7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/194
City of Tahoka
Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 2
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included as enacted through
Ordinance 0216A adopted 2/8/16.
As codified and published by
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.100 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.101 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the City of Tahoka as compiled, edited and published by
Franklin Legal Publishing, Inc.
Sec. 1.102 Designation and Citation of Code
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be
designated the “Code of Ordinances, 2002, City of Tahoka, Texas,” and may be so cited.
Sec. 1.103 Catchlines of Articles and Sections
The catchlines of the several articles and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the
contents of the article section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such articles and sections, nor as
any part of the articles and sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such
articles and sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
Sec. 1.104 Definitions and Rules of Construction
In the construction of this code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following
rules shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city
council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly
indicated.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/194
City and Town. Each means the City of Tahoka, Texas.
Council. Whenever the words “council” or “this council” or “the council” are used, they shall mean the city
council of the City of Tahoka, Texas.
City Manager, City Secretary, Chief of Police or Other City Officers. The words “city manager,” “city secretary,”
“chief of police” or other city officers or departments shall be construed to mean the city manager, city secretary,
chief of police or such other municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the City of Tahoka, Texas.
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of Lynn, Texas.
May. Is permissive.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
Must and Shall. Are each mandatory.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural
number shall include the singular.
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the
words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
Official Time Standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylightsaving
time as may be in current use in the city.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, or the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and
bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.
Property. Means and includes real and personal property.
Real Property. Means and includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. Means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use
of pedestrians.
Signature or Subscription. Shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State. The words “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. Shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks, alleys, avenues,
recessed parking areas and other public rights-of-way including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Refer to the divisions of Vernon’s Texas Statutes Annotated.
Written or In Writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
Year. Shall mean a calendar year.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/194
Sec. 1.105 Severability of Parts of Code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be
declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of
this code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in the code of
any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
Sec. 1.106 Repeal of Ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive
any ordinance which has been previously repealed.
Sec. 1.107 Amendments or Additions to Code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature and amendments to such ordinances, hereinafter enacted or
presented to the city council for enactment, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or
additions to the code of ordinances. Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and
section of the code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter,
article and section; provided however, the failure so to do shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of
such ordinances.
Sec. 1.108 Supplementation of Code
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and
general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period
covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become
obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that when they have been inserted, the
code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be
excluded from the code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization
authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code.
For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions
of the code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the
code and where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other
subdivision numbers;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/194
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this article,” “this
section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may be; and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
articles or sections inserted into the code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the
meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
Sec. 1.109 General Penalty for Violations of Code; Continuing Violations*
(a) Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is required
or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation
of any such provisions of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding five
hundred dollars ($500.00). However, a fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation
that governs fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation including the dumping of refuse may not exceed
two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); provided however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty
provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state. Each day any violation of this code or of
any ordinance shall continue, shall constitute a separate offense. In the event that any such violation is
designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, such nuisance may be summarily abated by the city.
In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances,
injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
(b) In addition to the penalties herein, the city reserves the right to impose additional costs incurred in the
abatement of any violation. For purposes of this subsection, costs incurred shall include, but shall not be limited
to, the actual out-of-pocket expenses attributable to the abatement and cleanup, including the cost of equipment
operation, cost of materials utilized, costs of specialists, experts or other contract labor not in the full-time
employment of the city, actual labor costs of city personnel, including benefits and administrative overhead,
overtime costs and any other incidental costs incurred by the City of Tahoka as a result of the abatement and
cleanup.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 1.200 CEMETERIES*
Sec. 1.201 Definition
As used in this article, the word “cemetery” shall mean and include any cemetery belonging to or operated by
the city. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-1)
Sec. 1.202 Applicability of Article
This article shall apply to the operation, control and conduct of the cemetery. (1979 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 7, Sec. 7-2)
Sec. 1.203 Approval of Sale of Lots; Execution of Deeds
(a) The sale or transfer of any cemetery lot or part of a lot shall be subject to the approval of the city.
(b) The mayor is authorized to execute deeds for cemetery lots sold.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/194
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-4)
Sec. 1.204 Payment for Lot
No deed shall be delivered or no burial will be allowed in any cemetery lot if the purchase price of such lot has
not been paid or if any other charge is due and unpaid, and all charges properly payable to the city must be paid
in advance. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-5)
Sec. 1.205 Interment Permitted Only On Order Of Lot Owner
The city will not permit any interment to be made on any cemetery lot except under an order from the lot owner
or his heirs or assigns, delivered at the office of the city secretary and indicating the desired location for such
interment. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-6)
Sec. 1.206 Driving or Riding Vehicles or Animals - Slow Speed; No Turning Around
Vehicles must be driven at a speed not exceeding fifteen (15) miles per hour through the cemetery and must not
be turned around in the avenues. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-7)
Sec. 1.207 Same - Staying on Roads
The driving or riding of vehicles or animals will not be allowed on lots or upon the lawns or walks of the
cemetery. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-8)
Sec. 1.208 Sitting, Standing, Etc., on Lots, Graves, Etc.
Sitting, lounging or lying at full length on lots, mounds or ornamental grounds at the cemetery and sitting or
standing on graves therein is unlawful. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-9)
Sec. 1.209 Signs Prohibited
No signs indicating that a lot or vault is for sale and no sign, card or advertisement of any stone-cutter,
undertaker or other person will be permitted in the cemetery. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-10)
Sec. 1.210 Grave Digging
The digging of a grave for an interment in the cemetery will be done only by city employees or any authorized
person. A notice of not less than twenty-four (24) working hours must be given to insure proper preparation of
the grave. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-11; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.211 Changing Lot Grades
The grades of cemetery lots once established cannot be changed without the consent of the city council. (1979
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-12)
Sec. 1.212 Order and Permit for Work on Lots
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/194
The city will not allow work of any description to be done or placed upon any cemetery lot unless a written
order from the lot holder or his representative is presented. This section applies to the cutting of inscriptions,
setting of markers and other such work, and also to the removal of anything from the lot. (1979 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-13; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.213 Permit for Workmen
No workman, except one employed in the erection of stone work will be allowed to work in the grounds of the
cemetery, except by special permit from the city. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-14; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 1.214 Exclusion of Persons From Grounds; Refusal of Permits
The city authorities shall have the right to exclude from the grounds of the cemetery any person who disobeys
any provision of this article. They shall also have the right to refuse permits to persons whose work is not
satisfactory, or whose employees disobey the rules of the cemetery. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec.
7-15)
Sec. 1.215 Work Orders Subject to Council Rules
All orders taken for work in the cemetery shall be subject to the rules of the city council. (1979 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-16)
Sec. 1.216 Prohibited Enclosures, Curbing, Ornaments, Walks, Etc.
Enclosures of any kind, curbing or coping around a lot, ornaments, chairs, settees, vases, glass jars, pitchers,
artificial flowers, flowers, toys, watering cans or other articles that may be considered objectionable by the
authorities are prohibited in the cemetery and the right to remove the same without notice to lot owners is
reserved. Objects of wood of any kind will not be permitted in the cemetery. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter
7, Sec. 7-17)
Sec. 1.217 Authority of Council to Lay Out and Alter Walks and Avenues and Make Regulations
The city council or appointed authority may, from time to time, lay out and alter avenues or walks and make
regulations for the government of the grounds and care and control of lots in the cemetery as it may deem
requisite and proper to secure and promote the general objects of the cemetery. (1979 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 7, Sec. 7-18)
Sec. 1.218 Boundary Markers to Remain Undisturbed
All boundary markers set up in the cemetery by the city authorities must remain undisturbed. (1979 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-19)
Sec. 1.219 Marker Plans to be Submitted to City
Plans for markers must be submitted to the city to secure permit for erection in the cemetery. (1979 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-20)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/194
Sec. 1.220 City Not Responsible for Articles Placed on Lots or Graves
The city will not be responsible for any funeral design, floral piece or other article or thing placed on any lot or
grave in the cemetery. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-21)
Sec. 1.221 Right of City to Remove and Plant Trees and Shrubs and Mow Grass
If any trees or shrubs situated on any cemetery lot shall, by means of their roots or branches, become detrimental
to the adjacent lots or avenues, or become unsightly or inconvenient for visitors, the city authorities shall have
the right to enter the lot for such purpose, to remove the trees or shrubbery or such part thereof as they shall
determine to be detrimental, unsightly or inconvenient. The city authorities shall have the right to remove any
trees or shrubs that may be infected by scales or other diseases and to plant and mow the grass on all lots and
graves. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-22)
Sec. 1.222 Removal of Funeral Designs and Floral Pieces
Funeral designs and floral pieces will be removed from the graves when they become wilted or unsightly.
Persons desiring to retain any such design or piece must remove the same within forty-eight (48) hours after the
interment. In no case will employees attempt to locate designs or floral pieces after their removal from the lots.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-23)
Sec. 1.223 Right of City Authorities to Fill and Level Graves and Plant Grass Thereon
The city authorities shall have full right to fill and level graves and plant grass thereon. (1979 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-24)
Sec. 1.224 Work Prohibited on Sunday and Between Certain Hours
Contractors or their employees will not be permitted to work in the cemetery on Sunday, or before 7:00 a.m. or
after 5:00 p.m. on any other day. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-25)
Sec. 1.225 Restrictions on Bringing Marker Work, Granite, Etc., Into Grounds
(a) Marker work or any other material shall not be brought into the cemetery when the ground is not in a
suitable condition, or when the proper foundation has not been prepared.
(b) Masons and stone cutters will not be permitted to bring into the grounds of the cemetery, material in large
quantities in advance of its immediate use, nor in any unprepared condition. Blocks of granite or marble must be
dressed to the design and dimensions ready for setting and lime must be sacked and mortar prepared and brought
to the grounds in moderate supply, and all chips, pruning and rubbish must be gathered up and carried to places
of deposit as required by the city authorities.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-26)
Sec. 1.226 Bringing Heavy Loads Into Grounds
The city must in all cases be consulted before any heavy load shall enter the cemetery grounds. (1979 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-27; Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/194
Sec. 1.227 Guy Ropes to Funeral Canopies Not to be Fastened to Trees or Shrubs
Guy ropes must not be fastened to any trees or shrubs in the cemetery. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7,
Sec. 7-28)
Sec. 1.228 Material to be Moved on Paths or Planks
All materials must be moved on the paths of the cemetery and over planks laid for the purpose, and not over
adjoining lots. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-29)
Sec. 1.229 Right of Council to Prohibit Erection of Markers and Monuments
The city council reserves the right to prohibit the erection in the cemetery of any marker or other monumental
work that may be considered by the members of the council to be inappropriate, whether in material, design,
workmanship or location or which might interfere with the general effect or obstruct any principal view. (1979
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-30)
Sec. 1.230 Removal of Offensive Monuments, Vaults, Etc.
If any monument, vault, effigy or any structure whatever placed in or upon any cemetery lot which is determined
by the city authorities to be offensive, improper or injurious to the appearance of the surrounding lots or
grounds, they shall have the right to enter upon such lot and remove the offensive or improper object and they
may do so without notice to the owner. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-31)
Sec. 1.231 Responsibility of Undertakers for Conduct of Employees
Undertakers will be held responsible for the action of all vehicle drivers or others employed by them, including
all agents, employees, and subcontractors, while within the grounds of the cemetery. (1979 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 7, Sec. 7-32)
Sec. 1.232 Level Graves
No grave mounds shall exist after the grave settles. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-33)
Sec. 1.233 Suspension of Work for Violation
The city shall have the power to suspend work in the cemetery immediately whenever there is a failure to
conform to the regulations prescribed in this article. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 7, Sec. 7-34)
ARTICLE 1.300 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.301 Organization
There exists the office of the emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in
accordance with state law.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/194
(1) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the
director.
(2) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management
within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. He/she may
delegate authority for execution, however, the final authority shall remain with the director.
(3) The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers
and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well
as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed
among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management
plan.
Sec. 1.302 Emergency Management Director; Power and Duties
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) Surveying actual or potential hazards which threaten the life and property within the city and
identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to
prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster should occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city,
and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid agreements deemed necessary
for the implementation of such plan.
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed
for a period in excess of seven (7) days, except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order
or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt
and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary.
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying
out the purposes of this city article. Such proclamations, regulations or directives shall be
disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public
and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city
secretary.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the emergency management organization of the city,
as well as the training of emergency management personnel.
(6) Determinations of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the
emergency management organization of the city.
(7) Maintenance of the liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal
emergency management organizations.
(8) Marshalling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city
to aid in carrying out the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the
representatives of the state and of other political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and
execution if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located for the
county wide coordination of the emergency management effort.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/194
(10) Supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and
equipment, including the acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of
improving emergency management within the city.
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after the approval of the city attorney, for the use of private
property for public shelter and other purposes.
(12) Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could
be used during a disaster as provided herein.
(13) Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act (chapter 418, Government Code).
Sec. 1.303 Emergency Management Plan
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan
shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of
this order. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state
division of emergency management. Insofar as possible, the form of the organization, titles and terminology
shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall
be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their
portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be
considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster.
Sec. 1.304 Interjurisdictional Program
The mayor is hereby authorized to join the mayor [sic] of the city in the formation of a regional
interjurisdictional emergency management program for the county and the south plains region and shall have the
authority to cooperate in the preparation of an interjurisdictional emergency management plan and in the
appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a
countywide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect the city.
Sec. 1.305 Override
At all times, when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in
effect, they shall supercede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter
may be inconsistent therewith.
Sec. 1.306 Liability
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health,
and safety, and neither the city, the agents and representatives of said city, nor any individuals, receiver, firm,
partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out,
complying with, or attempting to comply with, any rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of
this order shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of such activity. Any person owning or
controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license of
privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real
estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack, or
natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/194
death of or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other
permission, or for loss of or damage to, the property of such person.
Sec. 1.307 Commitment of Funds
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management
activity authorized by this order without the prior approval of the city council, nor shall any person have the
right to bind the city by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council
unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds
of the city, when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property.
Sec. 1.308 Offenses; Penalties
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this order.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia, or by any other
means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to
do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials.
(c) Convictions for violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by fine not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ordinance 90603 adopted 10/6/03)
ARTICLE 1.400 NOTICE OF DAMAGE OR INJURY*
Sec. 1.401 Required
(a) The city shall never be liable for any personal injury, whether resulting in death or not, unless the person
injured or someone in his behalf, or in the event the injury results in death, the person or persons who may have
a cause of action under the law by reason of such death or injury, shall file a notice in writing under oath with
the city administrator or city secretary within thirty (30) days after the same has occurred, stating specifically in
such notice when, where and how the exact injury occurred and the full extent thereof, together with the amount
of damages claimed or asserted.
(b) The city shall never be liable for any claim for damage or injury to personal property unless the person
whose personal property has been injured or damaged or someone in his behalf shall file a claim in writing under
oath with the city administrator or the city secretary within thirty (30) days after said damage or injury has
occurred, stating specifically when, where and how the injury or damage occurred and the full extent thereof,
and the amount of damage sustained.
(c) The city shall never be liable for any claim for damage or injury to real property caused by the negligent
act or omission of its officers, servants, agents or employees, unless the person whose real property has been
injured or damaged, or someone in his behalf shall file a claim in writing under oath with the city administrator
or city secretary within thirty (30) days after said damage or injury has occurred, stating specifically when,
where and how the injury or damage occurred, and the amount of damage claimed.
(d) The city shall never be liable on account of any damage or injury to person or to personal property arising
from or occasioned by any defect in any public street, highway, alley, grounds or public work of the city unless
the specific defect causing the damage or injury shall have been actually known to the city administrator, or to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/194
the director of public works at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the occurrence of the injury or damage, or
unless the attention of the city administrator or director of public works shall have been called thereto by a
notice thereof in writing at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the occurrence of the injury or damage and
proper diligence has not been exercised to rectify the defect.
(e) The notice herein required to be given to the city administrator or director of public works of the specific
defect causing the damage or injury shall apply where the defect arose from any omission of the city itself,
through its agents, servants or employees or acts of third parties.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Sec. 9-2)
Sec. 1.402 Waiver
Neither the mayor, any city councilman, the city administrator, city secretary, city attorney or any other officer or
employee of the city shall have authority to waive any of the provisions of Section 1.401, but the same may be
waived only by resolution of the city council, made and passed before the expiration of the said thirty (30) day
period provided for in said section, which resolution shall be evidenced by the minutes of the city council. (1979
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 9, Sec. 9-3)
Sec. 1.403 Exceptions to Notice Requirements
(a) The above written notice requirements shall be waived if the city has actual knowledge of death, injury or
property damage likely to result in a claim against the city. The city shall not be deemed to have actual
knowledge unless that knowledge is attributable to an appropriate city official whose job duties include the
authority to investigate and/or settle claims against the city.
(b) Notice requirements shall likewise be waived in cases in which the plaintiff can demonstrate good cause or
civil rights violations.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 1.500 PUBLIC BIDDING ON PURCHASES AND SALES*
Except in the case of exempted procurements, the city may not purchase or enter into a contract that requires an
expenditure that exceeds the maximum dollar amount permitted under the requirements of the Texas Local
Government Code without first submitting such to competitive sealed bidding, except in the case of high
technology procurements in which case the city may take competitive sealed proposals. Exempted procurements
shall include the following:
(1) A procurement made because of a public calamity that requires the immediate appropriation of
money to relieve the necessity of the city’s residents or to preserve city property;
(2) A procurement necessary to preserve or protect the public health or safety of the city’s
residents;
(3) A procurement necessary because of unforeseen damage to public machinery, equipment, or
other property;
(4) A procurement for personal or professional services;
(5) A procurement for work that is performed and paid for by the day as the work progresses;
(6) A purchase of land or a right-of-way;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/194
(7) A procurement of items that are available from only one source;
(8) A purchase of rare books, papers, and other library materials for a public library;
(9) Paving drainage, street widening, and other public improvements, or related matters, if at least
one-third (1/3) of the cost is to be paid by or through special assessments levied on property that will
benefit from the improvements;
(10) A public improvement project authorized by the voters for which there is a deficiency of
funds for completing the project in accordance with the plans and purposes authorized by the voters;
(11) A payment under a contract by which a developer participates in the construction of a public
improvement;
(12) Personal property sold:
(A) At an auction by a state licensed auctioneer;
(B) At a going-out-of-business sale;
(C) By a political subdivision of this state, a state agency of this state, or an entity of the
federal government.
(Ordinance 0712 adopted 7/9/12)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 2.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 2.101 Definitions
Animal. Any living creature, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, cows, horses, swine, birds, fish, mammals,
reptiles, insects, fowl and livestock, but specifically excluding human beings.
Animal Control Officer. Any person designated by the city, county commissioners, or county animal control
board to enforce the provisions of this article.
Commercial Business. A facility that regularly sells animals.
Commercial Stable. A facility where a fee is charged to house, pasture or rent horses or other livestock.
Dangerous Reptile. Any reptile that as a result of its physical makeup or nature is capable of inflicting physical
harm or death to human beings or animals as herein defined. This shall include all constrictors in excess of six
(6) feet in length.
Large Livestock. Horses of any member of the domesticated horse family, including but not limited to mules,
donkeys and ponies; and all types and varieties of cattle and all swine.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/194
Owner. Any person, firm or corporation having title to any animal, or a person who has, harbors or keeps, or
who causes or permits to be harbored or kept, an animal in his care, or who permits an animal to remain on or
about his premises.
Running At-Large. Not completely confined by a building, wall or fence of sufficient strength or construction to
restrain the animal, except when such animal is either on a leash or held in the hands of the owner or keeper, or
under direct supervision of the owner within the limits of the owner’s private property.
Small Livestock. All types of domesticated swine, sheep and goats.
Vicious Animal. Any individual animal of any species that has on two (2) previous occasions without
provocation attacked or bitten any person or other animal, or any individual animal which the chief of police has
reason to believe has a dangerous disposition or any species of animal which the supervisor has reason to believe
has a dangerous disposition likely to be harmful to humans or other animals.
Wild Animal. Any poisonous or dangerous reptile or any other animal which can normally be found in the wild
state not normally capable of being domesticated, including, but not limited to, skunks, foxes, leopards,
panthers, tigers, lions, bobcat, unless certified for medical, biological, herpetological or other scientific research
or study.
Sec. 2.102 Enforcement
Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the chief of police or any animal control officer. Any
animal control officer shall have the authority to issue citations for any violation of this article. If the person
being cited is not present, the animal control officer may send the citation to the alleged offender by registered or
certified mail. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any animal control officer in the performance
of his duties.
Sec. 2.103 Running At-Large
(a) It shall be unlawful for any dog or other animal possessed, kept or harbored, other than a cat, to run atlarge
as is defined in Section 2.101 above.
(b) The chief of police is authorized to impound such animals running at-large, other than a cat, and may
impound a cat under conditions specified in Section 2.105 below, and when he has received a complaint that the
cat causes a nuisance or hazard to the health or welfare of human or animal population.
Sec. 2.104 Animal Registration; Vaccination Required
All dogs and cats over four (4) months of age must be vaccinated annually for rabies with an antirabies vaccine
approved by the city health officer and administered by a duly authorized veterinarian. A metal tag of
certification of vaccination with the year of vaccination, a certificate number, and the name, address and phone
number of the vaccinating veterinarian, must be securely attached to a collar or harness that must be worn by the
dog or cat at all times. In addition to the metal tag of certification, a paper certificate must be issued stating the
name of the owner, the address of the owner, description of the dog or cat, the date of the vaccination, the
number of the metal certificate and the kind of vaccine used.
Sec. 2.105 Impoundment
(a) General Requirements. The following animals may be impounded:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/194
(1) Dogs not exhibiting evidence of being vaccinated, as described in Section 2.104. Cats whose
owners do not have evidence of being vaccinated, as described in Section 2.104.
(2) Any animal infected or kept under conditions which could endanger the public or animal
health.
(3) Any animal that creates a nuisance as defined in Section 2.108.
(4) Any animal running at-large as stipulated in Section 2.103.
(5) Any animal treated in a manner determined by the animal control officer or chief of police to be
cruel or inhumane.
(6) Any animal that has bitten a human being, other animal, or needs to be placed under
observation for rabies determination, as determined by an animal control officer.
(7) Any animal violating any provision of this article.
(b) Owner of Premises May Confine Animal. If any of the animals named in this article are found upon the
premises of any person, the owner or occupant of the premises shall have the right to confine such animal in a
humane manner until he can notify an animal control officer to come and impound such animal. When so
notified, it shall be the duty of an animal control officer to have such animal impounded as herein provided.
(c) Contact of Owner of Animal. Reasonable effort shall be made by an animal control officer to contact the
owner of any animal impounded which is wearing a current registration tag; however, final responsibility for
location of an impounded animal is that of the owner.
(d) Redemption of Impounded Animals. The owner can resume possession of any impounded animal upon
payment of impoundment fees, handling fees and any veterinarian bills incurred by animal control for the
welfare of the animal, and upon compliance with vaccination and registration provisions of this code, except
where prohibited in subsections (e) and (f) of this section.
(e) Animals Impounded Because of Cruel or Inhumane Treatment. Disposition of animals impounded on the
grounds of cruel or inhumane treatment shall be determined by the court of jurisdiction.
(f) Quarantined Animals. If any animal is being held under quarantine or observation for rabies, the owner
shall not be entitled to possession until it has been released from quarantine.
(g) Place of Impoundment. The animal control officer shall impound all animals in the facility designated by
the city or the county commissioner for impoundment under any provision of this article.
(h) Vicious or Wild Animals. Any impounded vicious or wild animal, unless there is reason to believe that it
has an owner, may be immediately disposed of as may be deemed appropriate by the county animal officer.
(i) Adoption of Impounded Dogs or Cats. Any impounded dog or cat may be adopted from the animal control
facility as follows:
(1) Dogs or cats impounded not wearing a registration tag may be placed for adoption after
seventy-two (72) hours. Dogs or cats wearing a registration tag may be placed for adoption after
seven (7) days. If the rightful owner appears and claims his dog or cat he may redeem the animal by
paying all fees incurred plus any documented additional cost incurred by the adoptee.
(2) The animal control officer shall determine whether a dog or cat is healthy enough for adoption
and if its health and age are adequate for vaccination. However, such decision shall not constitute a
warranty of the health or age of the animal.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/194
(3) There will be an adoption fee for all dogs and cats at an amount established by the county
animal control board.
(j) Euthanization of Certain Animals.
(1) Any animal, except a vicious or wild animal, not reclaimed by the owner may be humanely
euthanized after being impounded for seventy-two (72) hours, except that any animal wearing a
current registration tag shall be impounded for six (6) days.
(2) Any nursing baby animal impounded without the mother, or where the mother cannot or refuses
to provide nutritious milk, may be immediately euthanized to prevent further suffering.
(3) An owner who no longer wishes responsibility for an animal, or believes the animal to be in an
ill or injured condition, may sign a written waiver supplied by animal control allowing the animal to
be immediately euthanized in a humane manner, provided that no warm-blooded animal that has
bitten a human being shall be euthanized before expiration of the ten day quarantine period.
(4) Any impounded animal that appears to be suffering from extreme injury or illness may be
euthanized or given to a nonprofit human organization for the purpose of veterinary medical care, as
determined by the county animal control officer or the city chief of police.
Sec. 2.106 Impoundment Fees
(a) Impoundment fees shall be as set forth by the county animal control board.
(b) A daily handling fee as set forth by the county animal control board shall be charged for every day, or
fraction thereof, that an animal is at the animal shelter.
Sec. 2.107 Animal Quarantine
(a) Authority to Order Quarantine. The county animal control officer and/or chief of police shall have the
authority to order the quarantine of the animals responsible for bite incidents or suspected of having any
zoonotic disease considered to be a hazard to the human population or other animals.
(b) When Animals Shall be Quarantined. Every animal that bites a human or attacks another animal in an
unnatural manner or has rabies or any other zoonotic disease or is under suspicion of having rabies or any other
zoonotic disease shall be immediately confined by the owner, who shall promptly notify animal control or an
animal control officer of the place where such animal is confined and the reason therefor. The owner shall not
permit such animal to come in contact with any other person or animal. The owner shall surrender possession of
such animal to animal control on demand for supervised quarantine. Supervised quarantine shall be at the animal
shelter or a veterinary hospital, or any other method of adequate confinement approved by the county animal
control officer. The quarantine shall be for not less than ten (10) days and shall be under the supervision of a
veterinarian, who shall submit to animal control written reports as to the animal’s health on the initial day of
observation on the fifth and tenth days immediately following the date of said bite incident or above enumerated
purposes of quarantine. A release from quarantine may be issued if no signs of rabies or other diseases have
been observed during the quarantine period.
(c) Observation of Animal Other than at Animal Shelter. Any animal quarantined other than at the animal
shelter shall be observed by the same veterinarian throughout the entire required quarantine period in the same
manner as outlined above, and the owner shall immediately notify animal control as to the veterinarian
supervising the quarantine.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/194
(d) Owner’s Responsibility If Animal Quarantined Other than at Animal Shelter. If the chief of police orders
quarantine other than in the animal shelter or veterinary hospital, the owner shall be responsible for confining
the animal. He shall also be required to obtain the same veterinary supervision of the animal and release from
quarantine as required in a veterinary hospital or at the animal shelter.
(e) Violation of Quarantine. The violation of quarantine by any person shall be just cause for seizure and
impoundment of the quarantined animal by animal control. It shall be unlawful for any person to interrupt the
observation period.
(f) Animal Bites. All animal bite reports shall be investigated by the county animal control officer or chief of
police. Without permission of the county animal control officer or chief of police, it shall be unlawful for any
person to kill or remove from the city limits any animal that has bitten a person or other animal, or that has been
placed under quarantine, except when it is necessary to kill such animal to protect the life of any person or other
animal. Every animal that has been bitten by another animal shall be immediately confined by the owner, who
shall promptly notify animal control of the place where such animal is confined and the reason therefor. The
owner shall not permit such animal to come in contact with any person or animal.
(g) Animals Suspected of Having a Disease. The county animal control officer or chief of police shall direct
the disposition of any animal suspected of being rabid or having any other zoonotic disease considered to be a
hazard to any other animal or human being.
(h) Dead Animals Exposed to Rabies. The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies or suspected of
having been rabid shall upon demand be surrendered to animal control.
(i) Live Animals Exposed to Rabies. Any animal exposed to rabies shall be handled in one of the following
manners:
(1) Humane destruction, with notification to, or under supervision of, animal control.
(2) If not currently vaccinated, quarantine in a veterinary hospital for at least six (6) months
immediately following the date of the exposure.
(3) If currently vaccinated, immediate revaccination and quarantine for at least thirty (30) days
immediately following the date of the exposure.
(4) No person shall fail or refuse to surrender an animal for supervised quarantine or humane
destruction, as required herein for rabies control, when demand therefore is made by the chief of
police.
(5) Any person having possession of, or responsibility for any quarantined animal shall
immediately notify animal control if such animal escapes or becomes or appears to become sick or
dies and in case of death of the animal while under quarantine, shall immediately surrender the dead
animal to animal control for diagnostic purposes.
Sec. 2.108 Animal Nuisance
The following shall be considered a public nuisance and shall be unlawful:
(1) The keeping of any animal, which by causing frequent or long continued barking or noise, shall
disturb any person of ordinary sensibilities in the vicinity.
(2) The keeping of any animal in such a manner as to endanger the public health, to annoy
neighbors by the accumulation of animal wastes which cause foul and offensive odors, or are
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/194
considered to be a hazard to any other animal or human being, or by continued presence on the
premises of another.
(3) All animal pens, stables or enclosures in which any animal may be kept or confined which from
use have become offensive to a person of ordinary sensitivities.
(4) The keeping of bees in such a manner as to deny the lawful use of adjacent property or
endanger personal health and welfare.
(5) Persistent laxness in supervision of cats or dogs so that their running at-large results in
disturbance to persons of ordinary sensibilities.
(6) For any person to keep more than six common household pets, including but not limited to,
dogs, cats, birds, ferrets, rabbits, or gerbils, over four months of age in any combination of species.
Sec. 2.109 Prohibited Animals
(a) It shall be unlawful to keep any wild animal inside the city.
(b) It shall be unlawful to release or allow to run at-large any wild or vicious animal or dangerous reptile.
Sec. 2.110 Vicious Animals
(a) Destruction of Vicious Animals Found Running At-Large. Any vicious animal found running at-large may
be destroyed by any peace officer or animal control officer in the interest of public safety.
(b) County Animal Control Officer or Chief of Police May Order Removal, Appeal. The county animal
control officer or chief of police may order any owner or person having care, control or custody of any vicious
animal or nuisance animal, as defined in Section 2.109 above, to take such animal permanently from the city.
This animal must be removed immediately following receipt of such an order, even if an appeal is initiated. This
order may be appealed in writing within ten (10) days to a committee made up of the chief of police or his
representative, the city manager or his representative and the city attorney or his representative. Such committee
may uphold, reverse or modify the chief of police’s order, and may stipulate restrictions on the animal as a
condition to allowing the animal to remain in the city. If the committee upholds the chief of police’s order, the
owner or person having care, control, or custody shall not bring the animal back inside the city limits.
(c) Failure to Remove. If the owner or person having care, custody or control of a vicious animal fails to
remove such animal as provided for in subsections (a) and (b) above, such animal may be impounded and/or
destroyed. The county animal control officer [or] chief of police shall be authorized to obtain a search and
seizure warrant if there is reason to believe that an animal ordered removed from the city for being vicious has
not been so removed.
(d) Report of Disposition and Relocation. The owner or person having care, custody or control of a vicious
animal must report the disposition and relocation of such animal to the chief of police, in writing, within ten (10)
days after the expiration date for removal of such animal from the city. Each day thereafter such information is
not provided shall constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 2.111 Pet Care
The following are established as guidelines for pet and animal care and not intended to contravene the provisions
for animal cruelty as contained in the Texas Penal Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/194
(1) No owner shall fail to provide his animals with sufficient good and wholesome food and water,
proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and
with humane care and treatment.
(2) No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse an
animal, or cause, instigate or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight or other combat between
animals or between animals and humans.
(3) No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal.
(4) No person shall crop a dog’s ears, except when the procedure is done by a licensed
veterinarian.
(5) Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall stop at once
and render such assistance as may be possible and shall immediately report such injury or death to
the animal’s owner; in the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall at
once report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency or to the local humane society.
Sec. 2.112 Restraint; Tethering or Chaining of Dogs
(a) It shall be unlawful to tether or chain a dog unless the person is holding the tether or chain.
(b) It shall be unlawful to wrap a tether or chain directly around a dog’s neck, even if the person is holding the
tether or chain.
(c) This does not apply to temporary, owner supervised, restraint required to protect the safety of the person or
dog; or during a lawful animal event, such as walking on a leash, cleaning of a dog pen, veterinary treatment,
grooming, training, or law enforcement activity. Tethers must be attached to a collar or harness, and be unlikely
to become entangled.
(Ordinance 0411 adopted 4/11/11)
ARTICLE 2.200 DOGS AND CATS; RABIES CONTROL*
Sec. 2.201 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
At Large or Running at Large. Off the premises of the owner and not under the complete control of the owner,
either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise.
Owner. Any person owning, keeping, harboring, in charge of or in control of a dog.
Vaccination. An injection of a type of vaccine approved by the state veterinarian and administered by a
veterinarian licensed under state law.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Sec. 5-20)
Sec. 2.202 Enforcement of Article
The chief of police and any police officer of the city shall have the right to enforce any of the provisions of this
article, and the chief of police is hereby delegated authority to appoint any persons to aid and assist him in the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/194
carrying out and enforcement of this article. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Sec. 5-21)
Sec. 2.203 Dogs Running at Large†
No owner of any dog shall permit such dog to run at large within the city. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5,
Sec. 5-22)
Sec. 2.204 Annual Vaccination
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or keep a dog or cat at large more than four (4) months of age on
any premises within the corporate limits of the City of Tahoka unless such dog or cat wears a collar or harness
securely attached to its body to which shall be securely attached a current rabies tag. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.205 Confinement Upon Suspicion of Rabies When Person Bitten
(a) If any dog or other quadruped animal has bitten any person, the owner of said dog or other quadruped
animal shall immediately, and in any event not later than twenty-four (24) hours after such biting, notify the
chief of police and the city health officer of such biting and have such dog or other quadruped animal
impounded in the city pound or a veterinarian hospital in the city for a period of two (2) weeks.
(b) No such dog or other quadruped animal so held for observation shall be released from impoundment
without the authorization of the city health officer.
(c) Such impoundment shall be at the expense of the owner of said dog or other quadruped animal except
where at the time of said biting, the dog or other quadruped animal was wearing a collar or harness with valid
license and rabies tags attached thereto and was lawfully restrained or on the owner’s premises as required by
this article, in which event the expense of confinement shall be against the person so bitten, unless such person is
on the premises with the express or implied consent of the owner, such as in the case of delivery men, guests,
postmen or utility meter readers, etc., in which event the cost of confinement shall be at the dog owner’s
expense.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Sec. 5-26)
Sec. 2.206 Same-When Animal Bitten
(a) The owner of any dog or other quadruped animal suffering a bite from a rabid animal or suspected or
believed to have been bitten by a rabid animal, shall within twenty-four (24) hours from the time of such biting,
notify the chief of police and the city health officer and have the dog or other quadruped animal impounded and
either administered the Pasteur treatment or destroyed.
(b) When the owner desires to have the animal administered the Pasteur treatment, the confinement shall be
under the direction and supervision of the city health officer who shall direct the manner and means by which
the dog or other quadruped animal shall be confined, the confinement to be for a period of six (6) months and at
the owner’s expense.
(c) Such dog or other quadruped animal shall be released only by order of the city health officer.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Sec. 5-27)
Sec. 2.207 Impoundment
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/194
Any dog or other quadruped animal within the terms of this article found within the city in violation of any of
the provisions of this article shall immediately be impounded and kept for a period of seventy-two (72) hours
and then disposed of; provided however, that the owner of any animal impounded under the terms of this section
shall be allowed to take such dog from the place where impounded upon the following conditions:
(1) Upon the payment of an impounding fee of the sum of one dollar ($1.00) for each day or
fractional part thereof which said animal has been impounded.
(2) If a dog is not wearing a collar with valid rabies and license tags attached, the owner thereof
must present a certificate showing that said dog has been vaccinated within twelve (12) months from
that day or have said dog vaccinated prior to its release from impoundment and must further produce
or secure a valid license tag for such dog.
(3) If a dog, provide the dog with a collar or harness to which the license and rabies tags are
attached.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 5, Sec. 5-28)
ARTICLE 2.300 DANGEROUS DOGS*
Dangerous dogs, as defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, Section 822.041, shall be regulated in
accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, Chapter 822, Subchapter D. (Ordinance
adopting Code)
ARTICLE 2.400 NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS LIMITED
It is unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor more than six (6) dogs or cats or any combination thereof,
over six (6) months old, within the city except that this provision shall not apply to proprietors of animal
hospitals, pet stores, and veterinarians when such animals are kept upon premises of such animal hospital, pet
stores, and veterinarians in the normal course of business. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 2.500 LIVESTOCK†
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on any premises under such person's control within the city
limits any livestock, except pigs and hogs, in such a manner that the same will be located closer than one
hundred and fifty feet (150') distance from any person's living quarters, other than his own.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on premises under such person's control within the city any pigs
or hogs in any platted subdivision or within one thousand feet (1,000') from any person's living quarters; it shall
further be unlawful to keep any pigs or hogs in an area of unrestricted access wherein there is less than five
thousand (5,000) square feet for each pig or hog; provided however, that this subsection shall not apply to any
property surrounded by property not subdivided or platted. Pot bellied pigs kept as house pets are exempt.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any small livestock in an area of unrestricted access wherein
there is less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet for each animal so kept. Furthermore, large livestock shall be
kept on a minimum of one (1) acre of unrestricted access per animal.
(d) The provisions of subsections (a) and (c) shall not apply to any property surrounded by property not
subdivided or platted.
(e) No livestock impounded by virtue of this article shall be released to the owner until all costs and fees
prescribed by this article have been paid and until the person applying for the release of such livestock signs an
affidavit that he is the owner of the livestock and entitled to possession thereof.
(f) Any livestock found running at large shall be impounded by the local animal control authority.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/194
(g) All pens and enclosures wherein farm livestock, chickens, turkeys, geese, guineas, or other animals are
kept shall be maintained and kept in such a manner as not to become unsanitary or offensive to persons residing
in the vicinity thereof, nor shall they be maintained or kept as to breed flies or in any manner cause any injury to
the health of the public residing in the vicinity of the pen or enclosure.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 3.100 BUILDING CODE
Sec 3.101 Adoption of Building Code
The International Building Code, 2000 Edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials,
a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, is hereby adopted and the same is made a part hereof
by reference, except as modified or amended in this code of ordinances. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.102 Conflict of Building Code With Other Law
(a) The provisions of the building code shall supersede local laws, ordinances, codes or regulations to the
extent that such laws, ordinances, codes or regulations are inconsistent with the provisions of the building code;
provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent the adoption and enforcement of a law,
ordinance or regulation which is more restrictive or establishes a higher standard than those provided in the
building code and such more restrictive requirement or higher standard shall govern during the period in which it
is in effect.
(b) In a case where a provision of the building code is found to be in conflict with a provision of a zoning,
building, electrical, plumbing, fire, safety, health, water supply or sewage disposal law or ordinance, or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto or other local law, ordinance, code or regulation, the provision or
requirement which is more restrictive or establishes the higher standard shall prevail.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Sec. 6-2)
Sec. 3.103 Penalties for Violation of Building Code
(a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the building code shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in Section 1.109 of this code of ordinances.
(b) Any person who allows or permits the use or occupancy of any building, structure or premises of which he
is the owner, that is in violation with any provision of the building code shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be likewise punished.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Sec. 6-3)
Sec. 3.104 Review of Permit Applications by Planning Commission
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/194
Before a building permit is issued for a new building, moving a building into the city or moving house trailers or
mobile homes into the residential part of the city not now designated as the industrial area, the proposed
construction or move shall be reviewed by the planning commission, and approval recommended. (1979 Code
of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Sec. 6-4)
Sec. 3.105 Permit Fees
Building permit fees shall be as provided for in the currently adopted version of the International Building
Code. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.106 Fire Limits*
The fire limits of the city shall be as follows:
Beginning at the north city limits on Sweet Street; thence south to North 1st Street; thence west to Petty Street;
thence south to South 2nd Street; thence east to Conway; thence south to South 3rd Street; thence east to Alley
Street; thence north to Black Street; thence east to Knighton Street; thence north to South 1st Street; thence east
to Doak Street; thence north to the alley between South 1st Street and Lockwood Street; thence east to Standifer
Street; thence north to alley between North 1st Street and Lockwood Street; thence west to the west boundary of
new highway; thence south to Lockwood; thence west to Alley Street; thence north to the north city limits;
thence west to the point of beginning. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Sec. 6-6)
Sec. 3.107 Additional Restrictions in the Fire Limits
In addition to restrictions on construction in the fire limits contained in the building code, the following
restrictions shall apply in the fire limits:
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or attempt to erect any building within the fire limits
unless the building is fully fireproof, the walls made of brick, stone, concrete or tiling or any
combination thereof, and the roof of tar and gravel or metal, or any fireproof composition roofing as
accepted by the fire underwriters.
(2) There shall be a standard fire wall not less than eight (8) inches thick and eighteen (18) inches
high.
(3) No wooden building shall be constructed, nor any building now standing within the fire limits
shall be repaired, without first having the city council authorize the same.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Sec. 6-7)
Sec. 3.108 Flood Damage Protection-Review Generally Prior to Building Permit Issuance*
The building official shall review all building permit applications for new construction or substantial
improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed
building site is in a location that has a flood hazard, any proposed new construction or substantial improvement
(including prefabricated and mobile homes) must:
(1) Be designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of
the structure.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/194
(2) Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage.
(3) Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Sec. 6-8)
Sec. 3.109 Same-Review of Subdivision Proposals
The building official shall review subdivision proposals an other proposed new developments to assure that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(2) All public utilities and facilities such as gas, sewer, electrical and water systems are located,
elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Sec. 6-9)
Sec. 3.110 Same-Design of Water and Sewer Systems
The building official shall require new or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems to
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into flood waters, and require onsite waste disposal systems to be located so as to avoid impairment of
them or contamination from them during flooding. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Sec. 6-10)
ARTICLE 3.200 ELECTRICAL CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS
Sec. 3.201 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Installations. All electrical work of any nature performed on, in or near consumers’ premises.
Journeyman Electrician. One skilled and experienced in the actual physical labor involving electrical
installations and who does, or who holds himself out as intending to actually do, electrical work under the
employment and supervision of a master electrician.
Master Electrician. One who, being highly skilled in methods and practices of installations, holds himself out as
intending to do installations and proposes or do enter into contracts for such installations.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Sec. 6-20)
Sec. 3.202 Exemption as to Franchises and Street Lighting
The provisions of this article shall not apply to electric light, heat and power companies, telephone and telegraph
companies, normally operating or operating under franchise or state laws in the installation, maintenance,
removal or repair of wires or other equipment used in connection with their business as producers to supply
consumer service, or street lighting or illumination of public ways, alleys, parks or communications. (1979 Code
of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Sec. 6-24)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/194
Sec. 3.203 Certificates of Qualification for Master Electricians
(a) Master electricians shall make application for issuance of certificate of qualification to the board of
electrical examiners:
(1) The application shall be presented to the secretary of the board and shall be accompanied by a
fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
(Ordinance adopting Code)
(2) The applicant shall submit himself to an examination prepared by the board. The examination
shall consist of questions concerning electrical installations, the National Electrical Code, and other
topics related to the occupation of master electrician.
(3) If the applicant is successful in the examination, he shall obtain a bond from an approved
surety company in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), payable to the city, and
conditioned upon the applicant’s strict compliance with this article.
(b) Qualified applicants who comply with the above provisions shall be issued a certificate of qualification to
carry on the occupation of master electrician. The certificate shall be valid for one (1) year from date of issue.
(c) The certificate of qualification may be renewed by paying to the secretary of the board the sum of ten
dollars ($10.00) within ten (10) days after the expiration date of the old certificate, upon notification from the
secretary of the board. If a certificate of qualification is not renewed, it shall thereafter be void.
(d) A certificate of qualification shall be issued to an individual and shall not be assignable.
(e) No person shall engage in the occupation of master electrician without having his current certificate of
qualification in his possession, or in case of companies, firms or corporations, utilizing electric service as a
consumer, without having a holder of such certificate supervising the actual work being performed.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Sec. 6-27)
Sec. 3.204 Journeyman Electrician License
(a) Journeyman electricians shall make application to the secretary of the board of electrical examiners for
issuance of a license.
(1) The application shall be presented to the secretary of the board and shall be accompanied by a
fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
(Ordinance adopting Code)
(2) The applicant shall submit himself to an examination prepared by the board; the examination
shall consist of questions concerning electrical installations, National Electric Code and other topics
related to the occupation of journeyman electricians.
(b) Qualified applicants who comply with the above provisions shall pay to the secretary of the board the sum
of ten dollars ($10.00) mentioned above, and shall be issued a license to carry on the occupation of journeyman
electrician. The license shall be valid for one (1) year from date of issuance.
(c) Licenses may be renewed by paying to the secretary of the board the sum of five dollars ($5.00) within ten
(10) days after the expiration date of the old license, upon notification from the secretary of the board. If a
license is not renewed, it shall thereafter be void.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/194
(d) The license shall be issued to an individual and shall not be assignable.
(e) No person shall engage in the occupation of journeyman electrician without having been issued a current
license hereinabove provided; licensees shall keep their licenses in their possession when working as
journeyman electrician.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Sec. 6-28)
Sec. 3.205 Existing Licenses
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as preventing master electricians and journeymen electricians
from practicing their trade or profession under license agreements and existing ordinances; however, upon
expiration of existing license, they shall comply with all provisions of this article. (1979 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 6, Sec. 6-29)
Sec. 3.206 Illegal Use of License
No person shall allow the use of his certificate of dual qualification or license, directly or indirectly by any other
person for the purpose of obtaining a permit to do electrical installations. In addition to the penalty provided
herein, any person convicted of violating this provision shall forfeit his certificate of qualification and license
and it shall thereafter be void. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Sec. 6-30)
Sec. 3.207 Exemption of Homeowners From Licensing Requirements
Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the issuance of permits to owners of dwellings for electrical repair
work in such dwellings. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the issuance of permits to owners who
erect a dwelling in which to live; provided however, no permit shall be issued under this provision until the
owner submits an affidavit showing his ownership of the premises and his bona fide intention to live therein;
provided further in the event of erections, no person shall be issued a permit under the provisions of this
program more frequently than once each two (2) calendar years. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Sec. 6-
31)
Sec. 3.208 Appeal From Rejection of License
The decision of the board of electrical examiners shall be reviewed by the city council when within ten (10) days
after receiving notice of rejection, the dissatisfied applicant gives notice in writing to the city secretary that he
desires a hearing before the city council; provided however, that in meritorious cases, the ten (10) day period
may be waived by the city council. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Sec. 6-32)
Sec. 3.209 Permit Required for Inspections
No person using electric power as a consumer shall begin any electrical installation or begin any work of
installing, erecting or altering material, wiring, fixtures or any other apparatus to be used for the utilization of
electricity for light, heat or power in or on any building or premises in the city without first securing a permit
therefor from the office of the electrical inspector; provided however, no permit shall be required for minor work
such as repairing flush and tumbler switches, replacing fuses or changing lamp sockets and receptacles; provided
further, this section shall not apply to maintenance and repairs on the premises of a person regularly employing a
qualified maintenance electrician for that purpose. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Sec. 6-33)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/194
Sec. 3.210 Application for Permit; Number of Inspections; Fee
(a) Homeowners and holders of certificates of qualification shall make application for a permit to the
electrical inspector. Upon proper application for a permit and after paying of required inspection fees, the
electrical inspector or his representative shall issue the applicant a permit for the proposed work.
(b) There shall be a minimum of two (2) inspections for all construction; the first inspection to be made after
the rough-in work is completed, and thereafter at least one (1) final inspection when electrical fixtures and
appliances are installed. The inspector may make, when he deems it necessary, more than two (2) inspections.
(c) The inspection fee for all residential and other dwelling construction shall be three dollars ($3.00).
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Sec. 6-34)
Sec. 3.211 Notice of Readiness for Inspection
Permit holders whose installations are ready for inspection shall notify and allow the office of the electrical
inspector twenty-four (24) hours, Sundays and holidays excluded, before proceeding with the installations.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Sec. 6-35)
Sec. 3.212 Inspection Prior to Concealment of Wires
Installations wherein there is wiring to be concealed shall be inspected before concealment. The person
installing such wires shall notify the electrical inspector thereof and the wires shall not be covered or concealed
until the electrical inspector has approved same. Any person covering or concealing wires before inspection
shall be punished as provided herein. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Sec. 6-36)
Sec. 3.213 Re-Inspections
If by reason of faulty work, negligence or omission or for any other reason, a subsequent inspection must be
made in excess of the rough-in and final inspection hereinabove provided for, a charge for each re-inspection
shall be as follows: for the first re-inspection and each subsequent re-inspection, a fee of two dollars ($2.00)
each. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Sec. 6-37)
Sec. 3.214 Certificate of Compliance Prerequisite to Turning on Current
No person engaged in the business of transmission and sale of electric current to users thereof shall make any
connection of their transmission lines with the electric wiring or apparatus in any residence or other consumer
installation without first having received the electric inspector’s certificate of compliance for said installation.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Sec. 6-38)
ARTICLE 3.300 ELECTRICAL CODE
Sec. 3.301 Code Adopted
The National Electrical Code, promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association, being particularly the
2002 edition thereof and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as may hereinafter be amended, is
hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set forth at length herein, and from the date on which this section
shall take effect, the provisions therein shall be controlling for all electrical work within the area of jurisdiction
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/194
of the city. At least one (1) copy of said National Electrical Code shall be filed in the office of the city secretary.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.302 Penalties for Violating Code
(a) Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this article or the code adopted herein shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as provided in Section 1.109 of this code.
(b) Each day that any person shall continue to violate or fail to comply with a provision thereof shall be a
separate offense.
(c) Upon conviction of the second violation, the city council shall if it deems desirable hold a public hearing
for the purpose of determining whether or not said person’s certificate or license should be revoked, and if
revoked it shall thereafter be void and vest no rights.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Sec. 6-40)
ARTICLE 3.400 HOUSING CODE
Sec. 3.401 Code Adopted
The International Housing Code, 2000 Edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials,
a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, is hereby adopted and the same is made a part hereof
by reference, except as modified or amended in this code. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.402 Penalty for Violating Code
Conviction of violation of any part of the housing code shall be punishable as set forth in the general penalty
provision set forth in Section 1.109 of this code. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 6, Sec. 6-61)
ARTICLE 3.500 PLUMBING CODE*
(a) Certain documents, at least one copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary of the City of
Tahoka, being marked and designated as “International Plumbing Code, 2000 Edition” be and is hereby adopted
as the code of the City of Tahoka for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing
systems in the City of Tahoka, providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such “International Plumbing Code,” 2000 Edition on file in
the office of the City of Tahoka is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
article.
(b) No person, firm or corporation whether as owner, lessee, sublessee or occupant shall erect, construct,
enlarge alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use or maintain any plumbing or permit
the same to be done contrary to or in violation of this article of the International Plumbing Code, 2000 Edition.
Any person violating the provisions of this article or the International Plumbing Code shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and may be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109 of
this code. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 3.600 UNSAFE BUILDINGS†
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/194
Sec. 3.601 Definitions
Responsible Party. The owner, occupant or person in custody of the building or structure.
Unsafe Building. Any building or structure in or about which any or all of the following conditions exist:
(1) Walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle;
(2) Damage or deterioration exists to the extent that the building is unsafe;
(3) Loads on floors or roofs are improperly distributed or the floors or roofs are of insufficient
strength to be reasonably safe for the purposes used;
(4) Damage by fire, wind or other cause has rendered the building or structure dangerous to life,
safety, morals or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the city;
(5) The building or structure is so dilapidated, substandard, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or
otherwise lacking in the amenities essential to decent living that the same is unfit for human
habitation or is likely to cause sickness, disease or injury or otherwise to constitute a detriment to the
health, morals, safety or general welfare of those persons assembler, working or living therein or is a
hazard to the public health, safety and welfare;
(6) Light, air and sanitation facilities are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety or general
welfare of persons who assemble, work or live therein;
(7) Stairways, fire escapes or other facilities of egress in case of fire or panic are inadequate;
(8) Parts or appendages of the building or structure are so attached that they are likely to fall and
injure persons or property;
Sec. 3.602 Prohibited Conditions
(a) A condition exists in violation of the standards set forth above if such condition renders the building or
structure unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise detrimental to the health, safety, morals or welfare of the people of the
city.
(b) A responsible party may continue to use and occupy any building located within the city, regardless of the
date said building was constructed if such building meets the applicable minimum standards for buildings
prescribed herein, and is not in violation of this article.
Sec. 3.603 Unsafe Buildings Declared to be a Nuisance
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the existence of any unsafe building in the city;
and it shall be unlawful for any person to permit same to remain in such condition.
(b) All unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedures provided in this article.
(c) The fire marshal, hereinafter called “building official,” shall enforce the provisions of this article.
Sec. 3.604 Inspection of Building
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/194
The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected, every building or portion thereof, reported to be
unsafe. If such building or any portion thereof, is determined to be unsafe, the building official shall give the
responsible party notice in accordance with the requirements set forth in Sections 3.605 and 3.606 of this article.
Sec. 3.605 Notice to Repair
Whenever the building official determines that a building is unsafe, he shall give notice of such determination to
the responsible party. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Identify the specific conditions upon which such determination was based;
(3) Specify the corrective measures required;
(4) Provide a reasonable time for compliance;
(5) Advise the responsible party that there will be conducted a public hearing before the city
council to determine whether a building complies with the standards set out in this article. Said notice
shall inform the responsible party of the date, time and place of the hearing;
(6) Such notice be served upon the responsible party as set out in this article.
Sec. 3.606 Sufficiency of Notice
Notice given pursuant to this article shall be deemed properly served upon the responsible party if a copy thereof
is:
(1) Served upon him personally;
(2) Sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of such
person as shown on the records of the city; or
(3) Posted in a conspicuous place in or about the building affected by the notice.
Sec. 3.607 Public Hearing
(a) The purpose of the public hearing is to determine whether or not the building is unsafe in accordance with
the standards set forth in this article.
(b) The matter shall be set for hearing before the city council at the earliest practicable date and notice of said
hearing shall be served on the responsible party and the building official not less than ten (10) days prior to the
date of said hearing. All interested persons shall have the opportunity to be heard and may introduce evidence to
the city council for its members consideration.
(c) After the public hearing, the city council shall make such findings and orders as it shall deem appropriate.
(d) After the public hearing, if a building is found in violation of the standards set out in this article, the city
council may order that the building be vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished by the owner within a
reasonable time. The city council also may order that the occupants be relocated within a reasonable time. If the
responsible party does not take the ordered action within the allotted time, the city council shall make a diligent
effort to discover each mortgagee and lienholder having an interest in the building or in the property on which
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/194
the building is located. The city secretary shall send to each identified mortgage and lienholder a notice
containing:
(1) an identification and address of the building and the property on which it is located;
(2) a description of the violation of the code of ordinances that is present at the building.
(e) As an alternative to the procedure prescribed by subsection (d) described above, the city council shall
make a diligent effort to discover each mortgagee and lienholder before conducting the public hearing and shall
give them a notice of and an opportunity to convene at the hearing. If the city proceeds under this subsection, the
order issued by the city council shall specify a reasonable tine for the building to be vacated, secured, repaired,
removed or demolished by the responsible party, or for the occupants to be relocated by the responsible party,
and an additional reasonable time for the ordered action to be taken by any of the mortgagees or lienholders in
the event the responsible party fails to comply with the order within the time provided for action by the
responsible party. Under this subsection, the city is not required to furnish any notice to a mortgagee or
lienholder other than a copy of the order in the event the responsible party fails to timely take the ordered action.
(f) If the building is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished, or the occupants are not relocated
within the allotted time, the city may vacate, secure, remove or demolish the building or relocate the occupants
at its own expense.
(g) If the city incurs expenses under subsection (f), the city may assess the expenses on and the city has a lien
against unless it is a homestead as protected by the Texas Constitution, the property on which the building was
or is located. The lien is extinguished if the property owner or another person having an interest in the legal title
to the property reimburses the city for the expenses. The lien arises and attaches to the property at the time the
notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the Lynn County Clerk. The notice must contain the
name and address of the owner if that information can be determined with a reasonable effort, a legal description
of the real property on which the building was located, the amount of expenses incurred by the city and the
balance due.
(h) If the notice is given and the opportunity to repair, remove or demolish the building is afforded to each
mortgagee and lienholder as authorized by subsection (d) or (e), the lien is a privileged lien subordinate only to
tax liens and all previously recorded bona fide mortgage liens attached to the real property to which the city’s
lien attaches.
Sec. 3.608 Assessment of Expenses and Penalties
(a) If the city council has held a hearing pursuant to Section 3.607(b) and the time allotted for the repair,
removal or demolition of a building under Section 3.607(d) or Section 3.607(e) has expired, then the city council
may, in addition to the authority granted under Section 214.001, Local Government Code and Section 3.607 of
this article:
(1) order the repair of the building at the city’s expense and assess the expenses on the land on
which the building stands or to which it is attached; or
(2) assess a civil penalty against the responsible party for failure to repair, remove or demolish the
building;
(3) assess a general fine not to exceed $2,000.00 per day.
(4) the city’s building official shall invite at least two (2) or more building contractors to make
estimates pertaining to the needed repair, removal or demolition of a building. The building official
shall cause to be made an assessment of expenses or civil penalty based on such estimates. The
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/194
building official shall endeavor to minimize the expenses of any building repairs, removal or
demolitions order pursuant to this article.
(b) The city may repair a building under subsection (a) only to the extent necessary to bring the building into
compliance with the minimum standards of the city and only if the building is a residential building with 10 or
fewer dwelling units. The repairs may not improve the building to the extent that the building exceeds minimum
standards prescribed by the city.
(c) The city shall impose a lien against the land on which the building stands or stood, unless it is a homestead
as protected by the Texas Constitution, to secure the payment of the repair, removal or demolition expenses or
the civil penalty. Promptly after the imposition of the lien, the city shall file for record, in recordable form in the
office of the Lynn County Clerk, a written notice of the imposition of the liens. The notice shall contain a legal
description of the lien.
(d) Except as provided by Section 3.607 as set forth above, the city’s lien to secure the payment of a civil
penalty or the costs of repairs, removal or demolition is inferior to any previously recorded bona fide mortgage
lien attached to the real property to which the city’s lien attaches if the mortgage lien was filed for record in the
office of the Lynn County Clerk before the date the civil penalty is assessed or the repair, removal or demolition
is begun by the city. The city’s lien is superior to all other previously recorded judgment liens.
(e) Any civil penalty or other assessment imposed under this section accrues interest at the rate of 10 percent
per year from the date of the assessment until paid in full.
(f) In any judicial proceeding regarding enforcement of this article, the city is entitled to recover reasonable
attorney’s fees.
(g) A lien acquired under this section by the city for repair expenses may not be foreclosed if the property on
which the repairs were made is occupied as a residential homestead by a person 65 years of age or older.
Sec. 3.609 Posting of Warnings on Unsafe Buildings
(a) In the event the city council makes a determination after the public hearing that the building is deemed to
be an unsafe building, the building official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such building a notice to
read as follows:
DANGEROUS
DO NOT ENTER, UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
Building Official of the
City of Tahoka
(b) Such notice shall remain posted until required repairs, demolition or removal is completed and such
premises have been rendered safe. Such notice shall not be removed without written permission of the building
official, and no person shall enter the building except for making inspections or required repairs or to demolish
such building.
Sec. 3.610 Additional Powers of City
In addition to the above powers and authorities, the city shall have all of the rights granted by Sec. 54.012
through Sec. 54.19 of the Texas Local Government Code, as it exists as of this date or as it may be amended
from time to time.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/194
(Ordinance 12-92A adopted 11/2/92)
ARTICLE 3.700 ROOFERS
Sec. 3.701 Definitions
Annual Permit. A document issued by city hall for the city, which signifies the permit holder is in compliance
with this article. All permits will expire the 31st day of December each calendar year and must be renewed and
updated in order to provide work or services within the city limits. An annual permit is required, no prorated
amount shall be applied.
Contractor. Is intended to include any business, firm, corporation, contractor, builder, and any employee or
representative thereof, or any individual providing skills and/or services associated with the process of removing
old shingles or roofing materials and replacing with new; also intended to include the application of new
shingles or roofing materials over existing materials without the removal of the old, or repair or replace any roof
with metal, foam, or other material.
Roofing Permit. A document issued by the building inspector and city hall for the purpose of authorizing and
inspecting work performed at any residence in the city limits. This roofing permit must be issued prior to any
work commencing. A roofing permit is required to tear off and replace shingles, add a layer of shingles on top of
existing shingles, or repair or replace any roof with metal, foam, or other material.
Shingle. Is intended to include any asphalt, fiberglass, or combination based product which is customarily and
routinely installed on the roof of dwellings and structures to assist in the deflection of rain and other elements of
nature.
Sec. 3.702 Purpose
(a) The city council has determined that in addition to the commercial and residential buildings complying
with the International Building Code and the International Residential Code, the provisions of this article are
also essential to insure local residents and property owners are not taken advantage of or extorted in any way by
unscrupulous, dishonest, inexperienced, or corrupt business owners and workers,
(b) With the frequency of severe weather and specifically hail in our region, the need to further regulate who
is recognized and authorized to perform work on exterior roofs in the city limits is acknowledged.
Sec. 3.703 Violations
(a) The intent of the city council is to improve the process of registering and keeping records of anyone
performing roofing services in the city.
(b) A violation shall occur any time any roofing products or materials are not disposed of properly or kept on
the property on which the contractor is performing services, and each violation is a separate violation and shall
be punishable in accordance with Section 3.704 as a separate offense each time such violation occurs.
Sec. 3.704 Penalty
Any person, persons, citizen, corporation, business, or employee thereof who violates any provision of this
article or any section or subsection of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof in municipal court, shall be subject to a fine in the sum not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for each violation for which they are deemed guilty.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/194
Sec. 3.705 Permits
(a) Upon passage and acceptance of this article, any and all businesses, corporations, contractors, builders,
firms, or individuals for hire, engaging in the process and practice of removal and installation of shingles and
other like or similar roofing products, shall be required to obtain a roofing permit from the city to legally
perform work inside the city limits.
(b) In addition to any roofing permit, the contractor, builder, business, corporation, firm, or individual for hire
must obtain an annual building permit issued by the city. This permit is valid for a calendar year or any
remaining part of the calendar year after its issuance. Such permits will expire on December 31st of the year in
which they are issued, or until revoked, whichever occurs earliest.
(c) The permit must be carried (or in the possession of) so that it may be presented if and when requested by
the city building inspector, police department, or any designated agent thereof. If the person performing the work
does not have a valid and current permit as well as a building permit, all work will stop until such valid and
current permits are obtained or produced.
(d) For compliance with this article, any contractor, builder, business, corporation, firm, or individual
providing labor, skills, or materials commonly associated with the application or installation of roofing materials
must obtain a permit.
(e) The permit will require that this same contractor, builder, business, corporation, firm, or individual must:
(1) Produce satisfactory proof to the city of a general liability insurance policy, insuring such entity
obtaining the permit; that such entity has a minimum of $100,000.00 per occurrence and $200,000.00
aggregate of general liability insurance totally [sic] the actions of the entity or person obtaining such
permit in performance of any roofing contracts for citizens of the city, a copy of such liability shall
remain at city hall.
(2) Be bonded with a compliance bond in a minimum sum of $10,000.00, a copy of such bond to
remain at city hall.
(3) Provide information such as but not specifically limited to: name of business, name of principal
owner(s), address, telephone number, and a copy of a valid driver’s license or other verifiable
identification.
(f) A city resident homeowner seeking to personally perform repair or replacement of roofing materials on
property owned by him or her is not required to obtain a permit.
(g) For clarification: If a homeowner indicates that he or she will be performing the roof repairs and then
hires, contracts, subcontracts, or in any way solicits the assistance of a contractor, builder, business, corporation,
firm, or individual or employees thereof, then the homeowner must comply with all aspects and stipulations of
this article.
(h) The city will charge a fee to issue a permit to any entity or person obtaining a roofing permit in the amount
of $30.00 per roofing permit.
Sec. 3.706 Disposal of Materials and Debris
(a) It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to properly dispose of all roofing materials and debris in a
commercially reasonable manner. Under no circumstance will any roofing materials or debris be allowed to be
disposed of in the city dumpster containers, dumped on open ground, or left on site.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/194
(b) Furthermore it shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to properly dispose of all wrapping, paper,
packing, or roofing-related materials. Every effort should be used to contain these types of products and keep
this material from blowing or ending up on surrounding property. When roofing-related products end up in or on
neighbors’ properties it shall be the permit holder’s responsibility to clean up and remove all this material.
(c) Any violation of this section is subject to a fine not to exceed the amount set forth in Section 3.704.
(Ordinance adopted 5/17/10)
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 4.100 PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS*
Sec. 4.101 License Required
Before any person engages in the occupation of a peddler, solicitor, hawker, itinerant merchant or vendor of
merchandise in the City of Tahoka, such person shall first obtain from the city secretary a license to engage in
such occupation.
Sec. 4.102 Definitions
Peddler, Solicitor, Hawker, Itinerant Merchant and Itinerant Vendor. Shall be construed to mean and include all
persons as well as their agents and employees who engage in the temporary or transient business in the city, by
selling or offering for sale, either in person or by telephone or other mechanical means, any goods or
merchandise, or exhibiting the same through brochures as well as literature, or price list for the purpose of taking
orders for the sale thereof, and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business or conducting such exhibits
thereof, display, exhibit, sell or offer for sale, such goods or merchandise upon or from, a truck or other vehicle,
on the streets of the city, or to go from door to door of residences, offices or places of business to display, or
exhibit, sell or offer for sale such goods or merchandise, or who hire, rent, lease or occupy any room or space in
any building, structure, other enclosures, vacant lot, parking lot or any other property whatever in the city in,
through or from which any goods or merchandise may be sold, offered for sale, exhibited for sale or exhibited
for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof.
Temporary and Temporary Business. As used in this article means and shall be construed to mean any such
business as described above transacted or collected in the city upon, through or from any private property for
which no definite arrangement for the legal right of occupancy thereof for the purpose of conducting such
business therein or thereon for a period of at least six months has been made or any such business not having a
building, room, structure or enclosures within the city.
Transient Business. Shall mean any such business as described above of any itinerant vendor, peddler, solicitor,
hawker or the like, as may be operated or conducted by any person or his agents or employees who resides or is
domiciled away from the city or who has a fixed place of business or business headquarters outside of the city,
or who moves stocks of goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property or samples thereof into the city
with the purpose of, or intention of, removing them or the unused portion thereof from the city before the
expiration of six months.
City. Shall mean the City of Tahoka, Texas.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/194
Sec. 4.103 Application
The application for the license required under this article shall be made by the person or persons requesting a
license upon forms available in the office of the city secretary in the City of Tahoka. Such application shall be
filed with the secretary of the City of Tahoka at least three (3) days prior to the date on which the applicant plans
to commence his business activities. Such application shall give the following information:
(1) The applicant’s full name, home address and phone number.
(2) The address of his principal office or place of business and phone number.
(3) The kind and character of the goods, wares, merchandise, services or other personal property to
be sold, offered for sale or exhibited for the purpose of taking orders in the city.
(4) When the applicant shall have any agents or employees in the city, the name and relationship to
the applicant thereof, their addresses and phone numbers.
(5) If the applicant shall be a firm, partnership or association, the application shall include the full
name and address of all members thereof.
(6) If the applicant shall be a corporation, the application shall include the state chartering the
same, the names and addresses of the officers thereof and shall have attached thereto a certified copy
of its charter, or in the event such corporation is unincorporated under the laws of another state, its
current permit to do business in the state. In addition, if the applicant be a foreign corporation or
other foreign entity, then said application shall have attached to it a power of attorney describing a
resident agent for service of process within the State of Texas.
(7) An affidavit verifying the truthfulness of the contents application shall be attached thereto.
(8) Whether the registrant upon any sale or order shall demand or receive or accept payment of
deposit of money in advance of final delivery.
(9) The period of time which registrant wishes to solicit or sell in the city.
The registrant at the time of the registration as provided for in this section, shall submit for inspection by the city
secretary written proof of his identity which may be in the form of an automobile operator’s license or an
identification letter, or card issued to the registrant by the person for whom or through whom orders are to be
solicited or cleared.
Sec. 4.104 Bond
An application for a license under this article shall accompanied by a bond in the sum of $2,000.00 signed by the
applicant and as surety, either two or more residents of Lynn County Texas, or a commercially licensed bonding
company conditioned for the payment of all damages to any person or persons caused by, or arising from, any
fraudulent, wrongful or illegal act of the applicant, his agents or employees. Such bond shall be made payable to
the mayor of the City of Tahoka or his successor in office of the city for the use and benefits of all persons that
make any purchase or give any order the principal on the bond, his agents or employees. The bond shall provide
that any such person may sue thereon in his own right, without joining the mayor or the city and that successive
recoveries may be had thereon to the full extent of the amount therein named. The bond shall remain in full force
and effect for the entire duration of the license period.
Sec. 4.105 Issue of Permit
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/194
The secretary of the City of Tahoka shall accept all such applications and determine the accuracy of all
statements contained therein and shall, if all requirements are met, issue a license to the applicant on the
following fees:
(1) Individual applicant: $100.00
(2) For each agent or employee to work under said permit, an additional fee of $25.00
Sec. 4.106 Fraud in Sales
Any license granted to any person is issued with the express provision that the licensee shall not make any false
or fraudulent representations as to the product to be sold, or his authority to sell such product.
Sec. 4.107 License Contents
A license issued under the provisions of this article shall state the name and residence of the person to whom it is
issued and the period for which it is issued, and shall be officially signed by the city secretary with his seal of
office affixed thereto. The city secretary shall keep a duplicate record of each license issued by him.
Sec. 4.108 Term of License
No license issued under the provisions of this article shall be issued for a period longer than six (6) months.
(Such license shall not be assignable and shall not authorize more than one person to peddle at the same time,
save and except as provided in Section 4.105 herein.)
Sec. 4.109 Exhibition of License
A license issued under the provisions of this article must be exhibited upon demand to the city secretary, any
police officer of the City of Tahoka or to any person to whom sales or solicitation is attempted to be made. In
addition, at the exhibiting of the license, demand may be made for personal identification and identity of and
authorization by the company represented.
Sec. 4.110 Revocation of License
The city secretary upon investigation and recommendation by the chief of police or city manager, is authorized
to revoke any license issued under this article, if the licensee is found to be misrepresenting or making false
statements in regard to the product he is attempting to sell, his authority to sell such product or if the conduct of
such person doing selling, endangers the safety, health or property of the citizens of the city.
Sec. 4.111 Suspension of License
Any license issued under this article may be suspended upon receipt by the city secretary of complaints by two
or more persons, that any license holder has made misrepresentation or false statements as to the product he is
attempting to sell or take orders for, his authority to make such solicitation or that such license holder’s conduct
in the belief of such person making the complaints endangers their safety, health or property. Upon suspension,
the city secretary shall immediately investigate such complaints and may revoke such license or give the license
holder and complainants notice in writing that a hearing will be held before him after twenty-four hours from
issuance of such notice regarding possible revocation of such license.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/194
Sec. 4.112 Sales on Public Property Prohibited
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to offer or exhibit for sale any goods, wares, merchandise or other
commodities on or at any public park, swimming pool area or upon any other property owned by the City of
Tahoka for the purpose of selling goods, wares, merchandise or any other property abutting or adjacent to any
public park, swimming pool or other property owned by the City of Tahoka for the purpose of making such sales
to persons in a public park or swimming pool area, or other property owned by the City of Tahoka, unless such
person has previously applied to the city council for a permit to do so. Provided however, that the provisions of
this section shall not apply to any person or his employee duly operating under a concession contract between
such concessionaire and the city.
(b) “Person” as used in this section shall include corporations, organizations and any other type entity
regulated by law. Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall be printed or in writing and shall state the
name, age and gender of the person authorized to make sales; the area to which sales are authorized; the specific
goods, wares, merchandise or other commodities which the permittee is authorized to sell, and that the permit
shall not be transferable and is subject to revocation with or without cause by the city manager of the City of
Tahoka.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any permit holder as provided for in subsection (a) to exhibit or offer for sale any
goods, wares, merchandise or other commodities, upon any premises constituting a public park, swimming pool
or other property owned by the City of Tahoka, unless a permit duly issued to him in compliance with said
section has been registered with the park supervisor prior to the time any such commodities are offered for sale.
It shall be unlawful for any person exhibiting or having in his possession any goods, wares, merchandise or other
commodities for sale at any public park, swimming pool or other property owned by the City of Tahoka to fail or
refuse to exhibit the permit required by subsection (a) upon request of any police officer of the City of Tahoka,
the park supervisor or the city manager.
Sec. 4.113 License Required
It shall be unlawful for any person required by Section 4.101 of this article to secure a license to engage in any
of the activities set forth hereunder without a license.
Sec. 4.114 Entry Onto Premises
It shall be unlawful for any person required by Section 4.101 of this article to secure a license to enter upon the
land or premises of another without the prior consent of the owner, resident or occupant of such property.
Further, it shall be unlawful for any such license holder to remain on the premises of another after receiving
notice from the owner, resident or occupant thereof, to depart such premises.
(Ordinance adopted 11/1/82)
Sec. 4.115 Hours of Operation
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit funds or go upon any residential premises and ring the doorbell, or
rap or knock upon the door, or create any sound in a manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of
the residence for the purpose of engaging in or attempting to engage in a home solicitation or to distribute
samples of merchandise in the city:
(1) before 9:00 a.m. or after 30 minutes following sunset of any day, Monday through Saturday;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/194
(2) anytime on a Sunday, New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, July Fourth, Labor Day, Thanksgiving
Day or Christmas Day.
(3) This section shall not apply to a visit to the premises as a result of a request or an appointment
by the occupant.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.116 Penalty for Violations
The violation of any of the provisions of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be punishable by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.109 of this
code, and shall result in the automatic revocation of such convicted person’s license or permit. Each sale made
by any person in violation of the provisions hereof, shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
Sec. 4.117 Exceptions to Provisions
(a) The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following:
(1) The sale of bread, milk, butter, eggs, meat, vegetables or other agricultural products grown by
the seller.
(2) The sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated by the owners thereof, the proceeds of
which are to be used and applied to charitable, religious or philanthropic purposes.
(3) Sales or exhibits at fairs, rodeos, conventions or city civic organization’s, church or Chamber of
Commerce sponsored events.
(4) Ordinary wholesale commercial travelers who sell or exhibit for sale goods, wares or
merchandise to persons, firms or corporations engaged in the business of selling, buying and dealing
in goods or merchandise.
(5) The sale of magazines and other goods by schools or the representatives or class organizations
of said schools of Lynn County, Texas.
(Ordinance adopted 11/1/82)
(b) Applicants demonstrating a valid claim of interstate commerce shall be exempt from the fee requirements
herein, but shall be otherwise regulated by the provisions of this article. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 4.200 OCCASIONAL SALES
Sec. 4.201 Definition
Occasional Sales (Garage Sales, Including Patio and Porch Sales). Sales of tangible personal property at retail,
not to exceed two (2) in number during any twelve month period, by a person who does not hold himself out as
engaging, or does not habitually engage in the business of selling such tangible personal property at retail;
provided that:
(1) the tangible personal property shall be sold only on the premises of owner or lessee of the
property where the sale is conducted and said owner or lessee must be the legal owner of such
tangible personal property at the time of such sale;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/194
(2) the sale shall be confined to the garage, porch or patio on such premises;
(3) no new merchandise (i.e., merchandise acquired solely for the purpose of resale) shall be sold
at such occasional sale; and
(4) the duration of each such shall not exceed three (3) consecutive calendar days.
Sec. 4.202 Signs
One (1) sign is permitted, not to exceed two (2) square feet upon the property where the sale is taking place. Any
other signs at any location remote from the sale property are illegal.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 4.300 PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT
Sec. 4.301 Permit Required
All persons in the business of entertaining the general public and charging admission fees shall as a condition
precedent file an application with and obtain from the city secretary a permit to offer such entertainment. (1979
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 14, Sec. 14-6)
Sec. 4.302 Application for Permit
The application for the permit shall be filed not less than thirty (30) days before the first performance and shall
contain the following information:
(1) The name of the applicant.
(2) The address of the applicant or the applicant’s agent.
(3) The date or dates of the proposed entertainment.
(4) The kind or type of entertainment.
(5) The place where the entertainment will be held.
(6) The total off-street or highway parking spaces.
(7) The total capacity per capita of the facility where the entertainment will be held.
(8) The number of restrooms available within the facility where the entertainment will be held.
(9) An accurate drawing or plat showing ingress and egress and showing a fire exit plan.
(10) The time and hours of the entertainment.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 14, Sec. 14-7)
Sec. 4.303 Place of Holding; Grounds for Denial of Permit
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/194
All entertainment must be held in the facility named in the application. The city secretary or the city council
shall have the right to refuse to grant a permit when the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city are
endangered by traffic, inadequate sanitation facilities, or other health hazards, possible violence, illegal sale or
use of narcotics, immoral conduct, illegal conduct or any other similar problem or hazard. (1979 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 14, Sec. 14-8)
Sec. 4.304 Conducting Without Permit
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow, promote, conduct or hold such entertainment without first obtaining
a permit, and the same shall constitute a public nuisance and a breach of the peace. (1979 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 14, Sec. 14-9)
Sec. 4.305 Revocation of Permit
A violation of any provision of Sections 4.301 through 4.304 or a failure to comply with all information
contained in the application shall be grounds for withdrawing or revoking the permit without a refund. (1979
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 14, Sec. 14-10)
Sec. 4.306 Exemption
Public entertainment performed as part of city-sponsored events will not be subject to the permit requirements
herein. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 4.400 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Sec. 4.401 Purpose and Intent
(a) It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health,
safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations
to prevent the concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have
neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this article to
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny
access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.
(b) It is the intent of the city council that the locational regulations of Section 4.413 of this article are
promulgated pursuant to Chapter 243 of the Texas Local Government Code.
Sec. 4.402 Definitions
In this article:
Adult Arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other
image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one (1)
time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
Adult Bookstore or Adult Video Store. A commercial establishment that as one of its principal business purposes
offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/194
(1) books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations that depict or describe
“specified sexual activities” or specified anatomical areas;” or
(2) instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with “specified
sexual activities.”
Adult Cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features:
(1) persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, including topless dancers, nude dancers
or strippers, male or female; or
(2) live performances that are characterized by the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by
“specified sexual activities;” or
(3) films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are
characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas.”
Adult Motel. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that:
(1) offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with
closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas;” and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which
advertises the availability of this type of photographic reproductions; or
(2) offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or
(3) allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is
less than ten (10) hours.
Adult Motion Picture Theater. A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are shown that are characterized by the
depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
Adult Theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features
persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
“specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities.”
Child Care Facility. A building used as a day nursery, children’s boarding home, child placement agency,
religious or charitable encampment for children or any other place for the care or custody of children under
sixteen (16) years of age.
Church. A building in which persons regularly assemble for worship, intended primarily for purposes connected
with faith, or for propagating a particular form of belief.
City Manager. The city manager of Tahoka, Texas or his designated agent.
Escort. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another
person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
Escort Agency. A person who, or business association that, furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish
escorts as one of its business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
Establishment. Means and includes any of the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/194
(1) the opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
(2) the conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any
sexually oriented business;
(3) the addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business;
or
(4) the relocation of any sexually oriented business.
Licensee. A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as
the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license.
Nude Model Studio. Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or semi-nudity or displays
“specified anatomical areas” is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or
similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
Nudity or a State of Nudity.
(1) the appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast;
or
(2) a state of dress that fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female
genitals, or areola of the female breast.
Operates or Causes to be Operated. To cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found
to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner,
part owner, or licensee of the business.
Person. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
Residential District. A single-family, duplex, townhouse, multiple-family or mobile home district or area so
designated by such uses.
Residential Use. Property used for single-family, duplex, multiple-family, mobile home park, mobile home
subdivision, or campground purposes.
School. Any public or private learning center, elementary school, secondary school, junior college, community
college, college, university or other center for post-secondary education.
Semi-Nude. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the
female breasts, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
Sexual Encounter Center. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes,
offers for any form of consideration:
(1) physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or
(2) activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more
of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
Sexually Oriented Business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel,
adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.
Specified Anatomical Areas. Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/194
Specified Sexual Activities. Means and includes any of the following:
(1) the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female
breasts;
(2) sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or
sodomy;
(3) masturbation, actual or simulated; or
(4) excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (1) through
(3), above.
Substantial Enlargement of a Sexually Oriented Business. The increase in floor area occupied by the business by
more than twenty (20) percent, as the floor area existed on the date of the enactment of this article.
Transfer of Ownership or Control of a Sexually Oriented Business. Means and includes any of the following:
(1) the sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
(2) the transfer of securities that constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale,
exchange, or similar means; or
(3) the establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device that transfers the ownership or
control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.
Sec. 4.403 Classifications of Sexually Oriented Businesses
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
(1) adult arcades;
(2) adult bookstores or adult video stores;
(3) adult cabarets;
(4) adult motels;
(5) adult motion picture theaters;
(6) adult theaters;
(7) escort agencies;
(8) nude model studios; and
(9) sexual encounter centers.
Sec. 4.404 License Required
(a) A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented business without a valid license issued by
the city for the particular type of business.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/194
(b) An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the city manager. The application form
shall be sworn to and shall:
(1) include the name and address of the applicant;
(2) state whether the applicant meets each of the requirements set forth in Section 4.405 of this
article;
(3) include the name and address of each person required to sign the application pursuant to
Section 4.404(d) of this article, and the name, address and type of entity (if applicable) of each
person or entity owned or controlled by such person that owns or controls an interest in the business
to be licensed; and
(4) such other matters, consistent with this article, as may be specified in the application form.
The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the
premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram
need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (6"). Applicants
who must comply with Section 4.419 of this article shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements
of Section 4.419 of this article.
(c) The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this article and the premises must be
inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the city manager.
(d) If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he or she must sign the
application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than
an individual, each individual who has a twenty percent (20%) or greater interest in the business must sign the
application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under Section 4.405 of this article and
each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
Sec. 4.405 Issuance of License
(a) The city manager shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant within thirty (30) days after
receipt of an application unless the city manager finds one or more of the following to be true:
(1) An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
(2) An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or
penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or the applicant’s spouse in relation to a
sexually oriented business.
(3) An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license
or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form.
(4) An applicant or an applicant’s spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this
article other than the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within two
(2) years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall
have no effect.
(5) The license fee required by this article has not been paid.
(6) An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity within
the preceding twelve (12) months and has demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a sexually
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/194
oriented business premises in a peaceful and law abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law
enforcement officers.
(7) An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with
Sections 4.407, 4.412, 4.413, 4.415, 4.416, 4.417, 4.418, 4.419, or 4.420 of this article.
(8) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business are not in compliance with all
applicable city laws, regulations and city council ordinances.
(9) An applicant or an applicant’s spouse has been convicted of a crime:
(A) involving:
(i) any of the following offenses as described in Chapter 43 of the Texas Penal Code:
(aa) prostitution;
(bb) promotion of prostitution;
(cc) aggravated promotion of prostitution;
(dd) compelling prostitution;
(ee) obscenity;
(ff) sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor;
(gg) sexual performance by a child;
(hh) employment harmful to children; or
(ii) possession or promotion of child pornography;
(ii) any of the following offenses as described in Chapter 21 of the Texas Penal Code:
(aa) public lewdness;
(bb) indecent exposure; or
(cc) indecency with a child.
(iii) sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in Chapter 22 of the Texas
Penal Code;
(iv) incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway child as described in Chapter
25 of the Texas Penal Code; or
(v) criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing
offenses;
(B) for which:
(i) less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction of the date of
release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/194
(ii) less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of
release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction
is of a felony offense; or
(iii) less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of release from confinement for
the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more
misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-
month period.
(b) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or
applicant’s spouse.
(c) The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the
expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous
place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time.
Sec. 4.406 License Fees for Sexually Oriented Businesses
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business shall be $1,500.00.
Sec. 4.407 Inspection
(a) An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department and the city manager to
inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any
time it is occupied or open for business.
(b) A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits an offense if he
refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the police department at any time it is
occupied or open for business.
(c) The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel that are currently being rented by a
customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation.
Sec. 4.408 Expiration of License
Each license shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application
as provided in Section 4.404. Application for renewal should be made at least thirty (30) days before the
expiration date, and when made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license
will not be affected.
Sec. 4.409 Suspension
The city manager shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he determines that a
licensee or an agent or employee of a licensee has:
(1) violated or is not in compliance with Section 4.407, 4.412, 4.413, 4.415, 4.416, 4.417, 4.418,
4.419, or 4.420 of this article.
(2) engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business
premises;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/194
(3) refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this
article;
(4) knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises; or
(5) demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law
abiding manner thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers.
Sec. 4.410 Revocation
(a) The city manager shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in Section 4.409 of this article occurs and
the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months.
(b) The city manager shall revoke a license if he determines that:
(1) a licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the city manager
during the application process;
(2) a licensee, an agent or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of
controlled substances on the premises;
(3) a licensee, an agent or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
(4) a licensee, an agent or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a
period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;
(5) a licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in Section 4.405(a)(9)(A) for which the time
period required in Section 4.405(a)(9)(B) has not elapsed;
(6) on two (2) or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person or persons committed an
offense, occurring in or on the licensed premises, of a crime listed in Section 4.405(a)(9)(A), for
which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were agents or employees of the
sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed;
(7) a licensee or an agent or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The
term “sexual contact” shall have the same meaning as it is defined in Section 21.01, Texas Penal
Code; or
(8) a licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for any ad valorem taxes, sales or other taxes
related to the sexually oriented business.
(c) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license.
(d) Subsection (b)(7) of this section does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless
the licensee, agent or employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view.
(e) When the city manager revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year and the licensee
shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one (1) year from the date revocation became
effective. If, subsequent to the revocation, the city manager finds that the basis for the revocation has been
corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date
the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under subsection (b)(5) of this section, an applicant
may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under Section 4.405(a)(9)(8)
has elapsed.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/194
Sec. 4.411 Appeal
If the city manager denies the issuance of a license, or suspends or revokes a license, the city manager shall send
to the applicant, or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action and the right
to an appeal. Upon receipt of written notice of the denial, suspension, or revocation, the licensee whose
application for a license has been denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked shall have the right to
appeal to the state district court. An appeal to the state district court must be filed within thirty (30) days after
the receipt of notice of the decision of the city manager. The licensee shall bear the burden of proof in court.
Sec. 4.412 Transfer of License
A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under
the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application.
Sec. 4.413 Location of Sexually Oriented Business
(a) A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business
within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of:
(1) a church;
(2) a school;
(3) a child care facility;
(4) a boundary of a residential district;
(5) a public park;
(6) the property line of a lot devoted to residential use; or
(7) any building or structure in which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale.
(b) A person commits an offense if he or she causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial
enlargement, or transfer or ownership or control of a sexually oriented business located within one thousand five
hundred feet (1,500') of another sexually oriented business.
(c) A person commits an offense if he or she causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of
more than one (1) sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of
floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another
sexually oriented business.
(d) For the purpose of subsection (a) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of
the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a
church, school, child care facility or building or structure in which alcoholic beverages are offered for sale, or to
the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district, or residential lot.
(e) For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the distance between any two (2) sexually oriented
businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/194
(f) Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this article that is in violation of
subsections (a), (b), or (c) of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be
permitted to continue for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months, unless sooner terminated for any reason or
voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such nonconforming use shall not be increased,
enlarged, extended, or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two (2) or more
sexually oriented businesses are within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of one another and otherwise in a
permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a
particular location is the conforming use and the later-established business(es) is nonconforming.
(g) A sexually oriented business lawfully operated as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use
by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, school,
child care facility, public park, residential district, or residential lot, or any building or structure in which
alcoholic beverages are offered for sale, within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of the sexually oriented
business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application
for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked.
Sec. 4.414 Exemptions From Locational Restrictions
(a) If the city manager denies the issuance of a license to an applicant because the location of the sexually
oriented business establishment is in violation of any section of this article, then the applicant may, not later than
ten (10) calendar days after receiving notice of the denial, file with the mayor a written request for an exemption
from the locational restrictions of this article.
(b) If the written request is filed with the mayor within the ten day limit, the city council shall consider the
request. The mayor shall set a date for a public hearing within sixty (60) days from the date the written request is
received.
(c) A hearing by the city council may proceed if a quorum of the city council is present. The city council shall
hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply.
(d) The city council may, in its discretion, grant an exemption from the locational restrictions of this article if
it makes the following findings:
(1) That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect
on nearby properties or be contrary to the public safety or welfare;
(2) That the granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of this article;
(3) That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not downgrade the property
values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban or rural blight;
(4) That the location of an additional sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to
any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or
restoration; and
(5) That all other applicable provisions of this article will be observed.
(e) The city council shall grant or deny the exemption by a majority vote. Failure to reach a majority vote
shall result in denial of the exemption. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the
evidence. The decision of the city council is final.
(f) If the city council grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one (1) year from the date of the city
council’s action. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business is in violation of the
locational restrictions of this article until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/194
(g) If the city council denies the exemption, the applicant may not reapply for an exemption until at least
twelve (12) months have elapsed since the date of the city council’s action.
(h) The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any other provisions of this article other
than the locational restrictions.
Sec. 4.415 Additional Regulations for Escort Agencies
(a) An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(b) A person commits an offense if he acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the
age of eighteen (18) years.
Sec. 4.416 Additional Regulations for Nude Model Studios
(a) A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(b) A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity or
semi-nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this section if the
person under eighteen (18) years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex.
(c) A person commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity or semi-nudity or knowingly allows another
to appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed
from the public right-of-way.
(d) A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except
that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public.
Sec. 4.417 Additional Regulations for Adult Theaters and Adult Motion Picture Theaters
(a) A person commits an offense if he knowingly allows a person under the age of eighteen (18) years to
appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater.
(b) A person under the age of eighteen (18) years commits an offense if he knowingly appears in a state of
nudity or semi-nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater.
(c) It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (a) and (b) of this section if the person under eighteen (18)
years was in a restroom not open to the public view or persons of the opposite sex.
Sec. 4.418 Additional Regulations for Adult Motels
(a) Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and
vacated two (2) or more times in a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours, creates a rebuttable
presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this article.
(b) A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar
commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he rents or subrents a sleeping
room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same
sleeping room again.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/194
(c) For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the terms “rent” or “subrent” mean the act of permitting a
room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
Sec. 4.419 Regulations Pertaining to Exhibition of Sexually Explicit Films or Videos
(a) A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel,
which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space,
a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied
by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one (1) or more
manager’s stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures, and switches, which lights are
controlled by which switches and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not
be permitted. Only agents or employees shall have access to light switches. A manager’s station may
not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at
which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the
nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should
be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated
scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (6"). The city manager may waive
the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously
submitted and certifies that the configuration for the premises has not been altered since it was
prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
(3) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s station may be made without the
prior approval of the city manager.
(4) It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one (1) employee
is on duty and situated in each manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the
premises.
(5) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access
for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If
the premises have two (2) or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises
shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises
to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one (1) of the manager’s
stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s
station..
(6) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it also shall be the duty of any agents and
employees present in the premises to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(5) of this
section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all
times that any patron is present on the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to
any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted
in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section.
(7) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to
illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one
(1.0) footcandle as measured at the floor level.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/194
(8) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it also shall be the duty of any agents and
employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all
times that any patron is present on the premises.
(b) A person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through (a)(8), above, commits an offense if he or she
knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
Sec. 4.420 Display of Sexually Explicit Material to Minors
(a) A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons under the age of seventeen
(17) years, he displays a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film, or video cassette, the cover of which
depicts, in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or
perversion for commercial gain, any of the following:
(1) human sexual intercourse, masturbation, or sodomy;
(2) fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts;
(3) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks, or that portion of the
female breast below the top of the areola; or
(4) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered.
(b) In this section “display” means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining assistance from
an agent or employee of the business establishment:
(1) it is available to the general public for handling and inspection; or
(2) the cover, outside packaging on the item or contents of the item is visible to members of the
general public.
Sec. 4.421 Enforcement
(a) Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, any person violating Section 4.413 of this article,
upon conviction, is punishable by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.109
of this code, for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on
which a violation occurs.
(b) If the sexually oriented business involved is a nude model studio or sexual encounter center, then violation
of Section 4.404(a) or Section 4.413 of this article is punishable as a Class A misdemeanor.
(c) Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, above, any person violating a provision of this
article other than Section 4.413, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine in accordance with the general penalty
provision found in Section 1.109 of this code, for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs.
(d) It is a defense to prosecution under Section 4.404(a), Section 4.413 or Section 4.416(d) of this article
that a person appearing in a state of nudity or semi-nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
(1) by a proprietary school licensed by the State of Texas; a college, junior college, or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/194
(2) by a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or
(3) in a structure:
(A) which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that
indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing; and
(B) where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in
advance of the class: and
(C) where no more than one (1) nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one time.
(e) It is a defense to prosecution under Section 4.404(a) or Section 4.413 of this article that each item of
descriptive, printed film, or video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary,
artistic, political, or scientific value.
Sec. 4.422 Injunctive Relief
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in
violation of Section 4.413 of this article is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal
violations.
(Ordinance 104 adopted 1/5/04)
ARTICLE 4.500 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Sec. 4.501 Definitions
A word defined in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code has the meaning it has in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Code, except as otherwise specifically provided in this article.
Applicant. Each member of a partnership or association and all officers and the owner or owners of the majority
of the corporate stock of a corporation as of the date of the application.
Place of Business. The location of the business identified in the application for the permit or license to sell
alcohol under this article.
Sec. 4.502 Construction Consistent with State Law
This article shall be construed to be consistent with the Texas Alcoholic Beverages Code, rules, and regulations
promulgated under its authority.
Sec. 4.503 Restriction on Sale or Use of Alcohol
A person commits an offense if the person sells, stores, handles for the purpose of sale an alcoholic beverage
unless the use is authorized by and complies with the applicable provisions of the city code and the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Code.
Sec. 4.504 Minimum Distance from Certain Uses
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/194
(a) Except as provided by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, a person may not sell or engage in the business
of selling an alcoholic beverage at a place of business located within 300 feet from the following:
(1) Public school;
(2) A private school;
(3) A day-care center;
(4) A child-care facility;
(5) A religious institution; or
(6) A public hospital.
(b) Distances under this section shall be calculated using the method prescribed by the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Code.
Sec. 4.505 Location of Business that Sells Alcoholic Beverages
Any business that sells alcoholic beverages is allowed to do so only after obtaining the necessary permits as set
forth herein and must be located within the local retail (C-1) zone.
Sec. 4.506 Exceptions to Required Minimum Distances
(a) Minimum distances from certain uses does not apply to:
(1) The renewal or transfer of a permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages, if the permit or
license being renewed or transferred was originally issued before the date a private school, religious
institution, public hospital, day-care center, or child-care facility use was established within 300 feet
or a public school use was established within 1,000 feet from the place of business named in the
permit or license; or
(2) A new application at a location, if the sale of alcoholic beverages at the proposed place of
business was authorized not less than one year before the date a private school, church, public
hospital, day-care center, or child-care facility use was established within 300 feet or a public school
use was established within 1,000 feet from the place of business, and the new application is filed no
later than 90 days after the previous permit or license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages at
that location expired or was terminated.
(b) Minimum distances from certain uses does not apply to a permit of license holder who sells alcoholic
beverages if:
(1) The permit or license holder’s place of business and the private school, day-care center or
child-care facility are located on different stories of a multistory building; or
(2) The permit or license holder’s place of business and the private school or day-care center or
child-care facility are located in separate buildings and either the permit or license holder’s place of
business or the private school or day-care center or child-care facility is located on the second story
or higher of a multistory building.
Sec. 4.507 Hours for the Sale and Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/194
Hours for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be the same as the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Code “standard hours” as set out in Section 109.32(a)(2), Section 105.04 and Section 105.05, TABC.
Sec. 4.508 Approval of Certificate for Permit or License
(a) Every holder of any alcoholic beverage permit or license issued by the state under the Alcoholic Beverage
Code of the state and doing business within the corporate city limits shall be required to have a similar permit or
license from said city subject to the exceptions specifically provided in the Alcoholic Beverage Code. The
permit or license to be issued by the city shall be in such form as may be provided by the city secretary, and each
applicant for such permit shall make application upon the form to be provided by the city. The permit or license
shall be issued by the city secretary upon authorization by the city manager and shall cover the same transactions
or activities described in the applicant’s state permit or license. The city permit or license shall, unless sooner
revoked, remain in effect for one (1) year from the date of its issuance and shall not be transferable or assignable
to other permittees or licensees. It may, upon application to the city secretary, reflect a change of address at
which the activity is to be conducted. A separate city permit or license shall be required for each separate
location at which the proposed activity is to be conducted.
(b) In order to secure the necessary permit or license, the applicant shall:
(1) Demonstrate to the city secretary a state certificate or license, in full force and effect, issued to
the applicant;
(2) Submit to the city secretary, in duplicate, the application hereinafter described; and
(3) Make payment of the fee required under this article.
(c) The city secretary shall deliver one (1) copy of the application to the city manager who shall, within three
(3) working days, recommend to the city secretary the approval or disapproval of the application. If the
application is disapproved, the permit or license shall not be issued. If an application is refused, the applicant
shall have five (5) days in which to file written appeal with the city secretary, appealing such ruling to the city
council. The city council, at its next regular meeting or at a special meeting to be held without unnecessary
delay, shall hear testimony from the applicant and the city manager, to determine whether good cause existed for
denying such permit or license. If good cause for such refusal is found to exist, no permit or license shall be
issued.
Sec. 4.509 Permit Fees and Issuance
(a) Unless state law exempts a permittee or licensee from payment of a fee established by this section, a
permittee or licensee must pay the city an annual permit or license fee in an amount equal to the maximum fee
which the city is authorized to charge and collect, pursuant to Section 11.38 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Code, as amended.
(b) An applicant shall pay the fees established under subsection (a) to the city secretary no later than the 30th
day after the date the applicant’s payment of a state permit or license fee is due.
(c) A permittee or licensee who sells an alcoholic beverage at a business location before the applicant pays the
fees established by this section commit a class C misdemeanor punishable in accordance with this article.
(d) The city secretary shall issue and deliver a receipt under this section to the permittee or licensee
authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages under this article and a state permit or license, if the permittee or
licensee:
(1) Pays the fees established by subsection (a); and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/194
(2) Exhibits the certificate or license issued by the state.
Sec. 4.510 Penalty
An offense under this article is a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $500.00.
(Ordinance 1212 adopted 12/3/12)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE 5.100 FIREWORKS*
Sec. 5.101 Possessing, Selling, Etc., Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, store or offer for sale, sell or dispose of any character of
fireworks within the city. Fireworks shall include all types of fireworks covered by Article 9205, Vernon's
Annotated Civil Statutes. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Sec. 10-3)
Sec. 5.102 Discharge Prohibited
The use, firing, igniting, shooting, exploding or discharge of fireworks as provided in Section 5.101 is hereby
found and declared to be a general and public nuisance and the same is hereby prohibited; provided this section
shall not prohibit lawfully authorized pyrotechnic displays. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Sec. 10-4)
ARTICLE 5.200 FIRE MARSHAL AND HAZARD ABATEMENT
Sec. 5.201 Office Created; Appointment; Qualifications; Removal; Compensation
The office of fire marshal is hereby created. Such office shall be independent of other city departments, the fire
marshal reporting directly to the governing body. Such office shall be filled by appointment by the governing
body. The fire marshal shall be properly qualified for the duties of his office and shall be subject to removal at
any time by the city council. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Sec. 10-20; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 5.202 Investigation and Record of Fires
The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within the city by
which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire
was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be begun within twenty-four (24) hours not
including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires
occurring within the city, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and
the amount of loss which may be determined by the investigation required by this article. Such record shall at all
times be open to public inspection. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Sec. 10-21)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/194
Sec. 5.203 Taking Testimony; Charging Suspected Offenders; Referring Matter to Prosecutor
The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the
testimony on oath of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation
to the matter as to which an examination is hereby required to be made, and shall cause the same to be reduced
to writing, and if he shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime
of arson or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in
connection with such fire, he shall cause such person to be arrested and charged with such offense, and shall
furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence together with the names of witnesses and all of the
information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. (1979
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Sec. 10-22)
Sec. 5.204 Summoning Witnesses; Compelling Production of Documents
The fire marshal shall have the power to summon and compel the attendance of witnesses before him to testify
in relation to any matter which is by the provisions of this article a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may
require the production of any book, paper or document being pertinent thereto. (1979 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 10, Sec. 10-23)
Sec. 5.205 Administering Oaths; False Swearing; Contempt
The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any persons
appearing as witnesses before him. False swearing in any matter or proceeding aforesaid shall be perjury and
shall be punished as such. Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to testify or who disobeys any
lawful order of the fire marshal or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any
matter under investigation, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct after being summoned to give
testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and it shall be the duty of the fire marshal to make complaint against such person. (1979 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 10, Sec. 10-24)
Sec. 5.206 Privacy of Investigation; Separation of Witnesses
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may in his discretion be private, and persons
other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held, and
witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until
they have been examined. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Sec. 10-25)
Sec. 5.207 Right of Entry at Location of Fire
The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night in the performance of the duties imposed
upon him by the provisions of this article to enter upon and examine any building or premises when any fire has
occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10,
Sec. 10-26)
Sec. 5.208 Right of Entry for Examination Generally; Discovery of Dangerous Conditions
The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent thereto
and without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter
into and upon all buildings and premises within the city; and it shall be is duty, quarterly or more often, to enter
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/194
upon and make or cause to be entered upon and made a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing
and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he shall find any building or other
structure which for want of repair or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause is especially
liable to fire and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property or so occupied that fire would
endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of
stoves, ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues and pipes
with which the same may be connected or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems or a
dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals,
vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, flammables and refuse materials or other conditions which in his
opinion may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the
firemen or occupants, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied and such order shall be forthwith
complied with by the owner or occupant of said building or premises; provided however, if the owner or
occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he may within five (5) days appeal to the city administrator,
who shall investigate the cause of the complaint, and unless by his authority the order is revoked, such order
shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by said owner or occupant. (1979 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 10, Sec. 10-27)
ARTICLE 5.300 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
Sec. 5.301 Adoption
The International Fire Code including appendices, 2000 edition, copies of which are on file in the office of the
city secretary, is hereby adopted, and the same is made a part hereof by reference, except as modified or
amended in this code of ordinances. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 5.302 Establishment and Duties of Bureau of Fire Prevention
(a) The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention, which is hereby established
and which shall be operated under the supervision of the fire marshal.
(b) The fire marshal shall be in charge of the bureau of fire prevention.
(c) The fire marshal may designate such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to
time be necessary. The fire marshal shall recommend to the governing body the employment of technical
inspectors, who, when such authorization is made, shall be selected through an examination to determine their
fitness for the position. The examination shall be open to members and nonmembers of the fire department, and
appointments made after examination shall be for an indefinite term with removal only for cause.
(d) A report of the bureau of fire prevention shall be made annually and transmitted to the chief executive
officer of the municipality; it shall contain all proceedings under this code, with such statistics as the fire
marshal may wish to include therein; the fire marshal shall also recommend any amendments to the code which,
in his judgment, shall be desirable.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Sec. 10-41)
Sec. 5.303 Definitions
(a) Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall be held to mean this city.
(b) Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall be held to mean the
attorney for this city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/194
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Sec. 10-42)
Sec. 5.304 Establishment of Limits of Districts in Which Storage of Explosives and Blasting Agents is to
be Prohibited
The limits referred to in the fire prevention code in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited
are hereby established as the fire limits. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Sec. 10-43)
Sec. 5.305 Establishment of Limits of Districts in Which Storage of Flammable Liquids in Outside
Aboveground Tanks is to be Prohibited
(a) The limits referred to in the fire prevention code in which storage of flammable liquids in outside
aboveground tanks is prohibited are hereby established as the fire limits.
(b) The limits referred to in Section 16.51 of the Fire Prevention Code in which new bulk plants for
flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited, are hereby established as the fire limits.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Sec. 10-44)
Sec. 5.306 Establishment of Limits in Which Bulk Storage of Liquefied Petroleum Gases is to be
Restricted
The limits referred to in the fire prevention code in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted
are hereby established as the fire limits. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Sec. 10-45)
Sec. 5.307 Modifications
The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention
code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical
difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be
observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted
or allowed and the decision of the chief of the bureau of fire prevention thereon shall be entered upon the
records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter
10, Sec. 10-46)
Sec. 5.308 Appeals
Whenever the fire marshal shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is
claimed that the provisions of the fire prevention code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the
code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire
marshal to the governing body within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision appealed. (1979 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 10, Sec. 10-47)
Sec. 5.309 New Materials, Processes or Occupancies Which May Require Permits
The governing body, the city administrator and the chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall act as a committee
to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes
or occupancies which shall require permits in addition to those now enumerated in the fire prevention code. The
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/194
chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office and distribute copies
thereof to interested persons. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Sec. 10-48)
Sec. 5.310 Penalties
(a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention code hereby adopted or fail to
comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in
violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply
with such an order as affirmed or modified by the governing body or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within
the time fixed herein, shall severally for each such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Section 1.109 of this code. The imposition of one penalty for any
violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct
or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten (10)
days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 10, Sec. 10-49)
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 6.100 OFFICE OF HEALTH OFFICER
There is created the office of city health officer, the term of which shall be indefinite, until such time as his
successor is appointed and qualifies. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 6.200 BURNING OF TRASH OR GARBAGE
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn trash, garbage or other refuse within the city. (1979 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 11, Sec. 11-2)
ARTICLE 6.300 SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Sec. 6.301 Agreement to Connect to Sanitary Sewer; Prerequisite to Issuance of Building Permit
Before any person shall be issued a building permit for new construction or for additions to existing structures,
or for moving into the city and placing upon any lot or parcel of land any completed or partially completed
structure, applicant for permit shall first agree to install sanitary sewer facilities and to remove all existing
privies located on the lot or parcel of land on which construction or addition is to be placed, and such agreement
shall be made a part of and a requirement for the issuance of such building permit. (1979 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 11, Sec. 11-50)
Sec. 6.302 Connection to Septic Tank Where Sewer Not Available
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/194
In those areas of the city where city sewer lines do not exist, all water closets and other such sewerage as may
come from any residence, place of business or industry shall be connected to a septic tank system constructed
and maintained in conformity with the specifications of the State of Texas Department of Health Resources.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Sec. 11-51)
Sec. 6.303 Privies Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to build or maintain any privy vault above or below the ground within the city
on any lot or parcel of land. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 11, Sec. 11-52)
ARTICLE 6.400 STAGNANT WATER, CARRION, FILTH, TALL WEEDS AND GRASS*
Sec. 6.401 Accumulations of Stagnant Water Prohibited
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who shall own or occupy any lot or lots in the City
of Tahoka, Texas, to permit or allow holes or places on said lots where water may accumulate and become
stagnant, or to permit same to remain.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who shall own or occupy any lot or lots in the City
of Tahoka, Texas to permit or allow the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or to permit same to remain.
Sec. 6.402 Accumulations of Carrion, Filth and Other Matter Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who shall own or occupy any house, building,
establishment, lot or yard in the City of Tahoka to permit or allow any carrion, filth or other impure or
unwholesome matter to accumulate or remain thereon.
(Ordinance adopted Code)
Sec. 6.403 Growth and Accumulations of Weeds, Rubbish, Brush or Other Unsightly or Unsanitary
Matter Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who shall own or occupy any lot or lots in the city, to
allow weeds, rubbish, brush or any other unsightly, objectionable or unsanitary matter to accumulate or grow on
said lot or lots to a height in excess of twelve (12) inches.
Sec. 6.404 Notice of Violation; Abatement of Violation
(a) Upon becoming aware of a violation of Section 6.401, 6.402 or 6.403, the city manager shall cause a
written notice to be given to the property owner to remove or abate the violation. Such notice shall state the
nature of the violation and that it must be removed or abated within seven (7) days. If the owner of the property
does not remove or abate the violation within seven (7) days of notice of the violation, the city may do the work
or make the improvements required or pay for the work done or improvements made and charge the expenses to
the owner of the property.
(b) The notice must be given by at least one of the following:
(1) Personally to the owner in writing;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/194
(2) By letter addressed to the owner at the owner’s address as recorded in the county appraisal
district records; or
(3) If personal service cannot be obtained:
(A) By publication at least once in the official newspaper;
(B) By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which
the violation relates; or
(C) By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the
property to which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings.
(c) If the city mails a notice to a property owner in accordance with subsection (b), and the United States
Postal Service returns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not affected, and the
notice is considered as delivered.
(d) In a notice provided under this article, the city may inform the owner by regular mail and a posting on the
property that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public
health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city without further notice may
correct the violation at the owner’s expense and assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by
a notice under this subsection occurs within the one-year period, and the city has not been informed in writing
by the owner of an ownership change, then the city without notice may take any action permitted in subsection
(a) and assess its expenses as provided by Section 6.406.
Sec. 6.405 Dangerous Weeds
The city may immediately abate the nuisances of weeds in excess of forty-eight (48) inches in height which are
an immediate danger to the health, life or safety of any person.
State law reference–V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, Section 342.008
Sec. 6.406 Assessment of Expenses; Lien
(a) The city may assess expenses incurred under Section 6.404 hereof against the real estate on which the
work is done or improvements made.
(b) The mayor or city manager of the city shall file a statement of such expenses incurred, giving the amount
of such expenses and the date on which said work was done or improvements made with the county clerk. The
lien statement must state the name of the owner, if known, and the legal description of the property. The lien
attaches upon the filing of the lien statement with the county clerk.
(c) The lien obtained by the city is security for the expenditures made and interest accruing at the rate of 10
percent per annum on the amount due from the date of the filing of the lien statement by the city.
(d) The lien is inferior only to tax liens and liens for street improvements.
(e) The city may bring a suit for foreclosure in the name of the city to recover the expenditures and interest
due, and shall be entitled to recover reasonable attorney’s fees and court costs incurred in enforcing the lien. The
city shall have the right to obtain an order of sale of the property, by sheriff’s deed, with the proceeds of sale to
be applied first to the expenses of suit, attorney’s fees and court costs, then to the expenses incurred by the city
in doing the work or making the improvements, with the balance to be paid to the property owner or owners.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/194
(f) The statement of expenses or a certified copy of the statement shall constitute prima facie proof of the
expenses incurred by the city in doing the work or making the improvements.
Sec. 6.407 Penalty Provisions
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine in
accordance with the general penalty provision found in Section 1.109 of this code. Each occurrence or day of a
violation shall be deemed a separate violation.
(Ordinance 0810A adopted 8/13/10)
ARTICLE 6.500 SYNTHETIC DRUGS
Sec. 6.501 Definitions
Consumption or consume. The ingesting, inhalation, injection, dermal absorption, nasal insufflation, or other
means of introducing into the body a substance, whether in its original form or the liquid, smoke, vapor, or other
form derived from that original product.
Illegal smoking material.
(1) Any substance, however marketed, which can reasonably be converted for consumption by
smoking or otherwise, whether it is presented as incense, tobacco, herbs, potpourri, spices, teas, bath
salts or any other substance or blend of substances thereof including, but not limited to, any of the
following chemicals or comparable chemicals:
(A) Salvia divinorum or salvinorium A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically
as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of
such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture or preparation of such
plant, its seeds or extracts;
(B) Datura stramonium; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as datura
stramonium, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant,
and every compound, manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its
seeds or extracts;
(C) 2-[(1R, 3 S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl) phenol (also known as CP47,
497) and homologues;
(D) (6aS, 10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6-dimethy1-3-(2-methyloctan-2-y1)-6a, 7, 10, 10atetrahydrobenzo
[c] chromen-1-ol (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol);
(E) 1-penty1-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-018);
(F) 1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-073); or
(G) 1-pentyl-3-(4-methoxynaphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-081).
(2) Products containing some or all of the above substances are currently being marketed under the
following commercial names: “k-2,” “k-2 summit,” “k-2 sex,” “genie,” “dascents,” “zohai, “sage,”
“spice,” “KO knock-out 2,” “spice gold,” “spice diamond,” “yucatan fire,” “solar flare,” “pep spice,”
“fire n’ ice,” “salvia divinorum,” “jimson weed,” “gypsum weed,” “devil’s trumpet,” “devil’s weed,”
“thorn apple,” “tolguacha,” “jamestown weed,” “stinkweed,” “locoweed,” “datura,” “pricklyburr,”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/194
“devil’s cucumber,” “hell’s bells,” “moonflower,” “scooby’s snax,” “shaggy’s mix,” and “angry
birds.”
(3) Any material containing any of the botanical or chemical compounds set forth above shall be
subject to the provisions of this section, regardless of whether they are marketed under these or other
names.
Manufacture. The production or making of illegal smoking material by hand, by machine or any other method
from raw or prepared materials by giving such materials new forms, qualities, properties, or combinations.
Misbranded drug. Any drug identified as such by the food and drug administration or the controlled substances
act for which:
(1) The label is in any way false or misleading;
(2) The label does not bear the name and place of business of the manufacturer, repackager, or
distributor of the finished form of the drug;
(3) The label does not bear adequate directions for use;
(4) The label does not bear adequate warnings against use; or
(5) The label or prescription is not in the name of the person in possession of the drug.
Person. An individual, a group of two or more individuals, proprietorship, corporation, partnership, wholesaler,
association or other legal entity, or any licensed or unlicensed business.
Sec. 6.502 Sale, Delivery, Offer, Manufacture or Gift
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, publicly display, barter, deliver or give any illegal
smoking material to any person, or to own a property where such activity occurs.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, publicly display, barter, deliver, or give any
misbranded drug to any person, or to own a property where such activity occurs.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture any illegal smoking material for any purpose.
(d) In determining whether a product is prohibited by this section, statements on package labeling such as “not
for human consumption” may be disregarded when other relevant factors (viewed alone or in totality) indicate
that the product is intended to be consumed or ingested by humans, or is a product regulated by this chapter.
Other relevant factors that may be used to determine whether a product or sale is prohibited by this chapter
include, but are not limited to: verbal or written representations at the point of sale regarding the purpose,
methods, use, or effect of the product; aspects of the packaging or labeling suggesting that through consumption
of the product the user will achieve a “high,” euphoria, intoxication, relaxation, mood enhancement, or that the
product has other effects on the body; the cost of the product is disproportionately higher than other products
marketed for the same use; the product is treated differently than other products marketed for the same use (e.g.,
it is segregated from other products or kept behind the counter); the product contains a warning label stating or
suggesting that the product is in compliance with laws regulating controlled substances; the product’s name or
packaging uses images or slang referencing an illicit street drug; illicit or underground methods of sale or
delivery are employed by the seller or provider; whether the product can be smoked; and whether the product
resembles an illicit street drug such as cocaine, methamphetamine, or marijuana.
(e) Nothing in this section is intended to apply to legitimate air fresheners, potpourri, bath or beauty products,
or other aroma therapy products that do not contain the botanical, chemical, or related compounds described in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/194
this section or ingredients that are illegal under state and federal law.
Sec. 6.503 Use or Possession of Illegal Smoking Material
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession or to purchase, use, or consume illegal smoking
material within the corporate limits of the city.
Sec. 6.504 Defenses to Prosecution
(a) It shall be a defense to prosecution of a violation of this section if the use of the illegal smoking material is
done at the direction of or under a prescription issued by a licensed physician or dentist authorized to prescribe
controlled substances within the state.
(b) It shall be a defense to prosecution of a violation of this section if the person charged with such violation
presents legitimate and complete documentation from clergy or a spiritual leader recognized by the state that the
use of such material is part of a religious ceremony or activity of a religious denomination in which the person
charged has a documented long standing membership.
Sec. 6.505 Penalty
(a) Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
(b) Each occurrence of such violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(c) Each package sold, delivered, offered for gift or sale, or given in violation of this article shall be a separate
offense.
(Ordinance 02140A adopted 2/10/14)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL COURT
ARTICLE 7.100 MUNICIPAL COURT GENERALLY*
Sec. 7.101 Municipal Court Judge
(a) Office of Judge Created. There is hereby created the office of judge of the municipal court who shall have
all the powers and authority as granted by state law and the ordinances of this city, and shall perform all the
duties as prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas and the ordinances of this city.
(b) Appointment of Judge: Temporary Replacement.
(1) The judge shall be appointed for a term of office running concurrently with that of the mayor.
He or she shall receive such compensation as the city council shall fix by ordinance or resolution and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/194
shall furnish such surety bond as may be required by the city council, the premium to be paid by the
city.
(2) In the absence of the regular municipal judge, the city council may appoint any other person
qualified for the position to sit for the regular municipal judge or the mayor may serve as ex officio
judge until a judge is appointed.
(c) Removal of Judge. The judge of the municipal court may be removed by a majority of the city council for
incompetence, corruption, misconduct of malfeasance in office, after due notice and an opportunity to be heard
in his defense. The judge of the municipal court may also be removed from office by a city council resolution
declaring a lack of confidence in the judge; provided, that two-thirds (2/3) of the city council vote in favor of
said resolution.
(d) Oath Requirement for Judge. The judge of the municipal court, prior to taking office, shall take the oath of
office required by the state constitution and state laws. This is the oath required by the state laws for mayors of
cities.
Sec. 7.102 Creation of Municipal Court
There is hereby created a court in and for the city which shall be known as the municipal court of the City of
Tahoka, Texas. This court shall have jurisdiction within the city with power to hear and determine all cases of
alleged violations of the ordinances of the city and all other cases over which municipal courts are generally
given jurisdiction by state law as provided for in V.T.C.A., Government Code, Section 29.003.
ARTICLE 7.200 BUILDING SECURITY FUND*
Sec. 7.201 Fund Created
There is hereby created a municipal court building security fund. This fund shall be administered under the
direction of the governing body of the City of Tahoka.
Sec. 7.202 Fee Assessed
All defendants convicted in a trial for a misdemeanor offense in municipal court shall be required to pay a three
dollar ($3.00) security fee as a cost of court. A person is considered convicted for purposes of this article if a
sentence is imposed on the person, the person receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication,
or the court defers final disposition of the person’s case. The security fee shall be collected by the municipal
court clerk and paid to the official who discharges the duties of municipal treasurer for deposit in the municipal
court building security fund.
Sec. 7.203 Fund Purposes
The municipal court building security fund may be used only to finance the following items when used for the
purpose of providing security services for any buildings housing the municipal court of the City of Tahoka:
(1) The purchase or repair of x-ray machines and conveying systems;
(2) Hand-held metal detectors;
(3) Walk-through metal detectors;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/194
(4) Identification cards and systems;
(5) Electronic locking and surveillance equipment;
(6) Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables, or contract security personal during times when
they are providing appropriate security services;
(7) Signage;
(8) Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems;
(9) Locks, chains or other security hardware; and
(10) Any other time or service permitted by law.
ARTICLE 7.300 MUNICIPAL COURT TECHNOLOGY FUND*
Sec. 7.301 Establishment of Municipal Court Technology Fund
(a) There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, here-in-now known as the
fund, pursuant to Article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(b) The fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue
account.
Sec. 7.302 Establishment of Amount of the Fee and Assessment and Collection
(a) The fee shall be in the amount of four dollars.
(b) The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in
the municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if:
(1) a sentence is imposed on the person;
(2) the person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community
supervision; or
(3) the court defers final disposition of the person’s case.
(c) The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after September 1, 1999, (or for
convictions on offenses committed on or after ordinance is adopted.)
(d) The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the municipal treasurer or (other official who
discharges or performs the duties of the treasurer) of the City of Tahoka, who shall deposit the fee into the
municipal court technology fund.
Sec. 7.303 Designated Use of the Fund and Administration
(a) The fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of technological enhancements for the municipal court
of the City of Tahoka, Texas, including:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/194
(1) computer systems;
(2) computer networks;
(3) computer hardware;
(4) computer software;
(5) imaging systems;
(6) electronic kiosks;
(7) electronic ticket writers; or
(8) docket management systems.
(b) The fund shall be administered by the City of Tahoka, Texas.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
CHAPTER 8
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
ARTICLE 8.100 ADVERTISING IN GENERAL
Sec. 8.101 Putting Up Placards, Etc., in Public Places
It shall be unlawful for any person to fasten, tack, nail, tie, glue, paste or maintain any placard, poster, banner or
any other material anywhere on the streets, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, signal light posts or bases, street light posts
or bases, telephone posts or electric posts in the city or to cause the same to be done.
This section shall not apply to any officer of the city, the state, or the United States who may place upon such
objects, by tying with strings or ties any posters or placards in the interest of public health and safety.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Sec. 3-1)
Sec. 8.102 Painting On or Defacing City Property
It shall be unlawful for any person to paint or write pictures, characters, signs or advertisements or use any other
paint or material of any kind upon any of the sidewalks, streets, curbs or pavements of the city or upon any
ornamental ballustrade, fountain, stairway or other improvements belonging to the city; and it shall also be
unlawful to paint or to write in any manner thereon, or to carve thereon, or in any way to mutilate, deface or
destroy the same. Provided however, the city secretary is hereby authorized to issue a permit for limited periods
of time, not exceeding ninety (90) days, listed in the permit, authorizing the permittee to paint or print street
numbers on the curb showing the correct street number of abutting property, but such permit shall be expressly
conditioned upon the permittee obtaining the consent of the abutting property owner before painting house
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/194
numbers applicable to such abutting property, and be revocable by the city secretary upon violation of this
section. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Sec. 3-2)
Sec. 8.103 Banners, Etc., Over Public Streets
It shall be unlawful for any person to build, construct, fasten, tie or maintain any banners, streamers or other
similar materials anywhere in the city in such a manner that the same shall be above, over and across any public
street within the city; provided, the provisions of this section shall not apply to charitable organizations or any
person engaged in promoting a nonprofit civic enterprise who has secured approval from the city administrator
and has furnished a bond indemnifying the city from any personal injury or property damage which might result
from the building, constructing, fastening, tying, disconnecting or maintaining any such banners, streamers or
other similar material above, over or across any public street within the city. Upon presenting to the chief of
police evidence of approval by the city administrator and evidence of securing the bond as required above, the
chief of police shall issue a permit to such charitable organization or any person engaged in promoting a
nonprofit civic enterprise to engage in the activities otherwise herein prohibited. (1979 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 3, Sec. 3-3)
Sec. 8.104 Signs Upon or Over Sidewalks
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, erect or permit to remain any standing sign, bulletin board or
advertisement of any kind upon any of the sidewalks of the city, or to place, erect or permit to remain any
swinging sign or sign attached to any building, which sign is less than nine (9) feet above the sidewalk. (1979
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Sec. 3-4)
Sec. 8.105 Distributing, Etc., Handbills, etc
It shall be unlawful for any person to circulate or distribute upon any of the public streets, alleys, sidewalks or
public grounds of the city, or to scatter about, or to place in or upon any motor vehicle standing upon any public
street, alley, sidewalk or public grounds of the city, any dodgers, handbills or circulars. (1979 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 3, Sec. 3-5)
Sec. 8.106 Obscene, Etc., Advertising and Displays
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paint or have posted or painted, or to display or distribute any bill,
sign, bulletin, card or banner containing pictures or illustrations or any other matter of an obscene or immoral
character, at any point in the city where the same may be seen by persons traversing any alley, street or public
place. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Sec. 3-6)
ARTICLE 8.200 BILLBOARDS, SIGNBOARDS AND BULLETIN BOARDS
Sec. 8.201 Using Structures Without Authority
It shall be unlawful for any person to affix any sign or advertisement upon any structure, other than an
authorized billboard, signboard or bulletin board; provided this shall not apply to any person using his own
premises therefor, in compliance with law or when such sign or advertisement merely advertises the business
conducted on the premises. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Sec. 3-20)
Sec. 8.202 Leaving Paste, Etc., and Old Material From Billboards
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/194
It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter, daub or leave any paste, glue or like substance used for affixing
bills, upon any sidewalk or street within the city, or to scatter or throw any old bills or waste material removed
from billboards on the surface of any public street or on the surface of any other public or private property
within the city. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Sec. 3-21)
Sec. 8.203 Hazardous, Unsightly or Unsanitary Structures
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any billboard, bulletin board or signboard in such condition as to
be dangerous to the life or limb of any person using the streets or sidewalks of the city, or the property upon
which the same is located, or to maintain any such billboard, signboard or bulletin board in such condition for
lack of paint or torn or defaced condition of the matter affixed thereon as to be unsightly and in violation of the
sanitary provisions of this code and other ordinances of the city. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Sec. 3-
22)
Sec. 8.204 Removal by City
Upon the failure of any person required to remove any billboard, bulletin board or signboard, the city council
may have the same removed at the expense of the person owning or controlling the same. (1979 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 3, Sec. 3-23)
Sec. 8.205 License—Required
No person shall engage in or carry on the business or occupation of billposting, bulletin painting, distributing,
card or banner tacking or any similar business within the city, without first having been licensed to carry on such
business and having complied with the provisions of this article. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Sec. 3-
24)
Sec. 8.206 Same—Bond; Issuance; Fee; Duration; Renewal
Any person desiring to engage in any of the occupations enumerated in Section 8.205 shall file with the city
council his application for a license therefor, accompanied by a good and sufficient bond in the sum of five
hundred dollars ($500.00), to be approved by the city council with a solvent surety company authorized to do
business in the state as surety, conditioned that such person will save and keep harmless the city from all
damages caused in the conduct of such occupation or business, and will observe and obey all of the provisions of
this code and other ordinances now in force or hereafter to be passed by the city council regulating in any
manner the conduct of such business. If a license applied for under this section is granted by the city council, the
city secretary shall issue such license upon the payment of a license fee to the city of fifty dollars ($50.00),
which fee shall entitle such person to pursue such business or occupation for the remainder of the calendar year
in which issued, unless the license is sooner revoked. Such license may be annually extended for the period of
one (1) calendar year by the payment of an annual license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) on the first day of January
of each year. The annual license fee shall be a fixed annual fee and shall not be prorated for any period less than
one (1) year, but the licensee shall be required to pay the same for the full period of one (1) year, or any portion
thereof, within which such licensee desires to engage in the business. No refund or rebate shall be allowed
thereon. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Sec. 3-25)
Sec. 8.207 Same—Revocation; Suspension
In addition to any of the remedies provided by this article, the city council may revoke any license issued
hereunder for violations of the provisions of this article. Before revoking such license, notice shall be given to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/194
the licensee and he shall be entitled to a hearing with his witnesses at a regular meeting of the city council or a
special meeting called for that purpose. If the city council determines after hearing all the facts that the licensee
is willfully failing to comply with the provisions of this article, it may revoke his license or may suspend the
same for any period less than a year. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business enumerated in
Section 8.205 of this code after his license has been revoked by the city council or during the time the same has
been suspended. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Sec. 3-26)
ARTICLE 8.300 HIGHWAY BEAUTIFICATION
Sec. 8.301 Short Title
This article shall be known as “Highway Beautification.” (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Sec. 3-30)
Sec. 8.302 Scope
This article shall apply to signs located within the city, and within six hundred sixty (660) feet of the nearest
edge of the right-of-way of federal aid primary highway systems, being those highways designated as U.S. 87
and U.S. 380. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Sec. 3-31)
Sec. 8.303 Definitions
As used in this article:
Erect. Means to construct, build, raise, assemble, place, affix, attach, create, paint, draw or in any other way
bring into being or establish except when performed incidental to the change of an advertising message or to
normal maintenance or repair of an existing sign.
Freeway. Means a divided highway with full control of access.
Main-Traveled Way. Means the through traffic lanes exclusive of frontage roads, auxiliary lanes and ramps.
Official Signs. Means directional and other official signs authorized by law, including signs pertaining to natural
wonders and scenic and historic attractions and signs which have as their purpose the protection of life and
property.
On Premise Signs. Means signs advertising the sale or lease of the property on which they are located and signs
advertising activities conducted on the premises upon which they are located.
Sign. Means an outdoor sign, light, display, device, figure, painting, drawing, message, placard, poster, billboard
or other thing which is designated, intended or used to advertise or inform.
Traveled Way. Means that portion of the roadway used for the movement of vehicles, exclusive of shoulders and
auxiliary lanes.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Sec. 3-32)
Sec. 8.304 Standards
(a) Signs shall not imitate or resemble any official traffic sign, signal or device.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/194
(b) Signs shall not be erected or maintained upon trees or painted or drawn upon rocks or other natural
features.
(c) No sign shall exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet in area.
(d) No sign shall exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height.
(e) No sign shall exceed sixty (60) feet in length.
(f) All dimensions include border and trim, but exclude supports.
(g) Double faced, back-to-back, or V-type signs shall be considered as one sign.
(h) Signs which exceed three hundred fifty (350) square feet in area may not be double faced (stacked or side
by side).
(i) Signs may not be located in such a manner as to obscure or otherwise interfere with the effectiveness of an
official traffic sign, signal or device or to obstruct or interfere with the driver’s view of approaching, merging or
intersecting traffic.
(j) Signs may not be located within five hundred (500) feet of any public park, public forest, public
playground or scenic area so designated by a governmental agency, which is adjacent to the highway.
(k) Signs may not be erected closer than one hundred (100) feet apart on the same side of the highway.
(l) Adjacent to freeways, signs may not be erected closer than five hundred (500) feet apart on the same side
of the freeway.
(m) Signs may be located closer than the spacing requirements established herein, provided such signs are
separated by buildings, natural surroundings or other obstructions so that only one sign located within the
specified spacing is visible at any one time.
(n) Signs which contain, include or are illuminated by any flashing, intermittent or moving light or lights are
prohibited, except those giving public service information such as time, date, temperature, weather or similar
information.
(o) Lights which are not effectively shielded as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed at any
portion of the traveled ways of the highways, and which are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or to
impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or which otherwise interfere with any driver’s operation of a
motor vehicle, are prohibited.
(p) No sign shall be so illuminated that it interferes with the effectiveness of or obscures an official traffic
sign, device or signal.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Sec. 3-33)
Sec. 8.305 Applicability
Signs shall not be located outside of the business and industrial zoning districts of the city. Every sign erected
within the city, and within six hundred sixty (660) feet, of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of U.S. 87 and
U.S. 380 shall comply with the standards established by this article, with the following exceptions:
(1) Official signs.
(2) On-premise signs.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/194
(3) Signs which are not visible from any point on the main-traveled way viewed from a height of
not more than six (6) feet above any such point.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Sec. 3-34)
Sec. 8.306 Compliance With Other Regulations
Every sign regulated by this article shall also comply with the zoning ordinances, building code and all other
applicable codes and ordinances of the city. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Sec. 3-35)
Sec. 8.307 License, Permits and Fees
The building official shall issue building permits for signs regulated by this article only to persons who hold
valid licenses issued by the Texas Highway and Public Transportation Commission pursuant to the provisions of
the Texas Highway Beautification Act. The minimum fee for said building permits shall be ten dollars ($10.00).
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Sec. 3-36)
Sec. 8.308 Existing Signs
Every owner of every sign existing on January 24, 1973, which lies within the city, and within six hundred sixty
(660) feet of the nearest edge of the right-of-way of U.S. 87 and U.S. 380, with the exception of official signs
and on-premise signs, shall have applied for and obtained a license issued by the Texas Highway and Public
Transportation Commission pursuant to the provisions of the Texas Highway Beautification Act, authorizing the
maintenance of said sign after December 31, 1972. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 3, Sec. 3-37)
ARTICLE 8.400 FIREARMS AND SIMILAR WEAPONS*
Sec. 8.401 Definition
As used in Sections 8.402 and 8.403 “firearm” means any device designed, made or adapted to expel a projectile
through a barrel by using the energy generated by an explosion or burning substance or any device readily
convertible to that use, including but not limited to a rifle, pistol, shotgun, air rifle, pellet gun, BB gun and air
gun. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 14, Sec. 14-1)
Sec. 8.402 Conditions to Discharge
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or fire off any firearm within the city except as follows:
(1) Firing or discharging of a firearm in a shooting gallery that is operating in accordance with all
applicable state and federal laws and city ordinances.
(2) Firing or discharging of an air gun on property owned by the party firing the air gun and his
immediate family, provided that the discharge is no closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet from any
structure, except that of the owner, used for human habitation. Nothing contained in this exception
shall permit the discharging of an air gun whereby the projectile falls on the land of another.
(3) Firing or discharging of a shotgun during legally authorized hunting season with a license or
permit duly issued pursuant to the laws of the state and federal law, provided the hunter has
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/194
permission from the property owner on which any projectile would fall on or over their property, and
provided further that the size of shot that can be used is restricted to size number six (6) and smaller.
(4) Firing or discharging of firearms in defense of self, family or property.
(5) Firing or discharging of a firearm by a duly authorized peace officer in carrying out his lawful
duties.
(6) Firing or discharging of firearms when permitted or authorized by the laws of the state or
United States.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 14, Sec. 14-2)
Sec. 8.403 Discharge Across Public Property or Near Business Houses
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm of any kind on or across any public square, street or
alley in the city or within fifty (50) yards of any business house.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 14, Sec. 14-3)
Sec. 8.404 Explosives; Discharging
It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any package or container containing powder or other
explosive or combustible material, except in accordance with other ordinances of the city, and with the
permission of the governing body. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 14, Sec. 14-4)
ARTICLE 8.500 DISPLAY OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIAL TO MINORS
It shall be unlawful for any person in a business establishment open to persons under seventeen (17) years of age
to display a book, pamphlet, newspaper or magazine the cover of which depicts:
(1) Human sexual intercourse, masturbation or sodomy; or
(2) Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts;
or
(3) Less than completely and opaquely covered, the human genitals, buttocks or that portion of the
breast below the top of the areola; or
(4) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered, in a manner
calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or perversion
for commercial gain.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 14, Sec. 14-5)
ARTICLE 8.600 PRESENCE IN OR NEAR PUBLIC BUILDING UNDER SUSPICIOUS
CIRCUMSTANCES
It shall be unlawful for any person, in the nighttime or other inappropriate times, to be in or about any public
building or premises where he has no right or permission to be under suspicious circumstances, and without
being able to give a satisfactory account of the same. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 14, Sec. 14-11)
ARTICLE 8.700 SLEEPING OR LOUNGING IN PUBLIC
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/194
It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep or lounge in any street, alley, highway, square, sidewalk or other
public place not belonging to such person. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 14, Sec. 14-12)
ARTICLE 8.800 THROWING MISSILES
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw rocks, stones, balls, clods of earth or any other missile in such
manner as may do injury to any person or property. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 14, Sec. 14-14)
ARTICLE 8.900 PATROL AND ENFORCEMENT OF LAW BY CITY POLICE ON CITY PROPERTY
IN COUNTY
The jurisdiction of the chief of police, city police officers and other peace officers of the city shall be extended to
include the city airport, the city dump grounds, the city disposal plant and any other city property located in the
county. Said peace officers shall have full police powers to patrol the city airport, the city dump grounds, the city
disposal plant, and other city property located in the county and to enforce all of the laws of the United States,
the state, the county and the city on said premises. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 14, Sec. 14-15)
ARTICLE 8.1000 JUNKED VEHICLES*
Sec. 8.1001 Definitions.
Police Department. Means the police department of the City of Tahoka, Texas.
Demolisher. Means a person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into processed scrap or scrap metal or
to otherwise wreck or dismantle a motor vehicle.
Junked Vehicle. Means a vehicle that is self propelled and:
(1) does not have lawfully attached to it:
(A) an unexpired license plate; or
(B) a valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; and
(2) is:
(A) wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
(B) inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
(i) 72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
(ii) 30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
Motor Vehicle. Means a motor vehicle subject to registration under the Certificate of Title Act (Article 6687-1,
Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes).
Antique Vehicle. Means a passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old.
Special Interest Vehicle. Means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been altered or modified from original
manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists.
Collector. Means the owner of one or more antique or special interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires,
trades, or disposes of special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order to restore,
preserve, and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/194
Sec. 8.1002 Junked Vehicles as Public Nuisance
(a) A junked vehicle that is located in a place where it is visible from a public place or public right-of-way is
detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce the value of private property, invites
vandalism, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of
minors, and is detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight adverse to the
maintenance and continuing development of the city, and is a public nuisance.
(b) A person commits an offense if that person maintains a public nuisance as determined under this section.
Sec. 8.1003 Procedures for Abating Nuisance
To provide for the abatement and removal of a junked vehicle or a part of a junked vehicle as a public nuisance,
from private property, public property, or public rights-of-way, the City of Tahoka adopts the following
procedures:
(1) For a nuisance on private property, not less than ten (10) days' notice, stating the nature of the
public nuisance on private property must be given. The notice must require that the public nuisance
be removed and abated within ten (10) days, and that a request for a hearing must be made before
expiration of the ten day period. The notice must be mailed, by Certified Mail with a five day return
requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, any lien holder of record,
and to the owner or occupant of the private premises on which the public nuisance exists.
(2) For a nuisance on public property, not less than ten (10) days' notice, stating the nature of the
public nuisance on public property or on a public right-of-way, must be given. The notice shall
require that the nuisance be removed and abated within ten (10) days, and that a request for a hearing
must be made before expiration of the ten day period. The notice must be mailed, by Certified Mail
with a five day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, any
lien holder of record, and to the owner or occupant of the public premises or to the owner or occupant
of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the public nuisance exists.
(3) If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the motor vehicle is unknown,
notice to the last known registered owner may be placed on the motor vehicle, or, if the last known
registered owner is physically located, the notice may be hand-delivered. If any notice is returned
undelivered by the United States Post Office, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued
to a date not less than ten (10) days after the date of the return.
(4) Vehicles removed under the provisions of this section may not be reconstructed or made
operable after they have been removed.
(5) A public hearing must be held before the removal of the vehicle or vehicle part as a public
nuisance. The hearing shall be held before the judge of the municipal court if requested by the owner
or occupant of the public or private premises or by the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to
the public right-of-way on which the vehicle is located, within ten (10) days after service of notice to
abate the nuisance. At the hearing, it is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, that
the vehicle is inoperable. An order requiring the removal of the vehicle or vehicle part must include a
description of the vehicle or vehicle part and the correct identification number and license number of
the vehicle, if the information is available at the site.
(6) Notice must be given to the State Department of Highways and Public Transportation not later
than the fifth day after the date of removal of a junked vehicle or vehicle part. The notice must
identify the vehicle or vehicle part.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/194
(7) These procedures may not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part that is completely enclosed within
a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private
property, a vehicle or vehicle part that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in
connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junk yard, or an unlicensed, operable, or
inoperable antique or special interest vehicle stored by a collector on the collector's property, if the
vehicle and the outdoor storage area are maintained in a manner so that they do not constitute a
health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees,
shrubbery, or other appropriate means.
(8) The procedures of this section shall be administered by regularly salaried, full-time employees
of the City of Tahoka, except that the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part from property may be by
any duly authorized person.
Sec. 8.1004 Disposal of Junked Vehicles
A junked vehicle or vehicle part may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard, demolisher, or any suitable site
operated by the city for processing scrap or salvage.
Sec. 8.1005 Authority to Enforce
A person authorized by the City of Tahoka to administer the procedures authorized by this article may enter
private property for the purposes specified in this article to examine a vehicle or vehicle part, obtain information
as to identity of the vehicle, and remove or cause removal of a vehicle or vehicle part that constitutes a nuisance
as defined herein. The municipal court may issue orders necessary to enforce the procedures of this article. If the
owner or occupant of the premises or the owner of the junked motor vehicle or vehicle part shall give written
permission to the chief of police for removal of the junked motor vehicle or vehicle part, the giving of such
permission shall be considered compliance with the provisions of this article if given within the ten (10) days
after receipt of the notice.
Sec. 8.1006 Penalty and Abatement
A person who commits an offense under this article is, upon conviction, subject to a fine as provided for in the
general penalty provision found in Section 1.109 of this code, dollars for each offense, and each and every day
such violation continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction, the court shall order
removal and abatement of the nuisance. The provisions of this article are cumulative of all other remedies
available to the city. This article does not affect a law authorizing the immediate removal, as an obstruction to
traffic, of a vehicle left on public property.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 8.1100 PUBLIC NUISANCES GENERALLY
Sec. 8.1101 Public Nuisance
(a) A person may not cause, permit or allow a public nuisance under this article on any premises.
(b) A public nuisance is:
(1) keeping, storing or accumulating refuse on premises in a neighborhood unless the refuse is
entirely contained in a closed receptacle;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/194
(Ordinance 6-93 adopted 5/3/93)
(2) keeping, storing or accumulating rubbish, including but not limited to, newspapers, abandoned
vehicles, automobile or machine parts, refrigerators, stoves, furniture, tires and cans on premises in a
neighborhood for 10 days or more, unless the rubbish or object is completely enclosed in a building
or is not visible from a public street; (Ordinance adopting Code)
(3) maintaining premises in a manner that creates an unsanitary condition likely to attract or harbor
mosquitoes, rodents, vermin or disease-carrying pests;
(4) maintaining on abandoned and unoccupied property a swimming pool that is not protected
with:
(A) a fence that is at least four feet high and that has a latched gate that cannot be opened by
a child; or
(B) a cover over the entire swimming pool that cannot be removed by a child; or
(5) maintaining a flea market in an area that constitutes a fire hazard.
(c) This article does not apply to a site or facility that is permitted and regulated by a state agency.
Sec. 8.1102 Determination of Violation
Whenever a person causes, permits or allows a public nuisance under Section 8.1101 to exist on any premises in
the city as prohibited by said section and make a determination whether or not such is sufficient to constitute a
public nuisance as herein defined, and if it so finds, it shall cause the city manager to give the responsible party
notice in accordance with the requirements set forth in Section 8.1103 of this article.
Sec. 8.1103 Procedure on Violation
(a) Notice. Whenever the city manager or the city council determines that any premises are a public nuisance
as defined herein, the city manager shall give written notice to the owner, lessee, occupant, agent or person in
charge of the premises. The notice must state:
(1) The specific condition that constitutes a nuisance;
(2) That the person receiving notice shall abate the nuisance before the 31st day after the date on
which notice is served;
(3) The failure to abate the nuisance may result in abatement by the city, assessment of cost and a
lien against the property an which the nuisance exists; and
(4) That the owner, lessee, occupant, agent or person in charge of the premises is entitled to
submit, before the 31st day after the date on which the notice is served, a written request for hearing.
(5) The notice must be given:
(A) By service in person or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested; or
(B) If personal service cannot be obtained or the address of the owner, lessee, agent or person
in charge of the property is unknown, by posting a copy of the notice on the premises to which
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/194
the nuisance exists and by publishing the notice in the newspaper with general circulation in the
county two (2) times within ten (10) consecutive days.
(C) After the public hearing, the city council shall make such findings and orders as it shall
deem appropriate.
(D) After the public hearing, if the premises are found in violation of the standards as set
forth in Section 8.1101, the Code of Ordinances of the City of Tahoka, Texas, the city council
may order that the property be vacated, secured, repaired, removed, demolished, mowed or
abated within a reasonable time. If the responsible party does not take the ordered action within
the allotted time, the city council shall make a diligent effort to discover each mortgagee and
lienholder having an interest in said premises or in the property located on said premises. The
city secretary shall send each identified mortgage and lienholder a notice containing:
(i) an identification and address of the premises of the property on which it is located;
(ii) a description of the violation of the code of ordinances that is present at the
premises.
(E) As an alternative to the procedure prescribed by subsection (D) described above, the city
council shall make a diligent effort to discover each mortgagee and lienholder before
conducting the public hearing and shall give them not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of
said hearing, notice of and an opportunity to comment at the hearing. If the city proceeds under
this subsection, the order issued by the city council shall specify a reasonable time for the
public nuisance to be vacated, secured, repaired, removed, demolished, mowed or abated and an
additional reasonable time. for the ordered action to be taken by any of the mortgagees or
lienholders in the event the responsible party fails to comply with the order within the time
provided for action by the responsible party. Under this subsection, the city is not required to
furnish any notice to a mortgagee or lienholder other than a copy of the order in the event the
responsible party fails to timely take the ordered action.
(F) If the premises are not vacated, secured, repaired, removed, demolished, mowed or
abated within the allotted time, the city may vacate, secure, remove, demolish, mow or abate
the nuisance at its own expense.
(G) If the city incurs expenses under subsection (F), the city may assess the expenses on and
the city has a lien against, unless it is a homestead as protected by the Texas Constitution, the
property on which the building was or is located. The lien is extinguished if the property owner
or another person having an interest in the legal title to the property reimburses the city in full
for said expenses. The lien arises and attaches to the property at the time the notice of the lien is
recorded and indexed in the office of the Lynn County Clerk. The notice must contain the name
and address of the owner if that information can be determined with reasonable effort, a legal
description of the real property on which the nuisance was located, the amount of expenses
incurred by the city and the balance due.
(H) If the notice is given and the opportunity to vacate, secure, repair, remove, demolish,
mow or abate said nuisance is afforded to each mortgagee and lienholder as authorized by
subsection (D) or (E), the lien is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens and all
previously recorded bona fide mortgage liens attached to the real property to which the city’s
lien attaches.
(b) Public Hearing.
(1) The responsible party may request a public hearing. The purpose of the same shall be to
determine whether or not the premises is a public nuisance in accordance with the standards as set
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/194
forth and Section 8.1101 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Tahoka.
(2) The matter shall be set for hearing before the city council at the earliest practical date and
notice of said hearing shall be served on the responsible party by the city secretary not less than (10)
days prior to the date of said hearing. All interested persons shall have the opportunity to be heard
and may introduce evidence to the city council for its members’ consideration.
Sec. 8.1104 Assessment of Costs
(a) The city may:
(1) assess the cost of abating the nuisance, the cost of legal notification by publication and
administrative fee of not more than $100.00 on the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises on
which the nuisance exists; or
(2) by resolution or order assess the cost of abating the nuisance, the cost of legal notification by
publication and administrative fee of not more than $100.00 against the property on which the
nuisance exists.
(b) The city is entitled to accrue interest beginning on the 31st day after the date of assessment against the
property at the rate of ten percent (10%) a year.
(c) The statement of cost or a certified copy of the statement of cost is prima facie proof of the costs incurred
to abate the nuisance and is all that will be required of the city concerning costs.
(d) In any judicial proceeding regarding enforcement of this article, the city is entitled to recover a reasonable
attorney fee.
Sec. 8.1105 Posting of Warnings
(a) In the event the city council makes a determination after the public hearing that the premises are a public
nuisance, the city manager shall cause to be posted to such premises a notice reading as follows:
DANGER
DO NOT ENTER
THIS PROPERTY HAS BEEN DECLARED
A PUBLIC NUISANCE BY THE CITY OF TAHOKA
(b) Such notice shall remain posted until required repairs, removal, demolition, moving or abatement is
completed and such premises have been rendered no longer a public nuisance.
Sec. 8.1106 Additional Powers of the City
In addition to the above powers and authorities, the city shall have all of the rights granted by Section 342.003
through Section 342.004 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of Texas, as it exists as of this date or as it
may be amended from time to time.
Sec. 8.1107 Authority to Enter Premises
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/194
(a) A city official, agent or employee charged with the enforcement of health, environmental safety or fire
laws may enter any premises in the incorporated area of the city at any reasonable time to inspect, investigate or
abate a nuisance or to enforce this article.
(b) Before entering the premises, the official, agent or employee must exhibit proper identification to the
occupant, manager or other appropriate person.
Sec. 8.1108 Criminal Penalty
(a) A person commits an offense if:
(1) the person violates Section 8.1101; and
(2) the nuisance remains unabated after the expiration of the time ordered by the city council to
abate the nuisance.
(b) An offense under this article is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine in accordance with the general penalty
provision found in Section 1.109 of this code.
(c) If it is shown on the trial of the defendant that the defendant has been previously convicted of an offense
under this article, the defendant is punishable by a fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $1,000.00,
confinement in jail for not more than six months, or both.
(d) Each day a violation occurs is a separate offense.
(e) The court shall order abatement of the nuisance if the defendant is convicted of an offense under this
article.
(Ordinance 6-93 adopted 5/3/93)
ARTICLE 8.1200 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES IN
PARKS*
Sec. 8.1201 Definitions
As used in Section 8.1202 the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Alcoholic Beverage. Alcohol and any beverage containing more than one-half (1/2) of one percent of alcohol by
volume which is capable of use for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted.
Controlled Dangerous Substances. Shall include the possession of legal drugs, substances, adulterant, or dilutant
by someone other than to whom the legal drug, substance, adulterant, or dilutant was prescribed, abuse of legal
drugs, substances, adulterant, or dilutant, possession of illicit drugs, substances, adulterant, or dilutant, or use of
illicit drugs, substances, adulterant, or dilutant.
Sec. 8.1202 Prohibited Activities
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage or controlled dangerous
substance in a public park of the city.
(b) A person who violates this rule will be assessed penalties as described in Section 1.109 of the city code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/194
(Ordinance 080708 adopted 8/13/07)
ARTICLE 8.1300 MISCELLANEOUS NUISANCES†
Sec. 8.1301 Power to Define and Prohibit
The city, acting by and through its duly authorized officers, agents and representatives, shall have the power to
define all nuisances and prohibit the same within the city and outside the city for a distance of five thousand
(5,000) feet; to police all parks or grounds, speedways or boulevards owned by the city and lying outside of the
city; to prohibit the pollution of any stream, drain or tributary thereof, which may constitute a source of water
supply of any city, and to provide for policing the same, as well as to provide for the protection of any
watersheds and the policing of the same; to inspect dairies, poultry houses, slaughter pens and slaughter houses
inside or outside the city from which meat or milk is furnished to the inhabitants of the city; as provided in
Section 217.042, Local Government Code, which grants such powers and authorizes such acts. All powers
granted under said section are specifically adopted and made a part hereof.
Sec. 8.1302 Abatement by City
Whenever any nuisance as herein defined is found in any place in this city for the removal, abatement, or
destruction of which no man can be held liable under the provisions hereof, it shall be the duty of the city
manager, or his designee, to remove, abate, or destroy the same at the expense of the city.
Sec. 8.1303 Territorial Applicability
(a) This article shall be applicable and in force throughout the territory of the city within its corporate limits.
(b) This article shall also be applicable and in force within the area immediately adjacent and contiguous to
the city limits and extending for a distance outside the city limits for a total of five thousand feet (5,000'), and it
shall be unlawful to do or perform any act in violation of this article within such area of five thousand feet
(5,000') outside the city limits; provided, this article shall not apply within any portion of such five thousand foot
area which is contained within the territory of any other municipal corporation.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 8.14 NOISE NUISANCE
Sec. 8.1401 Definitions
Clearly Audible. Sound that can be heard without the assistance of a device.
Construction. Any phase of the on-site erection or removal, including, but not limited to, excavation, demolition,
alteration, or repair of a building or structure conducted on that site.
Daytime. The daylight hours from one-half hour before sunrise to one-half hour after sunset with exact times of
sunrise and sunset as designated by the U.S. Naval Observatory for this regional time zone.
Immediate Vicinity. A distance within 100 feet of the noise source, or an area within the property line of the
parcel or lot upon which the source of noise is emanating; whichever is the greater distance from the noise
source.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/194
Nighttime. The dark hours from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise with exact times of
sunrise and sunset as designated by the U.S. Naval Observatory for this regional time zone.
Noise Disturbance. Any sound which annoys or disturbs, or which causes or tends to cause an adverse
psychological or physiological effect upon the sensibilities of a reasonable, prudent, adult person; any
unreasonably loud or disturbing noise which is offensive to the sensibilities of a reasonable, prudent, adult
person; and any unreasonably loud or disturbing noise which renders the enjoyment of life or property
uncomfortable or interferes with public peace and comfort.
Residential. Any property used for temporary or permanent dwelling purposes.
Unreasonable Noise. A loud, disturbing, or raucous sound which:
(1) Causes distress, discomfort, or injury to persons of ordinary sensibilities;
(2) Which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans; or
(3) Which annoys or disturbs the quiet, comfort, or repose of a person of ordinary sensibilities.
Sec. 8.1402 Unreasonable Noise Prohibited
(a) An unreasonable noise is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person makes or causes to be made an unreasonable noise within the
city.
Sec. 8.1403 Unreasonable Noises Enumerated
Unreasonable noises in violation of this article, include, but are not limited to:
(1) Noise-producing devices. The use of a device to produce or reproduce sound, electronically,
mechanically, or otherwise, in a manner or with such volume or intensity that it annoys or disturb the
quiet, comfort, or repose of a person of ordinary sensibilities in a dwelling, hotel, or other type of
residence.
(2) Sound amplifiers. The use of a mechanical or electronic sound amplifier in a residential area
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day.
(3) Animals and birds. The keeping of an animal or bird, which by causing frequent or long
continued noise, disturbs the comfort and repose of a person of ordinary sensibilities in the
immediate vicinity.
(4) Horns or other signal devices on vehicles. Permitting an unreasonably loud, harsh, or prolonged
sounding of a horn, alarm, or other signal device on a vehicle, unless:
(A) Necessary to ensure safe operation as authorized by state law, or
(B) Caused by mechanical failure beyond the operator’s control and the operator takes all
reasonable measures to stop the noise made by the horn, alarm, or other device.
(5) Operation of vehicles in disrepair. The operation of an automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle
so out of repair or loaded in such manner as to create loud or raucous grating, grinding, jarring, or
rattling noises or vibrations that disturbs the comfort and repose of a person of ordinary sensibilities
in the immediate vicinity.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/194
(6) Exhaust without mufflers. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any internal
combustion engine or motor vehicle or boat engine, except through a muffler or other device which
will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises, or the running of any motor or engine without a
muffler which causes loud noise that annoys or disturbs the comfort and repose of persons of
ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity.
(7) Loading and unloading vehicles. The creation of any loud and excessive noise in connection
with the loading or unloading of any vehicle or trailer, or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes,
crates, and containers.
(8) Motorcycles. The use of any motorcycle, motorbike, dirt bike, or any other type of all-terrain
vehicle in a manner or in a place that annoys or disturbs the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons of
ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity.
(9) Devices. The use of any radio, television set, musical instrument, loudspeaking amplifiers and
similar device in a manner or in a place that annoys or disturbs the quiet, comfort, or repose of
persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity.
(A) The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production
or reproduction device, radio, receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television
set, loudspeakers and sound amplifiers or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound within a residential district or quiet zone, or within five hundred feet
(500') of any residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance.
Furthermore, any such activity shall create a noise disturbance per se if conducted between the
hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(B) The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production
or reproduction device, radio, receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television
set, loudspeakers and sound amplifiers or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound within a nonresidential area in such a manner as to cause a noise
disturbance.
(C) The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production
or reproduction device, radio, receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television
set, loudspeakers and sound amplifiers or other machine or device that produces or reproduces
sound for the purpose of attracting attention to any cause or demonstration, or to any
performance, show, sale or display of merchandise so as to attract attention to such cause,
demonstration or premises when such use is done in a manner which causes a noise disturbance.
(D) The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production
or reproduction device, radio, receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television
set, loudspeakers and sound amplifiers or other machine or device on trucks or other moving
vehicles for the purpose of attracting attention to any cause or demonstration, or for advertising
any show, sale or display of merchandise when such use is done in a manner which causes a
noise disturbance.
(10) Vehicular sound amplification systems. Operating or controlling a motor vehicle in either a
public or private place within the town and operating any sound device which is part of, or connected
to, any radio, stereo receiver, compact disc player, cassette tape player, or other similar device in the
motor vehicle, in such a manner that, when operated, it is audible at a distance of thirty feet (30'), or
when operated, causes a person to be aware of the vibration accompanying the sound at a distance of
thirty feet (30') from the source when such operation is done in a manner which causes a noise
disturbance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/194
(11) Construction work. Engaging in construction other than during the daytime, Monday through
Sunday, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety and convenience, and then
only by permit from the mayor.
(12) Near schools or hospitals. The creation of a loud and raucous noise on a street adjacent to a
school or institution of learning that is in session, or adjacent to a hospital, nursing home, or assisted
living home.
(13) Trash pickup. Conducting commercial or industrial trash or waste pickup within 1,000 lineal
feet of a residential dwelling during the nighttime.
(14) Commercial noise. Operating, as part of a business, equipment or machinery, including but
not limited to, combustion engines, fans, blowers, grinders, welders, loaders, washers, winches, lifts,
and hoists, whether independent or attached to a motor vehicle, during the nighttime within 1,000
lineal feet of any residential dwelling. This provision does not apply to the operation of a gin.
Sec. 8.1404 Exceptions
Section 8.1402 does not apply to the following activities:
(1) Athletic, musical, or cultural activities or events, including practices and rehearsals, conducted
by or under the auspices of public or private schools;
(2) Sounds created while conducting daytime yard work or lawn maintenance during the daytime,
including, but not limited to, lawn mowing, leaf blowing, brush clearing, and use of chainsaws;
(3) Sounds created as a part of new construction, remodeling, or maintenance activities on a
building or structure during the daytime, excluding Sundays, or new construction, remodeling or
maintenance activities indoors on Sunday during the daytime and which do not produce any clearly
audible noise outside of the immediate vicinity;
(4) Sounds created during construction, maintenance, or repairs conducted by or on behalf of a
governmental entity providing basic utility services or roadway projects approved by the city council;
(5) Sounds created by agricultural operations when the operations are related to activities directly
associated with agricultural business, including raking, baling, plowing, planting, harvesting,
milking, feeding, and mowing; and traffic flow;
(6) Sounds created by railroad traffic and typical roadway noises from vehicles.
Sec. 8.1405 Variances
The city council may authorize a variance to any restriction set forth in this article. Before granting a variance,
the city council must determine that a literal enforcement of this article would create an unnecessary hardship or
a practical difficulty on the applicant, that the situation causing the unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty is
unique to the affected property and is not self-imposed, that the variance will not injure and will be wholly
compatible with the use and permitted development of adjacent properties, and that the granting of the variance
will be in harmony with the spirit and purpose of this article. A person may request a variance from this article
by filing the request with the director of public works.
Sec. 8.1406 Penalty
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/194
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be fined in accordance with the
general penalty provision found in Section 1.109 of this code, and each and every violation of the various
provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense, as shall each day that violation continues.
(Ordinance 3110 adopted 3/14/11)
CHAPTER 9
PERSONNEL
ARTICLE 9.100 ADOPTION OF TITLE 28
The provisions of Title 28, Chapters 1 through 10, of the Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended,
insofar as its provisions may be applicable to the city are hereby adopted and accepted. (1979 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 2, Sec. 2-1)
ARTICLE 9.200 EMERGENCY POWERS OF MAYOR
Sec. 9.201 Generally; Calling Special Police Force
Whenever the mayor shall deem it necessary in order to enforce the laws of the city and to avert danger to
persons or property or to suppress a riot or outbreak or calamity, or to prevent a public disturbance, or when he
has good reason to believe or well-grounded fears of any serious violation of law or ordinance or any outbreak
or any other danger of a serious character to the city or the inhabitants thereof which cannot be controlled by the
regular city police force, he shall cause to be summoned into service a special police force of such numbers as in
his judgment may be necessary for the preservation of the peace and good order of the city; and such special
police, while in service, shall be subject to the orders of the mayor and shall perform such duties as he may
require, and while on duty shall have the same power and authority as are conferred upon the regular city
policemen under the law; and any person so summoned and failing to appear or obey such summons, or failing
to perform any duty required hereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2,
Sec. 2-2)
Sec. 9.202 Closing Public Places
The mayor shall have authority, in cases of riot or serious outbreak, or disturbance of the peace, with the view to
preserve the peace and good order in the city, to order and enforce the closing of any theater, ballroom,
restaurant or other public house and may arrest in person or cause the arrest of any person refusing to obey such
orders. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2, Sec. 2-3)
ARTICLE 9.300 MUTUAL LAW ENFORCEMENT ASSISTANCE
Sec. 9.301 Assignment of Police of this City Authorized
Pursuant to the provisions of article 999b, Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes, the city administrator and/or chief of
police are authorized to assign the regularly employed law enforcement personnel of his department to assist any
other county or municipality in this state, when a state of civil emergency in such county or municipality has
been declared by proper authority, upon request by such proper authority, and when, in the opinion of such
proper authority, a need exists in such other county or municipality for the services of additional law
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/194
enforcement officers to protect the health, life and property of such other county or municipality, its inhabitants
and the visitors thereto, by reason of riot, unlawful assembly characterized by the use of force and violence or
threat thereof by three (3) or more persons acting together or without lawful authority, or during time of natural
disaster or man-made calamity. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2, Sec. 2-4)
Sec. 9.302 Other Peace Officers as City Police When Assigned
Whenever any law enforcement officer of any other county or municipality is assigned to this city under
authority of an order adopted by the governing body of such other county or municipality, to assist under
circumstances as described above which may exist in this city, such officer shall be a peace officer of this city
and shall be under the command of the chief of police of this city while so assigned and he shall have all the
powers of a regular law enforcement officer of this city as fully as though he were within the county or
municipality where regularly employed, and his qualifications, respectively, for office where regularly employed
shall constitute his qualification for office in this city, and no other oath, bond or compensation shall be made.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2, Sec. 2-5)
Sec. 9.303 Prerequisites of Office Continue for City Police When Assigned
When any law enforcement officer of this city is ordered by proper authority to perform peace officer duties
outside the territorial limits of this city, he shall be entitled to the same wage, salary, pension and all other
compensation and all other rights for such service, including injury or death benefits, the same as though the
service had been rendered within the limits of this city; and he shall also be paid for any reasonable expenses of
travel, food or lodging, as well as for damage to equipment and clothing and medical expenses, which he may
incur while on duty outside such limits, or while traveling to or from such assignment. (1979 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 2, Sec. 2-6)
Sec. 9.304 Reimbursement to Other Governmental Body
When any law enforcement officer is assigned to this city from another county or city under the circumstances
described above, and upon request of the proper authority of this city, this city will, upon proper request,
reimburse the county or city furnishing the services of such law enforcement officer for his actual expenses of
travel, food, lodging, and for such cost or damage to equipment and clothing resulting from the services of such
law enforcement officer in this city and for which the county or city where he is regularly employed has paid.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2, Sec. 2-7)
ARTICLE 9.400 CITY ADMINISTRATOR
Sec. 9.401 Appointment; Function
The city council shall appoint a city administrator who shall be the administrative head of the municipal
government under the direction and supervision of the city council. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2, Sec.
2-8)
Sec. 9.402 Term of Office
The city administrator shall be appointed for an indefinite period and shall be subject to discharge at the will of
the city council. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2, Sec. 2-10)
Sec. 9.403 Absence or Disability
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/194
During the absence or disability of the city administrator, the city council shall designate some properly
qualified person to perform the duties of said office. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2, Sec. 2-11)
Sec. 9.404 Powers and Duties
The powers and duties of the city administrator shall be:
(1) To devote all of his working time and attention to the affairs of the city, and be responsible to
the city council for the efficient administration of its affairs.
(2) To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced.
(3) With the advice of the city council, to appoint and remove all heads of departments. He shall
have the power to appoint or remove all subordinate employees.
(4) To exercise supervision and control over all departments created by the city council or that may
hereafter be created by the city council.
(5) To attend all meetings of the city council with the right to take part in the discussion, but
having no vote; and he shall be notified of all special meetings of the city council.
(6) To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public
franchise are faithfully kept and performed, and upon knowledge of any violation thereof to call the
same to the attention of the city council.
(7) To act as budget officer and as such to prepare and submit to the city council, prior to the
beginning of each fiscal year, a budget of proposed expenditures for the ensuing year, showing in as
much detail as practicable the estimated amounts required by months for the efficient operation of
each department of the city and the reason for such estimated expenditures, which budget must be
approved by the city council.
(8) The city administrator, in addition to the foregoing subsection (7), shall make and file a budget
as required by state law with the assistance of the city treasurer, after the same has been approved by
the city council.
(9) To make a full written report to the city council as soon after the close of each month’s
accounts as possible, showing the operation and expenditures of each department for the preceding
month and a comparison of such monthly expenditures by departments, with the monthly allowances
made for such departments in the annual budget, and to keep the city council fully advised at all
times as to the financial condition and needs of the city.
(10) To act as purchasing agent for the city and to purchase all merchandise, material and supplies
needed by the city, and may establish, if needed, a suitable storehouse where such supplies shall be
kept and from which same shall be issued as needed; and to adopt such rules and regulations
governing requisitions and transaction of business between himself as such purchasing agent and the
heads of the departments, officers and employees of the city as the city council may approve.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2, Sec. 2-12)
(11) To enter into contracts binding the city, provided such contract does not obligate the city in
excess of $5,000.00. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 9.500 SOUTH PLAINS ASSOCIATION OF GOVERNMENTS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/194
Sec. 9.501 Membership of City
The city hereby enters into mutual agreement with other governmental units and becomes a member of the South
Plains Association of Governments. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2, Sec. 2-14)
Sec. 9.502 Ratification of Bylaws
The bylaws of the South Plains Association of Governments, on file in the city secretary’s office, and made a
part hereof for all purposes, are hereby ratified. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2, Sec. 2-15)
Sec. 9.503 City Representation on the General Assembly
The city representative to the general assembly of the South Plains Association of Governments, and the
designated alternate representative shall be duly elected members of the governing body of the city. (1979 Code
of Ordinances, Chapter 2, Sec. 2-16)
Sec. 9.504 Payment of Dues Authorized
Payment of membership dues when called for by the board of directors of the South Plains Association of
Governments, is hereby authorized. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2, Sec. 2-17)
ARTICLE 9.600 CITY COUNCIL*
Sec. 9.601 Regular Council Meeting Day
There shall be a regular meeting of the city council on the first Monday of each month. (1979 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 2, Sec. 2-30)
Sec. 9.602 Calling Special Meetings
Special meetings may be called at any time by the mayor as he shall deem necessary. (1979 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 2, Sec. 2-31)
Sec. 9.603 Continuing or Adjourning Meetings
All meetings may be continued or adjourned; provided, a special meeting shall not be continued beyond the date
and time of the next regular meeting. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2, Sec. 2-32)
Sec. 9.604 Quorum of Council
A quorum of the council will consist of a majority of the number of councilmen established. However, at a
called meeting or at a meeting to consider the imposition of taxes, two-thirds of the number of councilmen
established by that section constitutes a quorum unless provided otherwise. (Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code 22.039, et
seq, and all amendments thereto.) (Ordinance 03140A adopted 3/10/14)
Sec. 9.605 Reading and Acting on Reports of Expenditures
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/194
All reports of expenditures shall be read and approved or disapproved at the regular council meetings. (1979
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2, Sec. 2-34)
Sec. 9.606 Passage of Ordinances; One Reading, Effective Upon Publication
All ordinances to be passed by the city council shall be passed upon one reading; and upon publication as
prescribed by the law of this state, all ordinances so passed shall be in full force and effect. (1979 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 2, Sec. 2-35)
CHAPTER 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATION
ARTICLE 10.100 MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS*
Sec. 10.101 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Common Access Route. A private way which affords the principal means of access to individual mobile home
lots or auxiliary buildings.
Driveway. A minor entranceway off the common access route within the park into an off-street parking area
serving one or more mobile homes.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 12, Sec. 12-1)
Manufactured Home. Means a structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems.
The term does not include a recreational vehicle.
Mobile Home. Means a structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, airconditioning
and electrical systems.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Mobile Home Park. A unified development of mobile or manufactured home spaces arranged on a tract of land
under single entity ownership, meeting all requirements of this article and any applicable deed restrictions. A
mobile home subdivision is not a mobile home park.
Mobile Home Subdivisions. A mobile home subdivision is a unified development of mobile or manufactured
home lots arranged on a tract of land which has been subdivided and is under ownership of two or more persons
meeting all requirements of the subdivision regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/194
Parking, Off-Street. A minimum space nine (9) feet in width by eighteen (18) feet in length, located within the
boundary of a mobile or manufactured home space, or in a common parking and storage area, having
unobstructed access to an internal street.
Replacement. The act of moving one mobile or manufactured home from its existing stand and replacing it with
another mobile or manufactured home.
Sewer Connection. The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the drain outlet of a
mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding sewer service riser pipe of the sewage system serving the mobile
home park.
Water Connection. The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the water riser pipe to
the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within a mobile home park.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 12, Sec. 12-1)
Sec. 10.102 Inspections
(a) Inspections Required. The building inspector, the health officer, the fire marshal, the police chief and their
authorized representatives, are hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to
determine compliance with this article.
(b) Entry on Premises. The building inspector, the health officer, the fire marshal, the police chief and their
authorized representatives, shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property
for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this article.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 12, Sec. 12-2)
Sec. 10.103 Park Facilities and Installations
(a) Off-Street Parking. All mobile home parks shall provide off-street parking for all occupants; their guests,
servants, employees, etc.
(b) Access Route. If a mobile park includes more than one mobile unit, there shall be a common access route.
(c) Water Supply.
(1) An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided in each mobile
home park. Connection shall be made to the public supply of water unless a special exception is
granted by the city council to use a private water supply system. If a private supply is utilized for
service to the park, the private supply shall be adequate both for domestic requirements and for fire
fighting requirements established by the city.
(2) Water Distribution System.
(A) The water supply system of the mobile home park shall be connected by pipes to all
mobile homes, buildings and other facilities requiring water.
(B) All water piping, fixtures and other equipment shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with state and city regulations and requirements.
(d) Sewage disposal. The following shall apply:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/194
(1) General requirements. An adequate and safe sewerage system shall be provided in all mobile
home parks for conveying and disposing of all sewage. The sewer system for a mobile home park
shall be constructed in accordance with Texas Department of Health Resources requirements and all
applicable city codes and ordinances. All proposed sewage disposal facilities shall be approved by
the city health officer prior to construction. Effluents from sewage treatment facilities shall not be
discharged into any waters of the state except with prior approval of the city health officer and the
appropriate regulatory agency of the state.
(2) Sewer lines. All sewer lines shall be constructed of materials in accordance with all applicable
city codes and ordinances and requirements of the Texas Department of Health Resources.
(e) Refuse and garbage handling. Refuse and garbage handling shall be in compliance with city ordinances.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 12, Sec. 12-3)
Sec. 10.104 Zones
The property described in the zoning ordinance for such purpose shall be zoned as mobile home property. (1979
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 12, Sec. 12-4)
Sec. 10.105 Mobile Homes Outside of Parks
All mobile or manufactured homes located on other property than a mobile home park shall not be affected by
this article so long as said mobile homes conform to all applicable city ordinances, but upon removal of same, if
not replaced within ten (10) days, the property no longer qualifies as a parking place or use for mobile or
manufactured homes unless an exemption is granted by the city council. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 12,
Sec. 12-5)
Sec. 10.106 Mobile Homes Prohibited
Mobile homes as defined in Section 10.101 above will not be allowed to be placed within the city limits of
Tahoka, Texas. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 10.107 Subject to Mobile Homes Standards Act
This article is subject to and encompasses the Mobile Homes Standards Act effective September 1, 1975, and
codified as article 5221f, V.AC.S. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 12, Sec. 12-6)
Sec. 10.108 Exemptions Authorized; Hearings
The city council is hereby empowered to make exceptions to this article, to conduct hearings, and determine
same. Any requests for exemptions must be in writing and upon the filing of such request, this article will be
stayed until the next regular or special meeting of the city council at which time it shall issue an order sustaining,
modifying or withdrawing the refusal. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 12, Sec. 12-7)
Sec. 10.109 Conflict With Other Ordinances
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/194
Whenever the standards and specifications in this article conflict with those contained in another ordinance or
elsewhere in this code, the most stringent or restrictive provision shall govern. (1979 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 12, Sec. 12-8)
ARTICLE 10.200 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
Sec. 10.201 Adopted
The subdivision ordinance, adopted by the city on 6/14/10, as amended, is included at the end of this chapter as
exhibit A. Due to the nature of the subdivision ordinance and the technicalities involved in adopting or
amending it, such ordinance is printed herein as enacted, with only nonsubstantive formatting and style changes.
Capitalization, punctuation and numbering of articles, sections and subsections have been retained as enacted.
Subsequent amendments will be inserted in their proper place and denoted by a history note following the
amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates the material is unchanged from the original.
Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Any other material added for purposes of
clarification is enclosed in brackets. (Editorially supplied)
EXHIBIT A
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1.1. Authority; Extension to Extraterritorial Jurisdiction
(a) This Ordinance is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, including
Chapter 212, Texas Local Government Code and Section 16.350 of the Texas Water Code. Notwithstanding any
provision to the contrary, these rules apply only to a subdivision which creates two or more lots of five acres or
less intended for residential purposes. Lots of five acres or less are presumed to be for residential purposes
unless the land is restricted to nonresidential uses on the final plat and in all deeds and contracts for deeds.
(b) The following rules and regulations are hereby adopted as the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of
Tahoka, Texas, also referred to herein as “Ordinance.” The City Council hereby extends the application of this
Ordinance to the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Tahoka, as that area may exist from time to time. This
Ordinance shall be applicable to the filing of plats and the subdivision of land, as that term is defined herein and
in Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government Code, within the corporate limits of the City of Tahoka and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction as they may be from time to time adjusted by annexation or disannexation. The City
shall have all remedies and rights provided by said Chapter 212 with regard to the control, approval, and
enforcement of subdivisions and plats both within the City and within its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Section 1.2 Interpretation and Purpose
(a) In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this Ordinance, it is the intention of the City
Council that the principles, standards, and requirements provided for herein shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for platting and developing of subdivisions within the City of Tahoka and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction. This Ordinance shall be construed broadly to promote the purposes for which they are adopted.
(b) The subdivision (i.e., platting) of land is the first step in the process of development. A community’s
quality of life is of the public interest. Consequently, the subdivision of land, as it affects a community’s quality
of life, is an activity where regulation is a valid function of municipal government. The regulations contained
herein are intended to encourage the development of a quality municipal environment by establishing standards
for the provision of adequate light, air, open space, stormwater drainage, transportation, public utilities and
facilities, and other needs necessary for ensuring the creation and continuance of a healthy, attractive, safe and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/194
efficient community that provides for the conservation, enhancement and protection of its human and natural
resources.
(c) The procedure and standards for the development, layout and design of subdivisions of land within the
corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Tahoka, Texas, are intended to:
(1) Promote the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the municipality and the safe, orderly,
and healthful development of the municipality.
(2) Ensure that adequate water and wastewater facilities are provided in subdivisions within the
jurisdiction of the municipality, and to apply the minimum state standards for water and wastewater
facilities to these subdivisions.
(3) Guide and assist property owners and applicants in the correct procedures to be followed, and
to inform them of the standards which shall be required;
(4) Protect the public interest by imposing standards for the location, design, class and type of
streets, sidewalks, utilities and essential public services.
Section 1.3 Application of Regulations
(a) No subdivision plat shall be recorded until a final plat, accurately describing the property to be conveyed,
has been approved in accordance with this Ordinance and with other applicable City regulations described in
subsection 1.3(b) below. No building permit, certificate of occupancy, plumbing permit, electrical permit,
floodplain permit, utility tap, or certificate of acceptance for required public improvements shall be issued by the
City for any parcel of land or plat until:
(1) A final plat has been approved in accordance with this Ordinance; and
(2) All improvements required by this Ordinance have been constructed and accepted by the
City, or
(3) Assurances for completion of improvements have been provided in accordance with Section 5
[Article V.] of this Ordinance.
(b) Compliance with all City ordinances pertaining to the subdivision of land, shall be required prior to
approval of any development application governed by this Ordinance. It is the property owner’s responsibility to
be familiar with, and comply with, City ordinances. Applicable ordinances and requirements include, but are not
limited to, the following:
(1) Zoning Ordinance;
(2) Building Codes; and
(3) Other Applicable Chapters of the City’s Code of Ordinances.
Section 1.4 Jurisdiction
(a) The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to the following forms of land subdivision and development
activity within the City’s limits and its extraterritorial jurisdiction:
(1) The division of land into two or more tracts, lots, sites or parcels; or
(2) All subdivisions of land whether by metes and bounds division or by plat, which were outside
the jurisdiction of the City’s subdivision regulations in Lynn County, Texas, and which subsequently
came within the jurisdiction of the City’s subdivision regulations through:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/194
(A) Annexation; or
(B) Extension of the City’s extraterritorial jurisdiction; or
(3) The combining of two or more contiguous tracts, lots, sites or parcels for the purpose of
creating or expanding one or more legal lots in order to achieve a more developable site, except as
otherwise provided herein; or
(4) When a building permit is required for the following uses on land that has not already been
platted:
(A) Residential Single-Family: All single-family detached dwelling units shall be located on
individual lots owned in fee simple, and shall not be located on an easement.
(i) Construction of a new single-family dwelling unit; or
(ii) Moving of a primary structure or a main building onto a piece of property; or
(B) Nonresidential and Multifamily:
(i) Construction of a new nonresidential or multifamily structure; or
(ii) Additions, such as increasing the square footage of an existing building by more
than twenty percent (20%) of its gross floor area; or
(iii) Moving a primary structure onto a piece of property; or
(iv) For tracts where any public improvements are proposed; or
(v) Whenever a property owner proposes to divide land lying within the City or its
extraterritorial jurisdiction into two or more tracts, and claims exemption from Subchapter
A of Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government Code for purposes of development, that
results in parcels or lots all greater than five (5) acres in size; or in the event that
development of any such tract is intended, and where no public improvement is proposed
to be dedicated, he shall first obtain approval of a development plat that meets the
requirements of Texas Local Government Code Chapter 212, Subchapter B, Regulation of
Property Development, Sections 212.041 through 212.050. (See Section 2.7 of this
Ordinance for requirements for development plats.)
Section 1.5 Exemptions
(a) The provisions of this Ordinance shall not apply to:
(1) Development of land legally platted and approved prior to the effective date of this Ordinance,
except as otherwise provided for herein, and for which no re-subdivision is sought; or
(2) Sale, inheritance, or gift of land by metes and bounds of tracts upon which no improvements,
subdivision or alteration is occurring; or
(3) Existing cemeteries complying with all state and local laws and regulations; or
(4) Divisions of land created by order of a court of competent jurisdiction; or
(b) When a building permit is requested for unplatted or already platted parcels for one or more of the
following activities:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/194
(1) Replacement or reconstruction of an existing primary single-family or duplex structure, but not
to exceed the square footage of the original structure;
(2) Additions, such as increasing square footage of structure, of not over fifty percent (50%) of the
existing structure’s value, and of not over twenty percent (20%) of the gross floor area;
(3) Accessory buildings, as defined in the zoning ordinance;
(4) Remodeling or repair which involves no expansion of square footage; or
(5) Moving a structure off a lot or parcel, or for demolition permits.
Section 1.6 Pending Applications
Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, all applications for plat approval, including final plats, that are
pending on the effective date of this Ordinance and which have not lapsed shall be reviewed under the
regulations in effect immediately preceding the effective date of this Ordinance.
Section 1.7 Conflict; Severability
(a) Conflict With Other Laws. These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any
other ordinance, rule or regulation statute or other provision of law except as provided in this Ordinance. To the
extent that this Ordinance promulgates standards or imposes restrictions or duties which differ from those
imposed by other City ordinances, rules or regulations, the regulations contained within this Ordinance shall
supersede such other provisions to the extent of any conflict or inconsistency.
(b) Severability. If any part or provision of this Ordinance, or the application of this Ordinance to any person
or circumstance, is adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the judgment shall be confined in its
operation to the part, provision, or application directly involved in the controversy in which the judgment shall
be rendered, and it shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations or the application
of them to other persons or circumstances. The City Council hereby declares that it would have enacted the
remainder of these regulations even without any such part, provision, or application which is judge to be invalid.
Section 1.8 Saving Provision
This Ordinance shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or by virtue of, prior existing
subdivision regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accruing or about to
accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under
any section or provision existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, or as vacating or annulling any rights
obtained by any person, firm or corporation, by lawful action of the City except as shall be expressly provided in
this Ordinance.
Section 1.9 Waivers/Suspensions
(a) Where the Planning & Zoning Commission recommends, and the City Council finds, that undue hardships
will result from strict compliance with a certain provision(s) of this Ordinance, or where the purposes of these
regulations may be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve a waiver/suspension
from any portion of these regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest is secured,
provided that the waiver/suspension shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these
regulations, and further provided that the City Council shall not approve a waiver/suspension unless it shall
make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
(1) Granting the waiver/suspension will not be detrimental to the public safety, health or welfare,
and will not be injurious to other property or to the owners of other property, and the
waiver/suspension will not prevent the orderly subdivision of other property in the vicinity;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/194
(2) The conditions upon which the request for a waiver/suspension is based are unique to the
property for which the waiver/suspension is sought, and are not applicable generally to other
property;
(3) Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape and/or topographical conditions of the
specific property involved, a particular hardship to the property owner would result, as distinguished
from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of these regulations is carried out;
(4) The waiver/suspension will not in any manner vary the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of
the City;
(5) An alternate design will generally achieve the same result or intent as the standards and
regulations prescribed herein.
(b) Such findings of the City Council, together with the specific facts upon which such findings are based,
shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the City Council meeting at which a waiver/suspension is
considered. A waiver/suspension from any provision of this Ordinance may be granted only when in harmony
with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance so that the public, health, safety and welfare may be
secured and substantial justice done. Pecuniary hardship to the property owner or developer, standing alone,
shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship.
(c) Criteria for Waiver/Suspensions from Development Extractions. Where the City Council finds that the
imposition of any development extraction pursuant to these regulations exceeds reasonable benefit to the
property owner, or is so excessive as to constitute confiscation of the tract to be platted, it may approve a full or
partial, at its discretion, waiver/suspension to such requirements so as to prevent such excess.
(d) Conditions. In approving a waiver/suspension, the City Council may require such conditions as will, in its
judgment, secure substantially the purposes described in Section 1.2.
(e) Procedures.
(1) A petition for a waiver/suspension shall be submitted in writing by the property owner before
the plat is submitted for the consideration of the Planning & Zoning Commission. The petition shall
state fully the grounds for the application, and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner.
(2) Where a hardship is identified during concept plan review pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance or
during subdivision plat review pursuant to this Ordinance which requires issuance of a
waiver/suspension from a provision in this Ordinance, the Commission may recommend a
conditional (or temporary) waiver/suspension from that provision in this Ordinance in conjunction
with concept plan or plat approval by the City Council. A conditional or temporary
waiver/suspension from this Ordinance shall receive final approval along with a construction plat
provided that the construction plat conforms to the concept plan, and that no new information or
reasonable alternative plan exists which, at the determination of the City Council, voids the need for
a waiver/suspension. All waivers/suspensions shall have final approval or disapproval by the City
Council.
Section 1.10 Payment of All Indebtedness Attributable to a Specific Property
No person who owes delinquent taxes, delinquent paving assessments, delinquent fees, or any other delinquent
debts or obligations to the City, and which are directly attributable to a piece of property, shall be allowed to
record an approved plat or replat until the taxes, assessments, debts or obligations directly attributable to said
property and owed by the property owner or previous owner thereof shall have been first fully discharged by
payment, or until an arrangement satisfactory to the City Administrator has been made for the payment of such
debts or obligations. It shall be the applicant’s responsibility to provide evidence or proof that all taxes,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/194
assessments, debts or obligations have been paid at the time of submission for any application for approval
under this Ordinance.
Section 1.11 Right to Deny Hearing and Plat
The City may deny a hearing and any approval pursuant to this ordinance if the applicant does not submit the
information and fees required by this Ordinance.
Section 1.12 Misrepresentation of Facts
It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for any person to knowingly or willfully misrepresent, or fail to include,
any information required by this Ordinance in any plat application or during any public hearing or meeting of
the Commission or City Council. Such a violation shall constitute grounds for denial of the plat.
Section 1.13 Definitions
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall include the
future tense, words in the plural number shall include the singular number, and vice versa; and words in the
masculine gender shall include the feminine gender, and vice versa. Definitions not expressly prescribed herein
are to be determined in accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices. The
word “shall” is always mandatory, while the word “may” is merely directory.
Addition. A lot, tract or parcel of land lying within the corporate boundaries or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
City which is intended for the purpose of subdivision or development.
Alley. A minor public right-of-way not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which is
used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a street. The
length of an alley segment is to be measured from the right-of-way lines of the streets from which the alley is
provided access, including any alley turnouts onto a street.
Amended or Amending Plat. A revised plat correcting errors or making minor changes to the original recorded
final plat.
Applicant. A person or entity who submits an application for an approval required by this Ordinance.
Application. A written request for an approval required by this Ordinance.
Approval (by City Council). The City Council, as the governing body of the City shall be the final authority
responsible for approving all plats except for minor plats and amended plats. The only appeal to a decision by
the City Council shall be the judicial system.
Approval (by Planning & Zoning Commission). As a recommending body to the City Council, any reference
herein to approval by the Commission shall be construed to mean that the Commission takes action to make a
favorable recommendation (either with or without conditions) to the City Council. Any appeal to a decision by
the Commission shall be made to the City Council.
Authority. City Council, duly appointed official, or committee established by resolution that is expressly
authorized to review, amend, and/or enforce these Rules.
Block. A parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways, streets, streams, railway, rights-of-way, parks,
etc., or a combination thereof.
Bond. Any form of a surety bond in an amount and form satisfactory to the City.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/194
Building Official. The inspector or administrative official charged with responsibility for issuing building
permits and enforcing the Zoning and subdivision ordinances and Building Code of the City.
Building Setback Line. The line within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building
or other structure and the adjacent street right-of-way line, property line, creek, or other specific environmental
feature. In areas that lack a nationally recognized fire code as listed in Local Government Code Section
235.00(b)(2) and lack water lines sized for fire protection, setbacks from roads and rights-of-way shall be a
minimum of ten (10) feet, setbacks from adjacent property lines shall be a minimum of five (5) feet, and shall
not conflict with separation or setback distances required by rules governing public utilities, on-site sewage
facilities, or drinking water supplies.
City. The City of Tahoka, Texas.
City Administrator. The person holding the position of City administrator, as appointed by the City Council. For
the purposes of this Ordinance the City administrator may appoint, in writing, a designee to act on his or her
behalf.
City Attorney. The term “City Attorney” shall apply only to such attorney, or firm of attorneys, that has been
specifically employed by the City to assist in legal matters.
City Council. The city council of City of Tahoka, Texas.
City Engineer. The term “City engineer” shall apply only to such licensed professional engineer, or firm of
licensed consulting engineers, that has been specifically employed by the City to assist in engineering-related
matters.
City Planner. The term “City planner” shall apply only to such practicing, professional land planner, or firm of
professional land planners, that has been specifically employed by the City to assist in planning- and zoningrelated
matters.
Commission. The planning and zoning commission of the City.
Construction Plans or Drawings. The maps or drawings accompanying a plat and showing the specific location
and design of public improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the
City as a condition of approval of the plat.
Cul-de-sac. A street having only one outlet to another street, and terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular
turnaround or bulb. The length of a cul-de-sac is to be measured from the intersection centerpoint of the
adjoining through street to the midpoint of the cul-de-sac bulb.
Dead-End Street. A street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet.
Developer. Any person, partnership, firm, associate, corporation (or combination thereof), or any officer, agent,
employee, servant or trustee thereof, who performs or participates in the performing of any act toward the
subdivision of land, with the intent, scope of purview of these regulations.
Development Plat. A plat which depicts the development of land, which means the construction of any building,
structure or improvement of any nature, residential or nonresidential, or the enlargement of any external
dimension thereof.
Drinking Water. All water distributed by any agency or individual, public or private, for the purpose of human
consumption, use in the preparation of foods or beverages, cleaning any utensil or article used in the course of
preparation or consumption of food or beverages for human being[s], human bathing, or clothes washing.
Easement. The grant of one or more property rights by a property owner to another person or entity.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/194
Engineer. A person duly authorized and licensed under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Registration Act
to practice the profession of engineering.
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction. The area outside the municipal limits but within five miles of those limits.
Final Plat (also “Record Plat” or “File Plat”). The one official and authentic map of any given subdivision of
land prepared from actual field measurement and staking of all identifiable points by a surveyor or engineer,
with the subdivision location referenced to a survey corner, and with all boundaries, corners and curves of the
land division sufficiently described so that they can be reproduced without additional references. The final plat
of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be recorded in the land records of Lynn County, Texas. An amended plat
is also a final plat.
Lot (also Lot of Record). A divided or undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public street, and
which is, or which may in the future be, offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement; which is
designated as a distinct and separate tract; and which is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly
approved subdivision plat which has been properly filed of record.
Major Plat or Major Subdivision. All plats not classified as minor plats, including but not limited to subdivisions
of more than four (4) lots, or any plat that requires the construction of a new street, or portion thereof, or the
extension of a municipal facility as required by this or any other City ordinance.
Minor Plat or Minor Subdivision. A subdivision or replat resulting in four (4) or fewer lots abutting an existing
street, provided that the plat does not create any new streets or new easements or the extension of any municipal
facilities to serve any lot within the subdivision. Any property to be subdivided using a minor plat shall already
be served by all required City utilities and services.
Overlength Street. A street segment, or a cul-de-sac or alley segment, which exceeds the maximum length
allowed by this Ordinance, as measured along the centerline of the street from the intersection centerpoint of one
through street, which shall not be a cul-de-sac or dead-end or looped street, to the intersecting centerpoint of
another through street or, in the case of a cul-de-sac, to the midpoint of the cul-de-sac. For an alley segment, the
measurement shall be to the right-of-way lines of the streets from which the alley is provided access, including
any alley turnouts, or from the centerpoint of an intersection with another alley which connects to a street.
Pavement Width. The portion of a street that is available for vehicular traffic. Where curbs are used, it is the
portion from the back of one curb to the back of the opposite curb.
Perimeter Street. Any existing or planned street which abuts the subdivision or addition to be platted.
Permit. A license, certificate, approval, registration, consent, permit, contract or other agreement for
construction related to, or provision of, service from a water or wastewater utility owned, operated, or controlled
by a regulatory agency, or other form of authorization required by law, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance that a
person must obtain to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project for which the permit is
sought.
Plat. A preliminary plat, final plat, development plat, amended plat or replat, as determined by the context.
Preliminary Plat. The graphic expression of the proposed overall plan for subdividing, improving and
developing a tract, showing in plan view the proposed street and lot layout, easements, dedications and other
pertinent features, with such notations as are sufficient to substantially identify the general scope and detail of
the proposed development.
Private Street. A private vehicular access way, including an alley, that is shared by and that serves two or more
lots, which is not dedicated to the public, and which is not publicly maintained.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/194
Property Owner (also Known as “Applicant,” “Subdivider” or “Developer”). Any person or any agent thereof,
that has sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain
proceedings to subdivide the same under this Ordinance. The term “property owner” shall be restricted to
include only the owner(s) or authorized agent(s) of such owner(s), of land sought to be subdivided.
Replatting or Replat. The re-subdivision of any part or all of a block or blocks of a previously platted
subdivision, addition, lot or tract.
Right-of-Way. A parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a street or alley. Where appropriate,
“right-of-way” may include other facilities and utilities such as walkways; railroad crossings; electrical,
communication, oil and gas facilities, water and sanitary and storm sewer facilities; and any other special use.
The use of right-of-way shall also include parkways and medians outside of the paved portion of the street. The
usage of the term “right-of-way” for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter
established and shown on a final plat to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-ofway,
and shall not be included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels.
Sewerage Facilities. The devices and systems which transport domestic wastewater from residential property,
treat the wastewater, and dispose of the treated water in accordance with the minimum state standards.
Standard Street. A street or road that meets or exceeds the minimum specifications in the City’s standard street
specifications, and which is constructed to the ultimate configuration for the type of roadway it is designated for
on the City thoroughfare plan.
Street. A right-of-way, whether public or private and however designated, which provides vehicular access to
adjacent land. Streets may be of the following categories:
(1) Major thoroughfares, also known as arterial streets or primary thoroughfares, which provide
vehicular movement from one neighborhood to another or to distant points within the City, and
including freeways or highways leading to other communities.
(2) Collector streets, also known as feeder streets or secondary thoroughfares, which provide
vehicular circulation within neighborhoods, and from local streets to major thoroughfares.
(3) Local residential streets, also known as minor thoroughfares or streets, which primarily provide
direct vehicular access to abutting residential property.
(4) Private streets are streets which are owned and maintained by a homeowners association or
property owners association, and which are not dedicated to the public.
Subdivision (also Known as “Addition”). A division or re-division of any tract of land situated within the City’s
corporate limits or its extraterritorial jurisdiction into two or more parts, lots or sites, for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of sale, division of ownership, or building development. “Subdivision” includes resubdivisions
of land or lots which are part of a previously recorded subdivision.
Temporary Improvements. Improvements built and maintained by the applicant that are needed to remedy a
circumstance that is temporary in nature, such as a temporary drainage easement or erosion-control device, that
will be removed upon completion of the subdivision or shortly thereafter.
Editor’s note–To prevent future renumbering of these definitions as new terms are added, the numerical designation has been omitted
at the discretion of the editor and the terms are now listed in alphabetical order.
ARTICLE II. PROCEDURES
Section 2.1 Subdivision Review Bodies
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/194
(a) City Council.
(1) Final Action. The City Council shall hear and take final action on the following subdivision
procedures:
(A) Preliminary Plats;
(B) Final Plats;
(C) Development Plats;
(D) Replats;
(E) Amending Plats (where deemed necessary by the City Administrator);
(F) Plat Vacations;
(G) Minor Plats and Replats; if not approved by the City Administrator, and
(H) Additional powers and duties may be assigned under other portions of the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Tahoka.
(2) Establishment, Membership and Procedure[.]
(b) Planning and Zoning Commission.
(1) Powers and Duties.
(A) Review and Recommendation. The Commission shall be an advisory body and adjunct to
the City Council, and shall review and make recommendations regarding:
(i) Preliminary Plats;
(ii) Final Plats;
(iii) Development Plats;
(iv) Replats;
(v) Plat Vacations; and
(vi) Minor Plats and Replats, if not approved by the City Administrator.
(B) Final Action. The Commission shall take no final action on any subdivision application.
(C) Joint Meetings with the City Council. Whenever the City Council and the Commission
are required by the laws of the State of Texas to conduct public hearings in matters pertaining to
planning, zoning or subdividing property, and at other times when it is in the best interest of the
City to do so, the City Council and the Commission are hereby authorized, after published
notice as required by law, to hold joint meetings and to conduct joint public hearings.
(c) City Administrator.
(1) Powers and Duties. The following powers and duties shall be assigned to the City
Administrator under this Ordinance. Additional powers and duties may be assigned under other
portions of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Tahoka.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/194
(A) Review and Recommendation. The City Administrator shall review and make a
recommendation on the following subdivision procedures:
(i) Preliminary Plats;
(ii) Final Plats;
(iii) Development Plats; and
(iv) Replats.
(B) Final Action. The City Administrator may review and take final action (if the action is
approval [approved]) on the following subdivision procedures:
(i) Amending Plats;
(ii) Minor plats or replats; and
(iii) Replats permitted under Section 212.0145 of the Local Government Code that does
not require the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities.
Section 2.2 Submission Requirements
(a) Zoning Requirements. A property within the City’s corporate limits that is being proposed for platting
must be properly zoned by the City prior to approval of a preliminary plat. In addition, the proposed
development layout or subdivision design shown on the proposed plat must be in conformance with all standards
and requirements prescribed in the zoning ordinance.
(b) Noncompliance with the requirements of the zoning district in which the subject property is located, or
lack of the proper zoning, shall constitute grounds for denial of the plat. In situations where the zoning on a
particular piece of property cannot be ascertained by the City, the burden of proof regarding the property’s
zoning shall rest with the applicant. Proof of proper zoning shall consist of appropriate documentation, such as a
copy of the ordinance establishing the zoning, which shall be reviewed by City officials as to its validity and
authenticity.
(c) Plats in the ETJ. Any plat located in the City’s ETJ that is submitted for approval by the City shall be in
accordance with the City’s comprehensive plan, including all adopted water, sewer, storm drainage, future land
use, park, recreation, open space and thoroughfare plans.
(d) Professional Submittal Required. All plats shall be prepared by a licensed civil engineer or a registered
land surveyor.
(e) Classification of Subdivisions and Additions. Before any plat is filed for record with the county clerk, the
property owner shall apply for and secure City Council approval of the required subdivision plat, in accordance
with the following procedures, unless otherwise provided within this Ordinance.
(1) Minor subdivisions may be approved for residential or nonresidential properties: A plat
involving four or fewer lots abutting an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new
street or the extension of municipal facilities shall be considered a minor plat. Minor plat approval by
the City Council requires the submission of a final plat drawing and other submission materials
required by this Ordinance. Lots may be conveyed or sold only when the plat has been approved by
the City Council and the plat has been filed with the Lynn County Clerk.
(2) Major subdivisions may be approved for residential or nonresidential properties. The procedure
for approval of a major subdivision typically involves three steps: a preliminary plat, Construction
plans, and final plat. All major subdivision plats must be reviewed and approved by the Commission
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/194
and approved by the City Council, pursuant to this Ordinance. If the land is required to be platted, no
conveyance or sale of any portion or lot of the property may occur until after the final plat is
approved by the City Council and filed with the Lynn County Clerk, except where land to be sold for
nonresidential or multifamily purposes is reviewed and approved.
(f) Submission Requirements for All Types of Plat Applications. In addition to the requirements outlined
herein for each type of development application, the City shall maintain application forms, checklists, language
blocks for plats, and other similar items.
The forms and paperwork are available at the office of the City Administrator. These supplemental materials
may be amended from time to time, and it is the applicant’s responsibility to be familiar with, and to comply
with their requirements.
No plans providing land use, density or intensity shall be considered by the City prior to the submission of a
preliminary plat application.
(g) Right to Deny Hearing and Plat. The City may deny a hearing and any approval if the applicant does not
submit the information and fees required by this Ordinance.
(h) Proof of Land Ownership. Only the landowner or his or her authorized agent are allowed to submit an
application for subdivision approval. The City may require proof of ownership or documented proof of
authorization to serve as agent for the landowner from any applicant.
(i) Official Submission Date and Completeness of Application for All Types of Plats.
(1) For the purpose of these regulations, the “submission date” shall be the date upon which a
complete application for approval of any type of plat, that contains all required elements mandated by
the Texas Local Government Code, Section 212.004(b) and by this Ordinance, is first submitted to
the City administrator, after which the statutory period required for approval or disapproval of the
plat shall commence to run. No application shall be deemed officially submitted and no further
processing by staff shall occur until the City administrator determines that the application is complete
and a fee receipt is issued by the City.
(2) Failure by the City administrator to make a determination of incompleteness within ten (10)
business days following the date on which the application was first received by the City, shall result
in the application being deemed complete, and the “submission date” shall become the 10th business
day following initial receipt of the application by the City.
(3) Plat applications which do not include all required information and materials, as outlined below
and per other City development review policies which may change from time to time, will be
considered incomplete, shall not be accepted for official submission by the City, no further
processing by staff shall occur and shall not be scheduled on a Commission or City Council agenda
until the proper information is provided to City officials.
(4) Incomplete plat applications shall expire on the 45th calendar day after the application is filed
if:
(A) The applicant fails to provide documents or other information necessary to comply with
the City’s technical requirements relating to form and content of the application;
(B) The City provides to the applicant not later than the 10th business day after the date the
application is filed, written notice of the failure that specifies the necessary documents or other
information and the date the application will expire if the documents or other information is not
provided; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/194
(C) The applicant fails to provide the specified documents or other information within the
time provided in the notice.
(5) Applications which are deemed complete will expire if approval by the City Council does not
occur within 180 days from the date that the application was deemed complete.
(j) Submission Procedures and City Review Process for All Types of Plats.
(1) Submission Timing. An application for approval of any plat shall be submitted to the council at
least twenty-eight (28) calendar days, but no more than thirty (30) calendar days after the date that
the application was deemed administratively complete, unless the applicant waives the 30-day
requirement for action on the plat in writing, prior to the council meeting at which it is to be
considered.
(2) Submission Materials. The application shall include a written application form which bears the
notarized signature(s) of the property owner(s) of the subject property, along with the appropriate
submission fee, the appropriate number of full-size (24" x 36") prints of the plat, as required by the
City’s current development review policies and requirements, one 11” x 17” black-and-white
reduction of the plat, a copy of any applicable development agreement pertaining to the subject
property, if any, including an electronic version of all submission documents in a format acceptable to
the City, and shall clearly demonstrate that the proposed development complies with all applicable
laws, and any other applicable information and materials deemed appropriate by the City.
(A) The application shall be accompanied by a certificate showing that all taxes have been
paid on the subject property, and that no delinquent taxes exist against the property.
Documentation shall also be included that shows no delinquent assessments, fees, or other debts
or obligations to the City and which are directly attributable to the subject property.
(B) The application shall also be accompanied by an engineer’s summary report which
describes, in as much detail as necessary, the following: the overall nature and scope of the
proposed development, including zoning of the property, proposed use(s) and acreage of each
proposed use, minimum lot sizes, widths and depths, number of lots to be created, and special
amenities or facilities that will be included in the development; how the property will be served
with required utilities and services; how stormwater drainage will be handled; and an
itemization and description of any exceptions from provisions of this Ordinance that will be
sought. If the proposed development will have access points onto a major thoroughfare, the
application shall also include a letter from the appropriate entity, such as TxDOT or Lynn
County, acknowledging and approving proposed driveway locations and corresponding median
openings and left turn lanes, if applicable. Letters shall also be provided from each of the
applicable utility service providers, including water, wastewater, gas, electricity, telephone,
cable TV and solid waste, verifying their receipt and review of all materials depicting the
proposed development and their ability to provide an adequate level of service for the proposed
development. A letter from the Tahoka Independent School District shall also be provided that
acknowledges the District’s ability to accommodate the additional number of school-age
children that will be generated by the proposed development, and that expresses any desire the
District may have to obtain a future school site within any portion of the subject property.
(3) City Staff Review. Upon official submission of a complete application for plat approval, the
City shall commence technical review of the development application by forwarding a copy of the
application and plat to development review team members which includes, but shall not be limited to,
the City administrator, City engineer and the City planner, and to the applicable utilities.
Development review team members shall review the plat and shall ascertain its compliance with
these and other applicable City regulations. Following City staff review of the plat and supporting
documents, and following discussions with the applicant on any revisions deemed advisable and the
kind and extent of improvements to be installed, the applicant shall resubmit additional copies of the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/194
corrected plat to the City administrator no later than ten (10) calendar days prior to the commission
meeting. Failure to resubmit corrected copies of the plat back to the City in time shall be cause for
the City administrator to forward the plat application to the commission as it was originally submitted
rather than the corrected version of the plat. If, upon re-submission of the corrected plat to the City,
the City administrator determines that the application is still incomplete or is not correct, the plat
application shall be subject to denial.
(4) After the plat has been scheduled on an agenda, the applicant may request, in writing, a waiver
of the thirty (30) day approval requirement in order to allow more time to correct deficiencies,
address concerns, or otherwise improve the plat pursuant to the City’s regulations. After receipt of the
request, the City may delay action on the plat beyond thirty (30) calendar days following the official
submission date.
(5) Action by the Commission and City Council. All subdivision plat applications, unless
otherwise subject to approval by the City Administrator, shall be reviewed by the commission, and if
in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance and with all other applicable regulations of the
City, they shall be approved by the City Council.
(A) City staff shall place applications for preliminary plats that are deemed to be
administratively complete by the City administrator on a commission agenda within thirty (30)
calendar days of the date that the plat is found to be administratively complete. The commission
shall review each plat application and shall recommend approval, approval subject to certain
conditions, or denial of the plat application. The City Council shall take action on the plat
within thirty (30) calendar days of the action of the commission.
(B) Affirmation of, or minor modifications to, the commission’s recommendation to approve
the plat shall require a majority vote of the City Council members present.
(6) Simultaneous Submission of Plats. In the event that an applicant submits preliminary and final
plat applications simultaneously, the City administrator shall schedule both plat applications for
action by the commission within thirty (30) calendar days of the official submission date, unless the
applicant has executed a written waiver of the 30-day review period for one or both plats;
If the preliminary plat has not received approval prior to consideration of the final plat by the
commission, then the commission shall deny the final plat application. The City Council shall
take action on either one or both plat applications, as applicable, within thirty (30) calendar
days of the commission’s action. Affirmation of, or minor modifications to, the commission’s
recommendation to approve the plat(s) shall require a simple majority vote of the City Council
members present.
Section 2.3 Preliminary Plat
(a) A preliminary plat shall include all contiguous property under the ownership or control of the applicant. It
may contain more than one phase which, if so, shall be clearly identified. Approval of a preliminary plat by the
City Council shall be deemed general approval of the street and lot layout shown on the preliminary plat, and to
the preparation of the final or record plat. Approval for construction of the necessary streets, water lines, sewer
lines, and other required improvements and utilities shall be authorized only through the City engineer’s
approval of the construction plans.
(b) Standards for Approval. No preliminary plat shall be recommended for approval by the commission or
approved by the City Council unless the following standards have been met:
(1) The plat substantially conforms to the standards set forth in this Ordinance;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/194
(2) The layouts and engineering plans for required public improvements and City utilities have
been submitted by the applicant for approval by the City engineer provided that, whether specifically
stated or not, preliminary plat approval shall always be subject to any additions or alterations to the
engineering plans as deemed necessary by the City engineer, as needed, to ensure the safe, efficient
and proper construction of public improvements within the subdivision;
(3) The plat conforms to applicable zoning and other regulations;
(4) The plat must include or have attached to the plat a document containing a description of the
water and sewerage service facilities that will be constructed or installed to service the subdivision
and a statement of the date by which the facilities will be fully operable; and
(5) There must be attached to the plat a document prepared by an engineer registered to practice in
this state certifying that the water and sewerage service facilities described by the plat or on the
document attached to the plat are in compliance with the model rules adopted under Section 16.343,
Texas Water Code.
(6) If sewerage service facilities are not necessary, there must be included on the plat a statement
that water and sewerage service facilities are unnecessary for the subdivision, and a document
attached to the plat prepared by an engineer registered to practice in this state certifying that water
and sewerage service facilities are unnecessary for the subdivision under the model rules adopted
under Section 16.343, Texas Water Code.
(c) No construction work shall begin on the proposed improvements in the proposed subdivision prior to
approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council, or prior to issuance of all appropriate construction permits
by the City and other appropriate entities or agencies.
(d) The applicant shall provide copies of letters from applicable local utility companies stating that each utility
company has reviewed the preliminary plat and stating any requirements, including easements, they may have.
This requirement may be deferred until the final plat is submitted if such deferral request is submitted to the City
in writing and approved by the City administrator prior to the commission meeting at which the preliminary plat
will be considered.
(e) No excavation, grading, tree removal or site clearing activities shall occur prior to approval of the
preliminary plat and the engineering plans. However, preliminary grading or site preparation activities, such as
limited excavation, filling, and removal or clearing of brush, undergrowth or man-induced debris, may be
authorized by the City administrator in accordance with other applicable ordinances.
(f) Information Required Upon or With Preliminary Plat. The proposed preliminary plat and associated
construction plans shall show the information set forth below.
(1) A vicinity or location map that shows the location of the proposed preliminary plat within the
City or its ETJ and in relationship to existing roadways;
(2) Boundary lines, abstract or survey lines, corporate or other jurisdictional boundaries, existing
or proposed highways and streets, including right-of-way widths, bearings and distances sufficient to
locate the exact area proposed for the subdivision, and all survey monuments identified and labeled;
the length and bearing of all straight lines, radii, arc lengths, tangent lengths and central angles of all
curves shall be indicated along the lines of each lot, and the curve and line data may be placed in a
table format; accurate reference ties via courses and distances to at least one recognized abstract or
survey corner or existing subdivision corner shall be shown;
(3) The name, location and recording information of all adjacent subdivisions, or property owners
of adjacent unplatted lots; including those located on the other sides of roads, shall be drawn to the
same scale and shown in dotted lines adjacent to the tract proposed for subdivision in sufficient detail
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/194
to show accurately the existing streets, alleys, building setbacks, lot and block numbering, easements,
and other features that may influence the layout of development of the proposed subdivision;
adjacent unplatted land shall show property lines, the names of owners of record, and the recording
information;
(4) The location, widths and names of all streets, alleys and easements, existing or proposed,
within the subdivision limits and adjacent to the subdivision. A list of proposed street names shall be
submitted in the form of a letter or memo along with the application form for all new street names.
Street name approval is required at the time the preliminary plat is approved. It shall be the
Applicant’s responsibility to coordinate with appropriate utility entities for placement of necessary
utility easements and for location of all streets and median openings on highways or arterial
roadways.
(5) The location of all existing property lines, existing lot and block numbers and date recorded,
easements of record, with recording information, buildings, cemeteries, existing sewer or water
mains, gas mains or other underground structures, or other existing features within the area proposed
for subdivision;
(6) Proposed arrangement and square footage of lots, including lot and block numbers;
(7) A title block within the lower right hand corner of the plat, and with the engineering plans,
which shows the title or name under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded, the name and
address of the property owner and the name of the land planner, licensed professional engineer or
registered public surveyor who prepared the plat or plans, the scale of the plat, the date the plat was
prepared, and the location of the property according to the abstract or survey records of Lynn County,
Texas; the subdivision name shall not duplicate, or phonetically replicate, the name of any other
platted subdivision in the City or its ETJ, but phasing identification is allowed. It is the property
owner’s responsibility to check the plat records of Lynn County to ensure that the proposed
subdivision name will not duplicate or sound too much like a subdivision name already in existence.
The City may, at its discretion, require a different subdivision name if there is potential for confusion
by public safety officials or the general public;
(8) Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks, schools, playgrounds, other public uses or
for private facilities or amenities;
(9) Scale, date, north arrow oriented to the top or left side of the sheet, and other pertinent
informational data;
(10) Contours with intervals of two feet (2') or less shown for the area, with all elevations on the
contour map referenced to sea level datum;
(11) Areas contributing drainage to the proposed subdivision shall be shown in the engineering
plans; locations proposed for drainage discharge from the site shall be shown by directional arrows;
(12) All physical features of the property to be subdivided shall be shown in the engineering plans,
including the location and size of all water courses, 100-year floodplain according to Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) information, Corps of Engineers flowage easement
requirements, ravines, bridges, culverts, existing structures, drainage area in acres or area draining
into subdivisions, the outline of major wooded areas or the location of major or important individual
trees, and other features pertinent to subdivision;
(13) Proposed phasing of the development and a proposed schedule of development; the dedication
of rights-of-way for streets and street improvements, whether on-site or off-site, intended to serve
each proposed phase of the subdivision;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/194
(14) All preliminary plats shall be submitted in a legible format that complies with Lynn County
requirements for the filing of plats, and shall be drawn on a good grade blue line or black line paper;
(15) Proposed or existing zoning of the subject property and all adjacent properties;
(16) If the subdivision is not to be served immediately by a water utility, a note shall be placed on
the plat prohibiting occupancy of any lot until water satisfactory for human consumption is available
from a source on the land, a community source, or a public utility source in adequate and sufficient
supply to serve each lot. Such note shall provide that the plans and specifications for a private water
supply system must be submitted by a licensed professional engineer and approved by the Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ);
(17) If the subdivision is not to be served immediately by a sewage-collecting system connected to
a community treatment plant or public sewer system, a note shall be placed on the plat prohibiting
occupancy of any lot until an on-site waste disposal, such as a septic tank, system is installed in
accordance with the City’s and the state’s rules and regulations governing such systems, and until the
City has inspected and approved the installed system; and
(18) Certificates and other language shall be included on the plat, pursuant to the following
sections:
(A) A statement that the subdivided area is legally owned by the applicant.
(B) An accurate legal description by bearings and distances, including necessary curve and
line data, accurate to the nearest one hundredth of a foot, for all boundary, block and lot lines,
with descriptions correlated to a permanent survey monument.
(C) A statement signed by the property owner and acknowledged before a Notary Public as to
the authenticity of the signatures, saying that the property owner adopts the plat as shown,
described and named, and that he or she does dedicate, in fee simple, to the public use forever
the streets, alleys and easements shown on the plat. The property owner further reserves any
easement areas shown for mutual use of all public utilities desiring to use the same. Any public
utility shall have the right to remove and keep removed all or any part of any vegetative growth
or other appurtenance for construction or maintenance, or efficiency of its respective system in
these easements and all or any part of, any growth or construction which in any way hinders or
interferes with the right of ingress and egress to these easements for any necessary use without
asking anyone’s permission.
(D) The registered public surveyor’s certificate, with a place for his or her signature and
notarization of his or her signature.
(E) A place for plat approval signature of the mayor, the City Council, a place for the City
secretary to attest such signature, and the approval dates by the commission and City Council.
(F) Property owner’s and surveyor’s certificate, approval block, Special Notice regarding sale
of property, Visibility, Access and Maintenance Easements (to be used if applicable), Fire Lanes
(to be used if applicable), and Access Easements (to be used if applicable) language is required
and the specific language is available at the City.
(G) Other Plat Language. The plat shall include any other applicable language, such as for
drainage, floodway or other special types of easements, or for a private street subdivision, as
deemed appropriate and necessary by the City for the purpose of protecting the public health,
safety and welfare.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/194
(g) Effect of Approval. Approval of a preliminary plat authorizes the applicant to file construction plans for
infrastructure improvements, upon fulfillment of all requirements and conditions of approval. The preliminary
plat shall lapse where a complete application for such construction plans is not submitted within two years of the
date of approval of the preliminary plat.
Section 2.4 Construction Plans
(a) Following approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council, the applicant shall submit the required
number of sets of the complete construction plans for streets, alleys, storm sewers and drainage structures, water
and sanitary sewer facilities, screening and retaining walls, landscaping and irrigation, and any other required
public improvements for the area covered by the preliminary plat. Such construction plans shall comply with the
Minimum Construction Standards found in Appendix A [sic].
(b) Cost estimates for infrastructure improvements shall also be submitted with the construction plans.
(c) For the purposes of this Ordinance, complete sets of construction plans shall include the following plans or
sheets, generally in the order shown below, as well as any additional plans or sheets deemed necessary and
requested by the City engineer:
(1) Cover or title sheet;
(2) Approved Preliminary plat;
(3) Final site plan for nonresidential and multifamily projects only;
(4) Existing conditions plan which shows existing topography, vegetation, tree inventory, existing
natural and manmade physical features;
(5) Existing tree and vegetation protection plan;
(6) Grading, erosion control, and water quality control plans;
(7) Paving and storm drainage plans;
(8) Utility plans for water, sanitary sewer or septic systems, etc.;
(9) Traffic-control plans (if necessary);
(10) Screening and retaining wall plans; and
(11) Landscaping and irrigation plans.
(d) The applicant shall have these plans prepared by his own professional engineer(s), subject to approval of
the plans by the City engineer. The City engineer shall review, or cause to be reviewed, the plans and
specifications and if approved, shall mark them “Approved” and shall return one set to the applicant.
(e) If not approved, one set shall be marked with the objections noted and returned to the applicant for
correction, whereupon the Applicant’s engineer shall correct the plans as requested and shall resubmit them back
to the City Engineer for re-review.
(1) Once the construction plans are approved by the City Engineer, the applicant shall provide
additional sets of the approved plans to the City, as specified by the City engineer, for use during
construction. A full set of the City-approved construction plans must be available for inspection on
the job site at all times.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/194
(2) After approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council, approval of the construction plans
and specifications by the City Engineer, and following procurement of all applicable permits from
other appropriate agencies, such as TxDOT, TCEQ, LCRA or Lynn County, the applicant shall cause
a contractor to install or construct the public improvements in accordance with the approved plans
and the City’s standard specifications, and at the Applicant’s expense.
(3) The applicant shall employ engineers, surveyors or other professionals as necessary to design,
stake, supervise and perform the construction of such improvements, and shall cause his or her
contractor to construct the said improvements in accordance with this Ordinance and with the City’s,
and any other applicable agency’s, design standards.
(4) Construction plans shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional
engineer licensed in the State of Texas, as required by state law governing such professions and in
accordance with this Ordinance.
(5) All construction plans submitted for City review shall be dated and shall bear the responsible
engineer’s registration number, his or her designation of “professional engineer” or “P.E.,” and the
engineer’s seal.
(6) As part of the construction plans, a drainage plan showing how the drainage of each lot relates
to the overall drainage plan for the plat under consideration shall be submitted. The drainage plan
shall be made available to each builder within the proposed subdivision and all builders shall comply
with the drainage plan.
(f) Revisions to Approved Preliminary Plat. Where the preparation of construction plans reveals the need for
revisions to the approved preliminary plat, such revisions shall be considered minor or major according to this
section.
(1) Minor Revisions.
(A) It is generally recognized that minor revisions to the preliminary plat may be needed
before the final plat can be filed at the County.
(B) No revision to a preliminary plat shall be considered minor if it is requested more than
ninety (90) calendar days after initial approval of the preliminary plat.
(C) Such minor revisions as slight enlargement or shifting of easements or lot lines, addition
of private or franchise utility easements, correction of bearings or distances, correction of minor
labeling errors, addition of erroneously omitted informational items and labels, modification of
a plat note that does not amend the covenants and restrictions, and other similar revisions as
determined by the City Administrator may occur on the final plat without having to re-approve
the preliminary plat and without altering the plat’s status under Chapter 245.
(2) Major Revisions.
(A) Major revisions, such as obvious reconfiguration of lot lines or easements, relocation of
driveways or access easements or fire lanes, any modification to the perimeter or boundary of
the property, and relocation or addition or deletion of any public improvement, including
corresponding easement, shall necessitate resubmission and re-approval of the plat as a “revised
preliminary plat” and shall be considered a new project for the purpose of determining
applicable regulations.
(B) The procedures for such re-approval shall be the same as for a preliminary plat, and such
re-approval shall constitute a new project thus necessitating submission of a new application
form, payment of new fees, and other requirements.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/194
(g) Effect of Approval. Approval of construction plans authorizes the applicant, upon fulfillment of all
requirements and conditions of approval and upon construction of all required improvements, or submission of
the proper assurances for construction of same, as authorized by this Ordinance to submit an application for final
plat approval. The construction plan approval shall lapse where a complete application for a final plat is not
submitted within two years of the date of approval of the construction plans.
(h) Revisions to Approved Construction Plans.
(1) Minor Revisions.
(A) It is generally recognized that minor revisions to construction plans may be needed.
(B) Such minor revisions, as determined by the City Engineer, shall occur prior to
submission of the final plat, and may occur without having to re-approve the preliminary plat.
(2) Major Revisions.
(A) Major revisions shall necessitate re-submission and re-approval of the construction plans.
(B) The procedures for such re-approval shall be the same as for the original approval, and
such re-approval may constitute a new project thus necessitating submission of a new
application form, payment of new fees, and other requirements.
Section 2.5 Final Plat
(a) The final plat shall be in accordance with the preliminary plat, as approved, and shall incorporate all
applicable conditions, changes, directions and additions imposed by the commission and City Council upon the
preliminary plat. The final plat shall not be approved by the City Council until all utilities, infrastructure, and
other required improvements have been constructed according to the engineering plans, as approved by the City
engineer, unless provisions are made.
(b) Final plat applications which do not include the required data, completed application form, submission fee,
number of copies of the plat, record drawings, “Letter of Satisfactory Completion” of the public improvements
from the City, and other required information, including documentation that all required public improvements
have been constructed and installed in accordance with City standards, letters from utility companies verifying
their easements, and submission of the proper assurances or escrow funds for the completion of the
improvements, will be considered incomplete, shall not be accepted for submission by the City, and shall not be
scheduled on a commission agenda until the proper information is provided to City staff.
(c) Information Required on a Final Plat.
(1) All information that is required for a preliminary plat, except for submission of construction
plans, provided that such plans were already submitted and approved with the preliminary plat; and
except that physical features of or on the land, such as topography, buildings, structures, water bodies
and tree cover, shall not be shown on the final plat. In addition to these items, the final plat shall also
provide a place for the County Clerk of Lynn County to stamp the date and location where the plat
will be filed (“Volume ____, Page ___”) in the lower right-hand corner of the plat drawing.
(2) A detailed cost estimate for unconstructed water and wastewater facilities necessary to serve
each lot is required to be attached to the final plat for approval. Additionally, if the cost estimate is to
be included within a final engineering report, this final report must be attached to the final plat for
approval.
(3) A final plat requires attaching a construction schedule for each significant element needed to
provide adequate water or wastewater facilities. Additionally, if the construction schedule is to be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/194
included within a final engineering report, this final report must be attached to the final plat for
approval.
(4) An executed service agreement shall be attached to the final plat when the subdivider/owner
proposes to connect to an existing public water system (see Appendix B) [sic].
(5) A contractual agreement between the subdivider and the retail public utility shall be attached to
the final plat when the subdivider proposes to connect to an existing sewer system (see Appendix C)
[sic].
(6) Certification of water availability sealed by a licensed Professional Engineer is required to be
included on the final plat or be attached to the final plat in an engineering report. The certification
regarding the method for providing these services shall provide for:
(A) Connection to an existing public water or sewer system; or
(B) Creating a new public water or sewer utility that complies with requirements of the Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ); or
(C) Installing wells that meet public drinking water standards or septic systems that meet onsite
sewerage facility requirements; and
(D) Must state that the water and wastewater facilities will accommodate ultimate
development of the tract for a minimum of 30 years.
(7) All aspects of the final plat shall conform to the standards of Lynn County for plats with respect
to clarity, sheet size, lettering size and reproducibility.
(8) Approval Block (required). The approval block, property owner’s and surveyor’s certificate,
special notice regarding sale of property, visibility, access and maintenance easement (to be used if
applicable), fire lanes (to be used if applicable), and access easements (to be used if applicable) used
on the previously approved preliminary plat shall be modified and shown on the final plat.
(9) Other plat language. The plat shall include any other applicable language, as deemed
appropriate and necessary by the City for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and
welfare.
(d) Standards for Approval. No final plat shall be reviewed by the commission or approved by the City
Council unless the following standards have been met:
(1) The plat substantially conforms with the approved preliminary plat and other studies and plans,
as applicable;
(2) The construction and installation of required public improvements and City utilities has been
completed and the improvements have been accepted by the City as conforming to the City’s
regulations and design standards, or the proper assurances for construction of the improvements have
been submitted and approved by the City, and
(3) The plat conforms to applicable zoning, subdivision and other development related regulations,
and any other applicable codes or ordinances of the City that are related to development of a land
parcel.
(e) Record Drawings. When all of the improvements are found to be constructed and completed in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications and with the City’s standards, and upon receipt by the City of Tahoka
of a maintenance bond or certificate of deposit from each contractor, three (3) sets of “AS BUILT” or “Record
Drawing” plans and one (1) set of “As-Built” or “Record Drawing” sepias shall be submitted with a letter stating
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/194
the contractor’s compliance with this Ordinance. After such letter is received, the City administrator shall
receive and accept for the City the title, use and maintenance of the improvements. The final plat shall not be
approved prior to receipt of the above letter and other items, nor prior to acceptance of the improvements by the
City.
(f) Timing of Public Improvements.
(1) The City Council may permit all or some of the public improvements to be installed, offered
for dedication, or accepted by the City after approval of the final plat by the City if there exists a
compelling reason that is consistent with the public health, safety or welfare to do so.
The City Council may permit or require the deferral of the construction of public improvements
if, in its judgment, deferring the construction would not result in any harm to the public or
would offer significant advantage in coordinating the site’s development with adjacent
properties and off-site public improvements.
The deferred construction of any public improvement(s) must be approved by the City Council
at the time of preliminary plat approval, and the necessary assurances for completion of the
improvements, shall be a condition, of approval of the preliminary or final plat.
(g) Effect of Approval. Approval of a final plat authorizes the applicant, upon fulfillment of all requirements
and conditions of approval and upon completion of construction of all required improvements, or submission of
the proper assurances for construction of same, to submit the final copies, or mylars, of the plat for filing at Lynn
County. No conveyance or sale of any portion or lot of the property may occur until after the final plat is
approved by the City Council and filed with the Lynn County Clerk, except where land to be sold for
nonresidential or multifamily purposes is reviewed and approved through the development plat process.
(h) Revisions to Approved Final Plat Prior to Filing at the County. Occasionally, minor revisions are needed
before the final plat can be filed at the county. Such minor revisions as correction of bearings or distances,
correction of minor labeling errors, addition of erroneously omitted informational items and labels, and similar
revisions as determined by the City Administrator, may occur on the record plat prior to filing it without the City
Council having to re-approve the final plat.
Major revisions, such as obvious corrections or reconfiguration of lot lines or easements, relocation of driveways
or access easements or fire lanes, any modification to the perimeter or boundary of the property, and relocation
or addition or deletion of any public improvement, including corresponding easement, shall necessitate resubmission
and re-approval of the plat as a “revised final plat.”
The procedures for such re-approval shall be the same as for a final plat, and such re-approval may constitute a
new project thus necessitating submission of a new application form, payment of new fees, and other
requirements.
(i) Plat Filing. Subsequent to final plat approval by the City Council, the applicant shall return copies of the
final plat, as approved, with any other required documents and necessary fees attached thereto, to the City
administrator within thirty (30) calendar days following approval, in accordance with requirements established
by the City.
(1) All easements shall be included on the plat, including the recording information for those
easements that are filed or recorded as separate instruments, as required by utility companies and the
City prior to filing the final plat, and a copy of letters from each applicable utility company shall be
submitted to the City administrator stating that the plat contains the proper easements.
(2) All necessary filing materials, including mylars, reductions or blueline copies, as required by
the County Clerk of Lynn County or the City administrator, shall be returned to the City secretary
with the required fees.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/194
(3) If the required copies and materials are not returned to the City within the specified 30-day
time frame, the approval of the final plat shall be null and void unless an extension is granted by the
City Council.
(4) The City secretary shall file the final plat at the office of the County Clerk of Lynn County
within thirty (30) calendar days following receipt of all filing materials, including filing fees.
Section 2.6 Lapse of Plat Approval
(a) Lapse.
(1) The entire project shall expire five years after the date of initial approval if no progress towards
completion is made. Progress towards completion of the project shall include any one or more of the
following:
(A) An application for a final plat or plan is submitted to a regulatory agency;
(B) A good-faith attempt is made to file with a regulatory agency an application for a permit
necessary to begin or continue towards completion of the project;
(C) Costs have been incurred for developing the project including, without limitation, costs
associated with roadway, utility, and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve, in whole or
in part, the project (but exclusive of land acquisition) in the aggregate amount of five percent of
the most recent appraised market value of the real property on which the project is located;
(D) Fiscal security is posted with a regulatory agency to ensure performance of an obligation
required by the regulatory agency; or
(E) Utility connection fees or impact fees for the project have been paid to a regulatory
agency.
(2) A properly recorded final plat approved by the City shall not expire.
(3) Any re-application shall be considered a new project, subject to the regulations in place at the
time of the re-application.
(b) Extension and Reinstatement Procedure.
(1) Prior to the lapse of approval for a plat or construction plans, the applicant may petition the
City to extend the approval. Such petition shall be considered by the City Council, and an extension
may be granted by the City Council at such meeting. Any such extension must be approved prior to
the lapse of the approval.
(2) In determining whether to grant a request for extension, the City Council shall take into
account the reasons for lapse, and the ability of the applicant to comply with any conditions attached
to the original approval.
(3) The City Council may extend the approval subject to additional conditions based upon newly
enacted City regulations or state legislation, or such as are necessary to ensure compliance with the
original conditions of approval and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The City Council
may also specify a shorter time for extension of the approval than the original two year approval
period.
Section 2.7 Development Plats
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/194
(a) Authority. This section is adopted pursuant to the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 212,
Subchapter B, Sections 212.041 through 212.050, as amended. Development plats are not allowed for singlefamily
lot development in residential subdivisions.
(b) Applicability. For purposes of this section, the term “development” means the construction of any
building, structure or improvement of any nature, residential or nonresidential, or the enlargement of any
external dimension thereof. This section shall apply to any land lying within the City or within its extraterritorial
jurisdiction in the following circumstances:
(1) The development of any tract of land which has not been platted or replatted prior to the
effective date of this Ordinance, unless expressly exempted herein;
(2) The development of any tract of land for which the property owner claims an exemption from
the City’s subdivision ordinance, including requirements to replat, which exemption is not expressly
provided for in such regulations;
(3) The development of any tract of land for which the only access is a private easement or street;
(4) The division of any tract of land resulting in parcels or lots each of which is greater than five
(5) acres in size, and where no public improvement is proposed to be dedicated.
(c) Exceptions. No development plat shall be required, where the land to be developed has received final plat
or replat approval prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
(d) Prohibition on Development. No development shall commence, nor shall any building permit, utility
connection permit, electrical connection permit or similar permit be issued, for any development or land division
subject to this section, until a development plat has been reviewed by the commission, approved by the City
Council, and submitted with the City secretary.
(e) Standards of Approval. The development plat shall not be approved until the following standards have
been satisfied:
(1) The proposed development conforms to all City plans;
(2) The proposed development conforms to the requirements of the zoning ordinance, if located
within the City’s corporate limits, and this Ordinance;
(3) The proposed development is adequately served by public facilities and services, parks and
open space in conformance with City regulations;
(4) Appropriate agreements for acceptance and use of public dedications to serve the development
have been tendered; and
(5) The proposed development conforms to the design and improvement standards contained in
this Ordinance and any other applicable codes or ordinances of the City that are related to
development of a land parcel.
(f) Conditions. The City Council may impose such conditions on the approval of the development plat as are
necessary to assure compliance with the standards in subsection (e) above.
(g) Approval Procedure. The application for a development plat shall be submitted to the City in the same
manner as a final plat, and shall be approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the City Council following
review and recommendation by the commission in a similar manner as a final plat. Upon approval, the
development plat shall be filed at the county by the City secretary in the same manner as prescribed for a final
plat; and approval of a development plat shall expire if all filing materials are not submitted to the City
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/194
administrator and if the plat is not filed with the Lynn County Clerk within the time periods specified for a final
plat.
(h) Submittal Requirements. In addition to all information that is required to be shown on a final plat, a
development plat shall:
(1) Be prepared by a registered professional land surveyor or licensed professional engineer;
(2) Clearly show the boundary of the development plat;
(3) Show each existing or proposed building, structure or improvement or proposed modification
of the external configuration of the building, structure or improvement involving a change therein;
(4) Show all easements and rights-of-way within or adjacent to the development plat; and
(5) Be accompanied by the required number of copies of the plat, a completed application form,
the required submission fee, and a certificate showing that all taxes have been paid on the subject
property and that no delinquent taxes exist against the property.
Section 2.8 Minor Plats and Replats
(a) A minor plat or replat shall meet all of the informational and procedural requirements set forth for a final
plat, and shall be accompanied by the required number of copies of the plat, a completed application form, the
required submission fee, and a certificate showing that all taxes have been paid on the subject property and that
no delinquent taxes exist against the property.
(b) Notice, a public hearing, and the approval of other lot owners are not required for the approval a minor
plat or replat. Approval of a minor plat or replat may be by the City Administrator.
(c) The minor plat or replat shall be entitled and clearly state that it is a “minor plat” or “minor replat.”
Section 2.9 Replatting
(a) Replat Required. Unless otherwise expressly provided for herein, a property owner who proposes to replat
any portion of an already approved final plat, other than to amend or vacate the plat, must first obtain approval
for the replat under the same standards and by the same procedures prescribed for the final platting of land by
this Ordinance.
All improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the same requirements as for a preliminary or final
plat, as provided herein. Approval of a replat or minor replat shall be considered to automatically vacate any
prior plat, except as set forth in paragraph (b) below.
(b) Replatting Without Vacating Preceding Plat. A replat of a final plat or portion of a final plat may be
recorded and is controlling over the preceding plat without vacation of that plat where:
(1) The replat is signed and acknowledged by the owners of the property being replatted (no
signatures are required from other owners of lots in the subdivision that are not replatted);
(2) The replat is approved, after a public hearing by the City Council. No public hearing is required
by the commission; and
(3) The replat does not amend or remove any covenants or restrictions previously incorporated in
the final plat.
(c) In addition to compliance with subsections (b)(1) through (3) above, a replat without vacation of the
preceding plat must conform to the requirements of this section if:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/194
(1) During the preceding five (5) years, any of the area to be replatted was limited by an interim or
permanent zoning classification to residential use for not more than two (2) residential units per lot;
or
(2) Any lot in the preceding plat was limited by deed restrictions to residential use for not more
than two (2) residential units per lot.
(3) Notice of the public hearing required under subsection (b) above shall be given on or before the
fifteenth (15th) calendar day before the date of the hearing by publication in an official newspaper or
a newspaper of general circulation in Lynn County.
(4) Notice of the public hearing shall also be given by written notice, with a copy or description of
any requested exceptions, sent to the property owners, as documented on the most recently approved
ad valorem tax roll of the City, of lots that are in the original subdivision and that are within two
hundred (200) feet of the lot(s) to be replatted.
(5) In the case of a subdivision in the extraterritorial jurisdiction, the most recently approved
county tax roll shall be used. The written notice may be delivered by depositing the notice, properly
addressed with postage prepaid, in a post office or postal depository within the boundaries of the
City.
(d) If the property owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the total land area of lots to whom notice is
required to be given under subsection (c) above file with the City a written protest of the replatting before or at
the public hearing, or if the replat requires an exception, then approval of the replat will require the affirmative
vote of at least three-fourths (3/4) of the City Council members present. For a legal protest, written instruments
signed by the owners of at least twenty percent (20%) of the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the
area covered by the proposed replat and extending two hundred feet (200') from that area, but within the original
subdivision, must be filed with the City prior to the close of the public hearing. In computing the percentage of
land area subject to the “20% rule” described above, the area of streets and alleys shall be included.
(e) Compliance with subsection (c) above is not required for approval of a replat or part of a preceding plat if
the area to be replatted was designated or reserved for other than single or duplex family residential use by
notation on the last legally recorded plat or in the legally recorded restrictions applicable to the plat.
(f) Any replat which adds or deletes lots must include the original subdivision and lot boundaries.
(g) If the previous plat is vacated as prescribed in Section 212.013 of the Texas Local Government Code, as
amended, a public hearing is not required for a replat of the area vacated.
(h) The replat of the subdivision shall meet all the requirements for a final plat for a new subdivision that may
be pertinent, as provided for herein.
(i) The title shall identify the document as a “Final Plat” of the “_________ Addition, Block ____, Lot(s)
____, Being a Replat of Block ______, Lot(s) _____ of the ________________ Addition, an addition to the City
of Tahoka, Texas, as recorded in Volume/Cabinet _____, Page/Slide ______ of the Plat Records of Lynn County,
Texas.”
(j) An application submittal for a replat shall be the same as for a final plat.
(k) The replat shall be filed with the Lynn County Clerk in the same manner as prescribed for a final plat.
Section 2.10 Amending Plats
(a) An amended plat shall meet all of the informational and procedural requirements set forth for a final plat,
and shall be accompanied by the required number of copies of the plat, a completed application form, the
required submission fee, and a certificate showing that all taxes have been paid on the subject property and that
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/194
no delinquent taxes exist against the property. Any amending plat shall be considered a new project for the
purposes of determining rights under Chapter 245, subject to the regulations in place at the time of filing of the
amending plat.
(b) The City administrator may approve an amending plat, which may be recorded and is controlling over the
preceding or final plat without vacation of that plat, if the amending plat is signed by the property owner and if
the amending plat is for one or more of the purposes set forth in this Section. The procedures for amending plats
shall apply only if the sole purpose of the amending plat is to:
(1) Correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding plat;
(2) Add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding plat;
(3) Correct an error in a real property description shown on the preceding plat;
(4) Indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement from practice of the engineer or
surveyor responsible for setting monuments;
(5) Show the location or character of a monument that has been changed in location or character or
that is shown incorrectly as to location or character on the preceding plat;
(6) Correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission previously approved by the
municipal authority responsible for approving plats, including lot numbers, acreage, street names,
and identification of adjacent recorded plats;
(7) Correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two adjacent lots if:
(A) Both lot owners join in the application for amending the plat;
(B) Neither lot is abolished;
(C) The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and
(D) The amendment does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of the
owners in the plat;
(8) Relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other
improvement on a lot line or easement;
(9) Relocate one or more lot lines between one or more adjacent lots if:
(A) The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat;
(B) The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and
(C) The amendment does not increase the number of lots; or
(10) To make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six (6) or fewer lots in the
subdivision or a part of the subdivision covered by the preceding plat if:
(A) The changes do not affect applicable zoning and other regulations of the City;
(B) The changes do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions; and
(C) The area covered by the changes is located in an area that the City Council has approved,
after a public hearing, as a residential improvement area.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/194
(c) The City administrator may, at his or her discretion and for any reason, elect to present the amending plat
to the commission and City Council for consideration and approval. Should the City administrator refuse to
approve the amending plat, then the plat shall be referred to the commission and the City Council for
consideration within the time period required by state law.
(d) Notice, a public hearing, and the approval of other lot owners are not required for the approval and
issuance of an amending plat.
(e) The amended plat shall be entitled and clearly state that it is an “amended plat.” It shall also state the
specific lots affected or changed as a result of the amended plat, and shall include the original subdivision plat
boundary.
(f) The amending plat shall be filed at the county in the same manner as prescribed for a final plat.
Section 2.11 Plat Vacation
(a) By Property Owner. The property owner of the tract covered by a plat may vacate, upon review by the
commission and approval by the City Council, the plat at any time before any lot in the plat is sold. Any plat
vacation shall be considered a new project for the purposes of determining rights under Chapter 245, subject to
the regulations in place at the time of filing of the plat vacation. The plat is vacated when a signed,
acknowledged instrument declaring the plat vacated is approved and recorded in the manner prescribed for the
original plat.
(b) By All Lot Owners. If some or all of the lots covered by the plat have been sold, the plat, or any part of the
plat, may be vacated on the application of all the owners of lots in the plat with approval obtained in the manner
prescribed for the original plat.
(c) Criteria. The commission shall review, and the City Council shall approve, the petition for vacation on
such terms and conditions as are in accordance with Section 212.013 of the Texas Local Government Code, and
as are reasonable to protect the public health, safety and welfare. As a condition of vacation of the plat, the City
Council may direct the petitioners to prepare a revised final plat in accordance with this Ordinance such that the
property does not become “unplatted.”
(d) Effect of Action. On the execution and recording of the vacating instrument, the vacated plat shall have no
effect. Regardless of the commission’s and City Council’s action on the petition, the property owner will have no
right to a refund of any monies, fees or charges paid to the City nor to the return of any property or consideration
dedicated or delivered to the City except as may have previously been agreed to by the commission and City
Council.
(e) City-Initiated Plat Vacation.
(1) General Conditions. The City Council, on its motion, may vacate the plat of an approved
subdivision or addition when:
(A) No lots within the approved plat have been sold within five (5) years from the date that
the plat was signed by the City;
(B) The applicant has breached an improvement agreement and the City is unable to obtain
funds with which to complete construction of public improvements, except that the vacation
shall apply only to lots owned by [the] applicant or its successor; or
(C) The plat has been of record for more than five (5) years and the City determines that the
further sale of lots within the subdivision or addition presents a threat to public health, safety or
welfare, except that the vacation shall apply only to lots owned by the applicant or its
successors.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/194
(2) Procedure. Upon any motion of the commission or City Council to vacate the plat of any
previously approved subdivision or addition, in whole or in part, the commission shall publish notice
in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. The commission shall also provide personal
notice to all property owners within the subdivision or addition and to the City Council. The notice
shall state the time and place for a public hearing on the motion to vacate the subdivision or addition
plat. The commission shall recommend approval and the City Council shall approve the vacation
only if the criteria and conditions cited above are satisfied.
(3) Record of Notice. If the commission and City Council approve vacating a plat, the City
secretary shall record a copy of the resolution or ordinance in the office of the County Clerk of Lynn
County with a copy of the area or plat vacated. The county clerk shall write legibly on the vacated
plat the word “vacated” and shall enter on the plat a reference to the volume and page at which the
vacating instrument is recorded. If the commission and City Council adopt a resolution or ordinance
vacating a plat in part, it shall cause a revised final plat to be recorded which shows that portion of
the original plat that has been vacated and that portion that has not been vacated. On the execution
and recording of the vacating instrument the vacated plat has no effect.
ARTICLE III. SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
Section 3.1 Streets
(a) The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the City
thoroughfare plan, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets or driveways, whether
within the City or within its ETJ, or within adjacent municipal or County areas, to topographical conditions, to
public safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.
Reserve or residual strips of land controlling access to or egress from other property, or to or from any street or
alley, or having the effect of restricting or damaging the adjoining property for subdivision purposes, or which
will not be taxable or accessible for improvements shall not be permitted in any subdivision unless such are
required by the City in the public interest. All streets shall be constructed in accordance with this Ordinance.
(b) Proposed streets shall provide a safe, convenient and functional system for vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, shall be properly related to the thoroughfare plan and any amendments thereto, and shall be
appropriate for the particular traffic characteristics of each proposed subdivision or development. All streets
shall be open and unobstructed at all times.
(c) Adequacy of Streets and Thoroughfares.
(1) Responsibility for Adequacy of Streets and Thoroughfares. The applicant shall assure that the
subdivision is served by adequate streets and thoroughfares, and shall be responsible for the costs of
rights-of-way and street improvements, in accordance with the following policies and standards, and
subject to the City’s cost participation policies on oversized facilities.
(2) General Adequacy Policy. Every subdivision shall be served by improved streets and
thoroughfares adequate to accommodate the vehicular traffic to be generated by the development.
(3) Road Network. New subdivisions shall be supported by a road network having adequate
capacity, and safe and efficient traffic circulation.
(4) Approach Roads and Access. All subdivisions must have at least two (2) points of vehicular
access, primarily for emergency vehicles, and must be connected to the City’s improved thoroughfare
and street system by one or more approach roads of such dimensions and improved to such standards
as are hereinafter set forth.
(A) “Two (2) points of vehicular access” shall be construed to mean that the subdivision has
at least two (2) roads accessing the subdivision from the City’s improved thoroughfare system,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/194
and the subdivision has at least two road entrances. The City Council may, at its discretion and
upon a finding that such will not compromise public safety or impede emergency access, accept
a single median-divided entrance from the City’s improved thoroughfare system provided that
the median extends into the subdivision for an unbroken length of at least two hundred feet
(200') to an intersecting internal street which provides at least two (2) routes to the interior of
the subdivision.
(B) The subdivision shall be designed to provide adequate emergency access for public safety
vehicles. Each residential lot in the subdivision shall have a minimum frontage on a dedicated
street as required by applicable zoning, unless other provisions have been authorized through
planned development approval.
(5) Street Dedications.
(A) Dedication of Right-of-Way. The applicant shall provide all rights-of-way required for
existing or future streets, and for all required street improvements, as shown in the thoroughfare
plan or other valid development plans approved by City Council. In the case of perimeter
streets, half of the total required right-of-way width for such streets shall be provided. However,
in some instances more than half of the required width shall be required when a half street is
impractical or unsafe and depending upon the actual or proposed alignment of the street, such
as in the case of a curved street, as may be required by the City Council.
(B) Perimeter Streets. Where an existing half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision or
addition, the other half of the street shall be dedicated, and an appropriate amount of the street
shall be improved, by the developer of the subdivision or addition.
(6) Street Construction. All streets and thoroughfares shall be constructed and paved to City
standards and within rights-of-way as required by the thoroughfare plan and this Ordinance, and in
accordance with other City standards as may be from time to time adopted.
(7) Intersection Improvements and Traffic-Control Devices. Intersection improvements and trafficcontrol
devices shall be installed as warranted in accordance with the traffic impact analysis.
Construction and design standards shall be in accordance with City standards.
(8) Phased Development. Where a subdivision is proposed to occur in phases, the applicant, in
conjunction with submission of the preliminary plat, shall provide a schedule of development. The
schedule shall set forth the intended plan of development and dedication of rights-of-way for streets
and street improvements intended to serve each proposed phase of the subdivision. The City Council
shall determine whether the proposed streets and street improvements are adequate, and may require
that a traffic impact analysis be submitted for the entire project or such phases as the City Council
determines to be necessary to adjudge whether the subdivision will be adequately served by streets
and thoroughfares.
[(9) Reserved.]
(10) Private Streets. Subdivisions having private streets may be established only under the terms
set forth in this Section, and pursuant to any other ordinances or guidelines for private street
developments as may be adopted for use by the City either as part of this Ordinance or as separate
ordinances or policies. All private streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
City’s standards for publicly dedicated streets. The term “private street” shall be inclusive of alleys, if
such are to be provided within the subdivision.
(A) Private Streets: Subdivision Eligibility Criteria. Private streets shall be permitted only
within a subdivision satisfying each of the following criteria:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/194
(i) The streets to be restricted to private use are not intended for regional or local
through traffic circulation;
(ii) The subdivision is located in an area that is surrounded on at least two (2) sides,
meaning at least fifty percent (50%) of the perimeter, by natural barriers, such as creeks,
floodplains, steep topological slopes, geologic formations or wildlife preserves, or by
similar barriers created by man, such as a golf course or linear park. Non-qualifying
barriers include screening walls, roadways, manmade drainage ditches or berms, utility
easements and rights-of-way;
(iii) The subdivision is not located adjacent to an existing or approved public street
subdivision that can be reasonably connected, even though the street connection would
require construction of a bridge or culvert. In that instance, the two subdivisions shall be
connected as public street subdivisions unless the bridge or culvert would be so expensive
as to be impractical or unfeasible;
(iv) A mandatory property owners or homeowners association, which includes all
property to be served by the private streets, will be formed; and
(v) The subdivision conforms to any other special guidelines for private street
developments as may be approved separately by the City Council.
(B) Private Streets: Certain Streets Excluded. Roads or streets that are shown on the City
thoroughfare plan, such as highways, major or minor thoroughfares or arterials, or collectors,
shall not be used, maintained or constructed as private streets, and a private street subdivision
shall not cross or interfere with an existing or future collector or arterial street. Also, the
commission and City Council may deny the creation of any private street if, in their sole
judgment, the private street would negatively affect traffic circulation on public streets, or if it
would impair access to the subject or adjacent property; impair access to or from public
facilities including schools or parks; or if it would cause possible delays in the response time of
emergency vehicles.
(C) Private Streets: Access Onto Public Thoroughfare. A private street subdivision shall
provide a minimum of eighty feet (80') of access frontage on a public collector or arterial street
for subdivision entrances in order to accommodate a median-divided entrance with appropriate
vehicle stacking, queuing and turnaround area. Primary access into a private street subdivision
shall be from a major collector, which has a minimum right-of-way of eighty feet (80'), or from
a larger roadway, as shown on the City thoroughfare plan. Restricted access entrances shall not
be allowed from residential collector streets, minor residential or local streets, or from alleys or
private driveways or parking lots. No more than two (2) gated street entrances may intersect a
thoroughfare within any one (1) mile segment.
(D) Private Streets: Parks, Greenbelts and Wildlife Preserves Excluded. A private street
subdivision shall not cross or interfere with public access to or enjoyment of an existing or
future public pedestrian pathway, hike and bike trail, greenbelt, park or wildlife preserve as
shown on the City’s parks and open space master plan or as already dedicated for public use.
(E) Private Streets: Property Owners or Homeowners Association Required. Subdivisions
developed with private streets shall have a mandatory property owners association which
includes all property and lots served by the private streets. The association shall own and be
responsible for the maintenance of private streets and appurtenances. The documents shall be
filed of record with the Lynn County Clerk prior to final plat approval in order to ensure that
there is an entity in place for long-term maintenance of private streets and appurtenances. The
association may not be dissolved without the prior written consent of the City Council. No
portion of the association documents pertaining to the maintenance of private streets and alleys,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/194
and assessments therefore, may be amended without the written consent of the City Council.
The City will not assist in enforcing deed restrictions.
(F) Private Streets: Private Street Lot. Private streets must be constructed within a separate
lot owned by the property owners association. This lot must conform to the City’s standards for
public street rights-of-way. An easement covering the street lot shall be granted to the City
providing unrestricted access to and use of the property for any purpose deemed necessary by
the City. This right shall also extend to all utility providers operating within the City and to
other necessary governmental service providers, such as the U.S. Postal Service. The easement
shall also permit the City to remove any vehicle or obstacle within the street lot that may impair
emergency access.
(G) Private Streets: Construction and Maintenance Cost. The City shall not pay for any
portion of the cost of constructing or maintaining a private street.
(H) Private Streets: Infrastructure and Utilities. Any public water, sewer and drainage
facilities, streetlights, and traffic-control devices, such as traffic signs, placed within the private
street lot shall be designed and constructed to City standards. All private traffic-control devices
and regulatory signs shall conform to the “Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control Devices,”
as amended, and to City standards. The metering for utilities such as water, gas and electricity
shall be located on the individual lots to be served, not grouped together in a centralized
location(s). “Gang-box” style metering stations shall not be permitted.
(I) Private Streets: Plans and Inspections. Development applications for subdivisions with
private streets must include the same plans and engineering information required for public
streets and utilities. City requirements pertaining to inspection and approval of improvements
shall apply, and fees charged for these services shall also apply. The City may periodically
inspect private streets, and may require any repairs necessary to ensure efficient emergency
access and to protect the public health, safety, convenience and welfare.
(J) Private Streets: Restricted Access. The entrances to all private streets shall be clearly
marked with a sign, placed in a prominent and visible location, stating that the streets within the
subdivision are private, and that they are not maintained by the City. Guard houses, access
control gates, and cross arms, if used, shall be constructed per subsection (K) below. All
restricted access entrances must be manned twenty-four (24) hours every day, or they must
provide a reliable, alternative means of ensuring City and emergency access to the subdivision,
and other utility or public service providers, such as postal carriers and utility companies, with
appropriate identification. The method to be used to ensure City and emergency access into the
subdivision shall be approved by the City Council and by all applicable emergency services
providers prior to engineering release for construction of the development. If the association
fails to maintain reliable access as required herein, the City may enter the subdivision and
remove any gate or device which is a barrier to access at the sole expense of the association.
(K) Private Streets: Access Restricted Entrance Design Standards. Any private street which
has an access control gate or cross arm must have a minimum uninterrupted pavement width of
twenty-two feet (22') at the location of the gate or access control device, both ingress point and
egress point, regardless of the type of device used. If an overhead, or lift-up, barrier is used, it
must be a minimum of fourteen feet (14') in height above the road surface, and this clearance
height shall be extended for a minimum distance of fifty feet (50') in front of and behind the
location of the device. All gates and cross arms must be of a break-away design. A minimum
vehicle stacking distance of one hundred feet (100') shall be provided from the right-of-way line
of the public road from which the private street subdivision is accessed to the first vehicle
stopping point, which is usually an access request keypad or telephone or a guard’s window.
Adequate distance shall be provided between the access request point(s) and the entry barrier,
or gate, to accommodate a vehicle turnaround as described below.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/194
A paved turnaround space must be located in front of any restricted access entrance
barrier, between the access request device and the barrier or gate, to allow vehicles that
are denied access to safely exit onto public streets without having to back up, particularly
into the public street upon which the entrance is located. The design and geometry of such
turnaround shall be of such pavement width and having such inside turning radius that it
will accommodate smooth, single-motion U-turn movements by the following types of
vehicles:
(i) Larger passenger vehicles, such as vans and pick-up trucks;
(ii) Passenger vehicles with short trailers up to twenty-four feet (24') in length, such as
small flatbed, camping or box-type trailers; and
(iii) The types of service and utility trucks that typically visit or make deliveries to
neighborhoods that are similar to the proposed private street development, such as utility
service vehicles, postal or UPS delivery trucks, and two- to three-axle flatbed or box-type
trucks used by contractors and moving companies.
The City administrator, the commission, or the City Council may require submission
of additional drawings, plans or exhibits demonstrating that the proposed turnaround
will work properly, and that vehicle turnaround movements will not compromise
public safety on the entry roadway or on the adjacent public street(s).
A site plan showing the design and location of all proposed access restricted
entrances shall be submitted for review by the City administrator and the City
engineer along with the engineering plans for the subdivision, and must be approved
by the City Council along with approval of the preliminary plat.
(L) Private Streets: Waiver of Services. The subdivision final plat, property deeds and
property owners association documents shall note that certain City services shall not be
provided for private street subdivisions. Among the services which will not be provided are:
routine law enforcement patrols, enforcement of traffic and parking regulations, and preparation
of accident reports.
(M) Private Streets: Petition to Convert to Public Streets. The property owners association
documents shall allow the association to petition the City to accept private streets and any
associated property as public streets and right-of-way upon written notice to all association
members and upon the favorable vote of a majority of the membership. However, in no event
shall the City be obligated to accept said streets as public. Should the City elect to accept the
streets as public, then the City has the right to inspect the private streets and to assess the lot
owners for the expense of needed repairs concurrent with the City’s acceptance of the streets.
The City shall be the sole judge of whether repairs are needed. The City may also require, at the
association’s or the lot owners’ expense, the removal of any guard houses, access-control
devices, landscaping or other aesthetic amenities located within the street lot or within any
other common area.
(N) Private Streets: Hold Harmless. On the subdivision final plat shall be language whereby
the property owners association, as owner of the private streets and appurtenances, agrees to
release, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, any other governmental entity, and any
public utility entity for damages to the private streets that may be occasioned by the reasonable
use of the private streets by same, and for damages and injury, including death, arising from the
condition of the private streets, out of any use of access gates or cross arms, or out of any use of
the subdivision by the City or governmental or utility entity.
(d) Escrow Policies and Procedures.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/194
(1) Request for Escrow. Whenever this Ordinance requires a property owner to construct a street or
thoroughfare, or other type of public improvement, the applicant may, if unusual circumstances exist,
such as a timing issue due to pending roadway improvements by another agency such as TxDOT, that
would present undue hardships or that would impede public infrastructure coordination or timing,
petition the City to construct the street or thoroughfare, at a later date, in exchange for deposit of
escrow as established in this Section. If more than one street or thoroughfare must be constructed in
order to meet adequacy requirements for roadways, as demonstrated by a traffic impact analysis, the
City administrator may prioritize roadways for which escrow is to be accepted and require the deposit
of all funds attributable to the development in escrow accounts for one or more of such affected
roadways. The City Council shall review the particular circumstances involved, and shall determine,
at its sole discretion, whether or not provision of escrow deposits will be acceptable in lieu of the
property owner’s obligation to construct the street or thoroughfare with his or her development. A
traffic impact analysis may be required to facilitate the City Council’s deliberations on the matter.
(2) Escrow Deposit With the City. Whenever the City Council agrees to accept escrow deposits in
lieu of construction by the owner of the property under this Ordinance, the applicant shall deposit in
escrow with the City an amount equal to his or her share of the costs of design, construction, permits,
reviews and approvals, inspections, any additional land acquisition, and an appropriate and realistic
inflation factor to ensure that the actual “future dollar” costs will be covered when actual construction
occurs in the future. Such amount shall be paid prior to release of engineering plans by the City
engineer.
(3) Determination of Escrow Amount. The amount of the escrow shall be determined by using the
maximum comparable “turnkey” bid price of construction of the improvements, including design,
permits, reviews and approvals, inspections and any additional land acquisition that may be needed.
Such determination of the escrow amount shall be made as of the time the escrow is due hereunder.
(4) Termination of Escrow. Escrows which have been placed with the City under this section and
which have been held for a period of ten (10) years from the date of such payment or agreement, in
the event that the City has not authorized the preparation of plans and specifications for construction
of such roadway facilities for which the escrow was made, shall, upon written request, be returned to
the applicant, with accrued interest. Such return does not remove any obligations of the applicant for
construction of the required facilities if a building permit has not been issued on the subject lot or if a
new building permit is applied for.
(5) Refund. If any street or highway for which escrow is deposited is constructed by a party other
than the City, or is reconstructed by another governmental authority at no cost to the City, the
escrowed funds and accrued interest shall be refunded to the applicant or applicant who originally
paid the escrow amount after completion and acceptance of the public improvements. In the event
that a portion of the cost is borne by the City and the other portion of the cost by another party or
governmental authority, the difference between the applicant’s actual proportionate cost and the
escrowed funds, including accrued interest, if any, shall be refunded after completion and acceptance
of the improvements.
(6) Interest Limitation. If money is refunded within six (6) months of deposit, only the principal
will be refunded. Monies returned after this date will be refunded with interest accrued, calculated at
one percent (1%) less than the rate of actual earnings.
(e) Traffic Impact Analysis. Any proposed development project or plat involving a significant change to a
proposed roadway alignment from that shown on the City thoroughfare plan must be preceded by submission
and approval of a traffic impact analysis as specified in subsection (f) below. Failure to provide for such
approval prior to submission of a preliminary plat, or concurrently with the preliminary plat application, shall be
grounds for denial of the plat application.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/194
(f) Required Components of Traffic Impact Analysis. Whenever this Ordinance requires submission of a
traffic impact analysis the following elements shall be included:
(1) General Site Description. The traffic impact analysis shall include a detailed description of the
roadway network within one (1) mile of the site, a description of the proposed land uses, the
anticipated stages of construction, and the anticipated completion date of the proposed land
development. This description, which may be in the form of a map, shall include the following items:
(A) all major intersections; (B) all proposed and existing ingress and egress locations; (C) all existing
roadway widths and rights-of-way; (D) all existing traffic signals and traffic-control devices; and (E)
all existing and proposed public transportation services and facilities within a one (1) mile radius of
the site.
(2) Proposed Capital Improvements. The traffic impact analysis shall identify any changes to the
roadway network within one (1) mile of the site that are proposed by any government agency or other
developer. This description shall include the above items as well as any proposed construction project
that would alter the width or alignment of roadways affected by the proposed development.
(3) Roadway Impact Analysis.
(A) Transportation Impacts:
(i) Trip Generation. The average weekday trip generation rates (trip ends), the average
weekend trip generation rates, for uses other than residential or institutional, the highest
average a.m. and p.m. hourly weekday trip generation rates, and the highest hourly
weekend generation rates, for uses other than residential or institutional, for the proposed
use shall be determined based upon the trip generation rates contained in the most recent
edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers, Trip Generation Manual; or shall be
based upon data generated by actual field surveys of area uses compatible to the proposed
use and approved by the City administrator and the City engineer.
(ii) Trip Distribution. The distribution of trips to arterial and collector roadways within
the study area shall be in conformity with accepted traffic engineering principles, taking
into consideration the land use categories of the proposed development; the area from
which the proposed development will attract traffic; competing developments, if
applicable; the size of the proposed development; development phasing; surrounding
existing and anticipated land uses, population and employment; existing and projected
daily traffic volumes; and existing traffic conditions.
(B) Adequacy Determination. The roadway network included within the traffic impact
analysis shall be considered adequate to serve the proposed development if existing roadways
identified as arterials and collectors can accommodate the existing service volume, and the
service volume of the proposed development, and the service volume of approved but unbuilt
developments holding valid, unexpired building permits at a level of service “C” or above, as
described in the comprehensive plan.
(4) Intersection Analysis.
(A) Level of Service Analysis. For intersections within the roadway traffic impact analysis
area, a level of service analysis shall be performed for all arterial to arterial, arterial to collector,
and collector to collector intersections, and for any other pertinent intersections identified the
City administrator. Also, level of service analyses will be required on all proposed site driveway
locations for all nonresidential developments. The City may waive analysis of minor
intersections and site driveway locations within the one-mile radius. The level of service
analysis shall be based upon the highest hourly average a.m. or p.m. peak weekday volume or
highest average hourly peak weekend volume as determined from a two-day survey of weekday
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/194
volumes and, where necessary, a one-day survey of weekend volumes. The level of service
analysis shall take into consideration the lane geometry, traffic volume, percentage of righthand
turns, percentage of left-hand turns, percentage and typical size of trucks, intersection
width, number of lanes, signal timing and progression, roadway grades, pedestrian and bicycle
flows, school routes, number of accidents, and peak hour factor.
(B) Adequacy Analysis. The intersections included within the traffic impact analysis shall be
considered adequate to serve the proposed development if existing intersections can
accommodate the existing service volume, the service volume of the proposed development,
and the service volume of approved but unbuilt developments holding valid, unexpired building
permits at level of service “C” or above.
(5) Effect of Adequacy Determination. If the adequacy determination for roadways and
intersections indicates that the proposed development would cause a reduction in the level of service
for any roadway or intersection within the study area that would cause the roadway to fall below the
level of service required herein, the proposed development shall be denied unless the developer
agrees to one of the following conditions:
(A) The deferral of building permits until the improvements necessary to upgrade the
substandard facilities are constructed;
(B) A reduction in the density or intensity of development;
(C) The dedication or construction of facilities needed to achieve the level of service required
herein; or
(D) Any combination of techniques identified herein that would ensure that development will
not occur unless the levels of service for all roadways and intersections within the traffic impact
analysis study are adequate to accommodate the impacts of such development.
(g) Arrangement of Streets Not Shown on the Thoroughfare Plan. For streets that are not shown on the City
thoroughfare plan, such as local residential streets, the arrangement of such streets within a subdivision shall:
(1) Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets from or into
surrounding areas;
(2) Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the City Council to meet a
particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformity to
existing streets impractical;
(3) Provide for future access, such as by stubbing streets for future extension, to adjacent vacant
areas which will likely develop under a similar zoning classification or for a similar type of land use;
and
(4) Not conflict in any way with existing or proposed driveway openings.
(h) Residential collector streets and minor residential streets shall be laid out such that their use by through
traffic will be discouraged.
(i) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the City Council may require
marginal access streets, reverse frontage lots, which back onto the arterial, deep lots with rear service alleys, or
such treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of
through and local traffic.
(j) Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their control is definitely
placed by the City under conditions approved by the City Council.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/194
(k) Intersecting, undivided streets with centerline offsets of less than one hundred and fifty feet (150') shall be
avoided. Intersecting streets onto an existing or future divided roadway must be configured such that the
centerline offset will accommodate the appropriate median opening and left-turn lanes, with required transition
and stacking distances, onto each divided roadway.
(l) Major thoroughfare intersections shall be at ninety degree (90°) angles and tangent to the intersecting street
for at least fifty feet (50'). Other street intersections shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles, and no street shall intersect at less than eighty degrees (80°).
(m) Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown on the thoroughfare plan and as defined by the
corresponding roadway cross-sections in the comprehensive plan.
(n) Construction of half streets shall be prohibited, except when essential to the reasonable development of the
subdivision in conforming with the other requirements of this Ordinance and the thoroughfare plan, and where
the City Council makes a determination that there is no immediate benefit to be gained by constructing the full
street section since no access from the street will be needed by the subdivision in question. If the applicant is
responsible for one-half (1/2) of the street, then the applicant shall either construct the facility along with his or
her development or shall provide escrow for the construction cost of his or her share of the facility unless the
City participates in the construction of the facility. Whenever a partial street has been previously platted along a
common property line, the other portion of the street right-of-way shall be dedicated such that the right-of-way
is increased to the street’s ultimate planned width.
(o) The maximum length of any block or street segment shall be two thousand feet (2,000') and the minimum
length of any block or street segment shall be five hundred feet (500'), as measured along the street centerline
and between the point(s) of intersection with other through, not dead-end or cul-de-sac, streets.
(p) A cul-de-sac street shall not be longer than six hundred feet (600'), and at the closed end shall have a
turnaround bulb with an outside pavement diameter of at least eighty feet (80') and a right-of-way diameter of at
least one hundred feet (100'). The length of a cul-de-sac shall be measured from the centerline of the intersecting
street to the centerline of the cul-de-sac bulb.
(q) The commission may recommend, and the City Council may approve, variances for overlength streets or
cul-de-sacs, whether temporary or permanent, upon considering the following:
(1) Alternative designs which would reduce street or cul-de-sac length;
(2) The effect of overlength streets upon access, congestion, delivery of municipal services, and
upon convenience to residents of the subdivision in traveling to and from their homes; and
(3) Means of mitigation, including but not limited to additional mid-block street connections,
limitation on the number of lots to be served along an overlength street segment or cul-de-sac,
temporary or permanent points of emergency access, and additional fire protection measures.
(r) Except in unusual cases, no dead-end streets will be approved unless such dead-end streets are provided to
connect with future streets on adjacent land. In the case of dead-end streets which will eventually be extended
into the adjacent subdivision, no more than one lot per side can front onto the dead-end street stub unless a
temporary turnaround bulb, with an off-site easement, is provided at the end. A temporary dead-end street shall
not exceed six hundred feet (600') in length, and the temporary turnaround bulb must be constructed like a culde-
sac, as provided in subsection (p) above. A note shall be placed on the final plat clearly labeling any dead-end
streets, if any, that will at some point be extended into the adjacent property, and signage shall be placed at the
end of the constructed street stub, such as on the barricade, also stating that the street will be extended in the
future. Signage and lettering must be large enough to be legible by a person with normal vision at a twenty-foot
distance. Any required temporary turnaround easements shall be shown on the final plat along with their
appropriate recording information, if they are off-site or established by separate instrument.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/194
(s) New streets which extend existing streets shall bear the names of the existing streets, and shall be
dedicated at equal or greater right-of-way widths than the existing streets.
(t) Construction of New Streets. All new streets dedicated within a subdivision shall be constructed in
accordance with paving widths and specifications as set forth by the City at the time at which the preliminary
plat application is officially submitted and deemed a complete application.
(u) Points of Access. All subdivisions shall have at least two (2) points of access from improved public
roadways. All residential developments shall provide not less than one (1) entrance for every fifty (50) lots, or
portion thereof, including dead-end stubbed streets that will eventually provide connections into adjacent future
developments and thence to an existing arterial or collector street.
(v) Streets will be constructed in accordance with the construction standards that are in effect at the time the
preliminary plat application is officially submitted and deemed a complete application.
Section 3.2 Alleys
(a) Service alleys in nonresidential districts, if provided or constructed by the applicant, shall be a minimum
right-of-way width of twenty-five feet (25') and a pavement width of fifteen feet (15') unless they must serve as
fire lanes, which requires a minimum pavement width of twenty-four feet (24'), as dedicated fire lane easements
on the final plat.
(b) Residential alleys shall be discouraged in the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, and shall only be
required in instances where a subdivision must connect into existing alleys for the purpose of providing
continuity or convenience. If alleys are constructed or required, the following standards shall be met:
(1) In residential districts, alleys shall be parallel, or approximately parallel, to the frontage of the
street. Alleys in residential districts shall provide a minimum of fifteen feet (15') of right-of-way and
ten feet (10') of pavement.
(c) General Design Standards for Alleys.
(1) Alleys shall be paved in accordance with the construction standards that are in effect at the time
the preliminary plat application is officially submitted and deemed a complete application.
(2) Dead-end or “hammerhead” alleys shall not be allowed. Alleys must have adequate turnouts
and street entrances such that vehicular traffic flow is continuous and efficient. Where a temporary
dead-end alley situation is unavoidable, a temporary turnaround bulb or turnout onto a street, either
of which will need a temporary easement for street or alley purposes, shall be provided as determined
by the City engineer.
(3) Alleys may not exceed a maximum length of two thousand feet (2,000'), as measured along the
centerline of the alley and between intersections with other alleys or entrances onto streets at the
right-of-way line of the street at the alley entrance. The councilmembers may recommend, and the
City Council may approve, variances for overlength alleys upon consideration of the following:
(A) Alternative designs which would reduce alley length;
(B) The effect of overlength alleys upon access, congestion, delivery of municipal services,
and upon convenience to residents of the subdivision in accessing rear driveways and in driving
around to the front of their homes; and
(C) Means of mitigation, including but not limited to additional mid-block alley turnouts,
limitation on the number of lots to be served along a single alley segment, temporary points of
access, and additional fire protection measures.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/194
(4) Alley intersections shall be perpendicular and at a ninety degree (90°) angle, and intersection
pavement shall be of sufficient width and inside radius to accommodate waste collection and
emergency vehicles. Intersections shall be three-way wherever possible, and four-way intersections
shall be avoided.
Section 3.3 Easements
(a) The minimum width for City utility easements shall be fifteen feet (15'). The minimum width for City
drainage easements shall be as required by the City engineer. The width of easements for other utility providers,
such as for gas, electric, telephone or cable TV, shall be as required by that particular entity. It shall be the
applicant’s responsibility to determine appropriate easement widths required by other utility companies.
Wherever possible, easements shall be centered or along front or side lot lines rather than across the interior or
rear of lots, particularly where no alleys will be provided behind the lots.
(b) Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway or channel, there shall be provided a
stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with such course and of such additional
width as may be designated by the City engineer, subject to determination according to proper engineering
considerations. The required width shall conform to the requirements set forth by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA).
(c) A lot’s area shall be computed inclusive of all easements. However, there shall be a minimum buildable
area, exclusive of required easements, buffer zones and setbacks for each lot. The minimum buildable area shall
be an area one-half (1/2) of the required minimum lot size. If the City disputes the buildable area of any lot, the
applicant shall submit verification in writing that the buildable area is adequate for the type of housing product
or nonresidential building proposed for that lot.
(d) Where alleys are not provided in a residential subdivision, a minimum ten foot (10') wide utility easement
shall be provided along the front of all lots, adjacent to and flush with the street right-of-way line for the
potential placement of utility facilities.
(e) For new development, all necessary on-site easements shall be established on the subdivision plat and not
by separate instrument, and they shall be labeled for the specific purpose, and to the specific entity, for which
they are being provided.
Section 3.4 Blocks
(a) The length, width and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to:
(1) Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use
contemplated.
(2) Zoning requirements as to lot sizes, setbacks and dimensions.
(3) Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic and for pedestrians
or bicyclists traveling to a public park or school site within the neighborhood.
(b) Intersecting streets, which determine the lengths and widths of blocks, shall be provided at such intervals
as to serve cross-traffic adequately, to provide adequate fire protection, and to conform to customary subdivision
practices. Where no existing subdivision or topographical constraints control, the block lengths shall not exceed
two thousand feet (2,000') in length. Where no existing subdivision or topographical constraints control, the
blocks shall not be less than five hundred feet (500') in length; however, in cases where physical barriers or
property ownership creates conditions where it is appropriate that these standards be varied, the length may be
increased or decreased, through issuance of a variance by the City Council with plat approval, to meet the
existing conditions having due regard for connecting streets, circulation of traffic and public safety.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/194
Section 3.5 Sidewalks
(a) Pedestrian concrete walkways (sidewalks) not less than four feet (4') wide may be required within a
residential subdivision, on at least one side of residential and collector streets, and walkways not less than five
feet (5') wide shall be provided within all nonresidential developments and along all perimeter roadways, for
both residential and nonresidential developments. The commission shall recommend, and the City Council shall
determine, if walkways are required at the time of preliminary plat approval. Walkways shall be constructed
within the street right-of-way, one foot (1') away from the right-of-way line, and at least four feet (4') away from
the street curb, and shall be installed prior to acceptance of the subdivision by the City and prior to final plat
approval, unless surety is provided.
(b) The cost and provision of any perimeter walkways, such as along major thoroughfares, may be escrowed
as a part of a developers agreement, if approved by the City Council. The City has the right, but not the
obligation, to refuse escrow and to require paving of the walkways if, in its sole opinion, immediate provision of
the walkways is necessary for safe pedestrian circulation or if it would otherwise protect the public health, safety
or welfare.
Section 3.6 Lots
(a) Lots shall conform to the minimum requirements of the established zoning district, except as noted in
subsection (g) below.
(b) No more than one single-family detached dwelling shall be located on each lot.
(c) Each lot shall abut a dedicated, improved public street unless platted as an approved private street
subdivision in accordance with this Ordinance. Lot width and access shall conform with the provisions of the
zoning ordinance, and any other applicable City code or ordinance. Lot access onto highway, arterial and
collector streets is subject to approval by the City Council, which may require a traffic study or other
information prior to approval of the preliminary plat in order to fully study all access issues. In all cases, lots
shall have a minimum of fifty feet (50') of frontage along a dedicated, improved street.
(d) Irregular-shaped lots shall have sufficient width at the building line to meet lot width and frontage
requirements of the appropriate zoning district, and shall provide a reasonable building pad without
encroachment into front, side or rear yard setbacks or into any type of easement. Also, the rear width shall be
sufficient to provide access for all necessary utilities, including access for driveways and solid waste collection
when alleys are present.
(e) Side lot lines shall be approximately at right, or ninety degree (90°), angles or radial to street right-of-way
lines.
(f) Double frontage lots shall be avoided, except where they may be essential to provide separation of
residential development from traffic arterials, or to overcome a specific disadvantage or hardship imposed by
topography or other factors. Where lots have double frontage, building setback lines shall be established for each
street side. Double frontage lots in residential subdivisions will not be allowed without providing appropriate
screening.
Section 3.7 Building Lines
Front and street side building lines and buffer zones for water quality purposes for the purposes of the nonpoint
source pollution control ordinance shall be shown on a concept plan and on any type of plat for all lots, and shall
be consistent with the zoning ordinance requirements for the district in which the development is located. For
property that is not subject to the City’s zoning regulations, the minimum front building line (for a residential or
nonresidential lot) shall be forty feet (40’).
Section 3.8 Utility Services not provided by the City of Tahoka
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/194
(a) For purposes of this section, the following meanings shall apply:
(1) “Utility services” - The facilities of any person providing electric, natural gas, telephone, cable
television, or any other such item or service for public use approved but not provided by the City.
(2) “Feeder or feeder/lateral line” - High voltage supply electric lines carrying more than 69,000
volts that emanate from substations used to distribute power through an area to an unspecified
number of customers.
(3) “Lateral lines” - Those electric lines used to distribute power from a feeder line to a single
subdivision. These electric lines are normally connected to a feeder line through a sectionalizing
device such as a fuse.
(4) “Service lines” - Those electric lines used to connect between the utilities’ supply system or
lateral lines and the end user’s meter box.
(b) All subdivision plats and engineering plans submitted to the City for approval shall provide for utility
services such as electrical, gas, telephone and cable TV utility lines, including lateral or service distribution
lines, and wires to be placed underground. Feeder and other major transmission lines may remain overhead
within the appropriate easements. However, an applicant shall endeavor and, whenever practical, the City shall
require that feeder lines are placed away from major or minor thoroughfares or arterials, as shown on the
thoroughfare plan. Whenever practical, feeder lines which are to be placed overhead shall not be placed along
both sides of the street right-of-way. Verification of acceptance of easement locations and widths by the public
utilities shall be provided to the City, by the applicant, prior to final plat approval by the City Council, and all
easements shall be reviewed by the utility companies and by the City engineer, for those to the City, prior to
granting final approval for any residential subdivision affected by this section. The applicant shall also, prior to
final plat approval, provide a Letter of Commitment from each utility provider, such as those providing
electricity, gas, telephone and cable television, who will serve the development that said utility providers will
ensure the provision of necessary infrastructure and service to all portions of the proposed development within
eighteen (18) months following final plat approval. Failure to submit such Letters of Commitment from utility
providers shall constitute grounds for denial of the final plat application on the basis that there is no written
assurance that the development can be served by essential utility services.
(c) Each of the utility companies shall be responsible for developing administrative policies, criteria for
easement size, and cost reimbursement procedures for the installation and extension of their underground
utilities. Nothing herein shall prohibit or restrict any utility company from recovering the difference in cost of
overhead facilities and underground utilities from the property owner in accordance with the provisions of such
utility’s approved tariff. No utility company shall be required or permitted to begin construction of underground
facilities unless and until the property owner or developer of the subdivision has made arrangements satisfactory
to the specific utility company for the payment of such difference between the cost of overhead facilities and
underground facilities.
(d) All electrical and telephone support equipment, including transformers, amplifiers and switching devices
necessary for underground installations, shall be pad- or ground-mounted, or shall be mounted underground and
not overhead, unless the subdivision is served from perimeter overhead electrical facilities. Pad- or groundmounted
utility equipment shall be completely screened from view of any public roadway, and shall not be
located within any required visibility area, such as at street intersections or corners or at driveway openings.
(e) Temporary construction service may be provided by overhead electric lines and facilities without obtaining
a variance or special exception, provided that when the underground utility service to any portion of a
subdivision is completed, such overhead electric lines and facilities are promptly removed.
(f) Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any existing facilities in place prior to the effective
date of this Ordinance to be placed underground.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/194
(g) The metering for utilities such as water, gas and electricity shall be located on the individual lots to be
served and not grouped together in a centralized location(s). “Gang-box” style metering stations shall not be
permitted.
(h) The locations, widths and configurations of easements for any utility service provider other than the City
shall be determined, approved and acquired, if necessary, by the applicable utility service provider.
(i) All utility installations shall be subject to inspection by the City, and shall be in conformance with any
applicable City design standards related to their placement within public rights-of-way within easements, or
elsewhere in the City (including on private property).
Section 3.9 Water and Wastewater Facility Design
(a) All new subdivisions shall be connected with the City’s water system, which is capable of providing water
for health and emergency purposes, including fire protection. An alternative source of water may be used for
irrigation purposes only and for a nonresidential use only (e.g., a public park, public school, etc.), subject to City
approval and provided that all appropriate permits are procured from any applicable sources. Such alternative
water source may not be used for potable (i.e., drinking) water supply under any circumstances. The design and
construction of water system improvements shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Design and construction of a water source on the site shall be in accordance with applicable
regulations of the TCEQ.
(2) Design and construction of a water source from a water utility provider shall be in accordance
with the standards in the TCSS Manual, in accordance with the standards of the water utility
provider, and in accordance with the TCEQ, whichever is the most stringent requirement.
(3) Design and construction of a fire protection system shall be in accordance with the standards in
the TCSS Manual, and in accordance with the fire department serving the site.
(b) All new subdivisions shall be served by an approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. The
design and construction of the wastewater system improvements shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Design and construction of on-site waste disposal systems shall comply with the On-Site
Sewerage Facility Rules if within the corporate limits, and with the requirements of Lynn County if
within the ETJ.
(2) Design and construction of a central off-site wastewater collection and treatment system shall
be in accordance with the standards of the wastewater utility provider and with the standards of the
TCEQ, whichever is the most stringent requirement.
(c) The subdivider shall be responsible for:
(1) Phasing of development or improvements in order to maintain adequate water and wastewater
services;
(2) Extensions of utility lines to connect to existing utility service;
(3) Providing all necessary easements for the utilities;
(4) Providing proof to the City of adequate water and wastewater service;
(5) Providing provisions for future expansion of the utilities;
(6) Providing all operations and maintenance of the utilities, or providing proof that a separate
entity will be responsible for the operations and maintenance of the utilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/194
(7) Providing all fiscal security required for the construction of the utilities;
(8) Obtaining approvals from the utility providers; and
(9) Complying with all requirements of the utility provider.
(d) Extension of water and wastewater lines shall be made along the entire frontage of the subdivision
adjacent to a street or thoroughfare. If the subdivision is not adjacent to a thoroughfare, the extension of utilities
shall be accomplished in such a manner to allow future connections to said utilities by new subdivision.
(e) Installation, operation and maintenance of utilities not specifically referenced herein shall comply with
regulations of the TCEQ and with other applicable state rules and regulations, whichever is the most stringent
requirement.
Section 3.10 Stormwater Collection and Conveyance Systems
(a) System Design Requirements. Drainage improvements shall accommodate runoff from the upstream
drainage area, and shall be designed to prevent overloading the capacity of the downstream drainage system.
The City may require the phasing of development, the use of control methods such as retention or detention, or
the construction of off-site drainage improvements in order to mitigate the impact of the proposed development.
No stormwater collection system shall be constructed unless it is designed in accordance with the construction
standards by a licensed professional engineer, and unless it is reviewed by the City engineer and approved by the
City Council. All plans submitted to the City engineer for approval shall include a layout of the drainage system
together with supporting calculations for the design of the system.
(b) Each proposed stormwater conveyance improvement must be sufficiently constructed of materials and of a
design to resist:
(1) External pressure caused by earth or building; and
(2) Internal pressure or abrasion caused by water or debris.
(c) The proposed improvements will not permit water to gather in a pool that may become stagnant.
(d) The proposed development:
(1) Will not result in additional identifiable adverse flooding on other property;
(2) To the greatest extent feasible, preserves the natural and traditional character of the land and
the waterway; and
(3) Includes on-site control of the two-year peak flow, based on the overall design.
(e) No person shall deepen, widen, fill, reclaim, reroute or change the course or location of any existing ditch
or drainageway without first obtaining written permission of the City engineer and any other applicable agency
having jurisdiction. The City engineer may, at his or her discretion, require preparation and submission of a
FEMA or flood study for a proposed development if there are concerns regarding storm drainage on the subject
property or upstream or downstream from the subject property. The costs of such study, if required, shall be
borne by the developer.
(f) In order to help reduce stormwater runoff, the layout of the street network, lots and building sites shall, to
the greatest extent possible, be sited and aligned along natural contour lines, and shall minimize the amount of
cut and fill on slopes in order to minimize the amount of land area that is disturbed during construction.
(g) All stormwater retention or detention facilities which are not located underground shall be designed using
materials and techniques as established by the City.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/194
(h) The owner or developer of property to be developed is responsible for the conveyance of all stormwater
flowing through the property, including stormwater that:
(1) Is directed to the property by other developed property; or
(2) Naturally flows through the property because of the topography.
(i) If the construction or improvement of a storm drainage facility is required along a property line that is
common to more than one property owner, the owner proposing to develop the property is, at the time the
property is developed, responsible for each required facility on either side of the common property line.
(j) The responsibility of the owner proposing to develop the property includes the responsibility to dedicate or
obtain the dedication of any right-of-way or easement necessary to accommodate the required construction or
improvement of the storm drainage facility.
(k) If an owner of property proposes to develop only a portion of that property, a stormwater drainage facility
to serve that portion of the property proposed for immediate development or use if [is] required, unless the
director determines that construction or improvement of a drainage facility outside that portion of the property to
be developed is essential to the development or use of the property to be developed.
ARTICLE IV. PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES
Section 4.1 Areas for Public Use
The applicant shall give consideration to suitable and adequate sites for schools, parks, playgrounds, and other
areas for public use or service so as to conform with the recommendations contained in the City’s applicable
plans. Any provision for schools, parks or other public facilities shall be indicated on the preliminary and final
plat, and shall be subject to approval by the City Council.
Section 4.2 Property Owners or Homeowners Associations
(a) Applicability. When a subdivision contains either common open space or other improvements which are
not intended to be dedicated to the City for public use, such as private streets, a private recreation facility,
landscaped entry features or water quality structures, a property owners or homeowners association agreement
must be submitted to and approved by the City administrator, and made a part of the final plat documents. The
Conditions, Covenants and Restrictions (CCRs) and the association documents, including the Ordinances of
incorporation and association by-laws, shall be submitted to the City for review and approval along with the
preliminary plat application, and shall be filed of record with the Lynn County Clerk prior to final plat approval
in order to ensure that there is an entity in place for long-term maintenance of these improvements. Said
documents must, at a minimum, include provisions which allow the City to take over the maintenance of
common property, including but not limited to private streets and private recreation facilities, using association
funds, if such action becomes necessary due to nonperformance or inaction by the association or if the
association goes defunct. Provisions shall also be included which would, in the latter instance, convey ownership
of the private streets, if any, and all other common areas to the City, and which would allow the City to remove
any improvements or amenities from the common areas and sell any buildable land area, as residential lots, to
recoup the City’s expenses for maintenance or demolition of the improvements. Any monies that remain after
the City has recovered all of its expenses shall be retained for future maintenance or upgrading of the streets,
common areas, if any remain, screening walls, or other improvements within the subdivision.
(b) Membership. A property owners or homeowners association shall be an incorporated non-profit
organization operating under recorded CCRs through which:
(1) Each lot owner within the described land area is automatically a mandatory member; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/194
(2) Each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the expenses for the
property owners or homeowners association’s activities, such as maintenance of common open
spaces or private streets, and the provision and upkeep of common recreational facilities.
(c) Legal Requirements. In order to assure the establishment of a proper property owners or homeowners
association, including its financing, and the rights and responsibilities of the property or home owners in relation
to the use, management and ownership of common property, the subdivision plat, dedication documents,
covenants, and other recorded legal agreements must:
(1) Legally create an automatic membership, non-profit property owners or homeowners
association;
(2) Place title to the common property in the property owners or homeowners association, or give
definite assurance that it automatically will be so placed within a reasonable, definite time;
(3) Appropriately limit the uses of the common property;
(4) Give each lot owner the right to the use and enjoyment of the common property;
(5) Place responsibility for operation and maintenance of the common property in the property
owners or homeowners association;
(6) Place an association charge on each lot in a manner which will both assure sufficient
association funds and which will provide adequate safeguards for the lot owners against undesirable
high charges;
(7) Give each lot owner voting rights in the association; and
(8) Must identify land area within the association’s jurisdiction including but not limited to the
following:
(A) Property to be transferred to public agencies;
(B) The individual residential lots;
(C) The common properties to be transferred by the developer to the property owners or
homeowners association; and
(D) Other parcels.
(9) Any governmental authority or agency, including, but not limited to, the City and Lynn County,
their agents, and employees, shall have the right of immediate access to the common elements at all
times if necessary for the preservation of public health, safety and welfare. Should the property
owners or homeowners association fail to maintain the common elements to City specifications for
an unreasonable time, not to exceed ninety (90) days after written request to do so, then the City shall
have the same right, power and authority to enforce the association’s rules and to levy assessments
necessary to maintain the common elements as does the association. The City may elect to exercise
the rights and powers of the property owners or homeowners association or its board, or to take any
action required and levy any assessment that the property owners or homeowners association might
have taken, either in the name of the property owners or homeowners association or otherwise, to
cover the cost of maintenance, or the possible demolition, if such becomes necessary to preserve
public safety or to ease maintenance burden, of any common elements.
(d) Protective Covenants. Protective covenants shall be developed which, among other things, shall make the
property owners or homeowners association responsible for:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/194
(1) The maintenance and operation of all common property;
(2) The enforcement of all other covenants;
(3) The administration of architectural controls (optional); and
(4) Certain specified exterior maintenance of exterior improvements of individual properties
(optional).
The City is not responsible for enforcing protective covenants or deed restrictions.
(e) The association may not be dissolved without the prior written consent of the City Council.
(f) No portion of the association documents pertaining to the maintenance of private streets and alleys, and
assessments therefore, may be amended without the written consent of the City Council.
Section 4.3 Parkland & Public Facility Dedication
(a) Policy and Purpose. The primary purpose of the parkland dedication requirements is to ensure that the
need for parkland which arises from new development is provided by the developer as is attributable and in
proportion to the demand created by the new development. The applicant shall give consideration to suitable
sites for parks, playgrounds and other areas for public use so as to conform with the recommendations of the
comprehensive plan, and is a reasonable contribution of land and facilities for those who live and will use
parkland in the new development. Any provision for parks and public open space areas shall be indicated on the
preliminary and final plat, and shall be subject to approval by the City Council.
(b) Parkland Dedication Required.
(1) Except as provided herein, any person submitting a preliminary or final plat application for
development of any area zoned and to be used for single-family, duplex, or multifamily residential
purposes within the City shall include, on such preliminary and final plat, dedication to the City of
land for public park purposes, calculated at the rate of not less than one and one-half (1.5) acres of
parkland per one hundred (100) ultimate dwelling units of such residential subdivision.
(2) The preliminary and final subdivision plat shall clearly show the area proposed to be dedicated
as parkland under the provisions of this Section. The final location and size of public parks within the
City shall be determined in all instances by the City Council.
(3) The applicant has the duty to submit with the subdivision plat for a multifamily residential
development information concerning the numbers of dwelling units, and should he or she fail to do
so, the density shall be calculated at the highest density that would be allowed in such multifamily
residential district for the purposes of calculating parkland requirements. Deed restrictions or other
legal instruments shall be required and submitted as part of the application to ensure that the
proposed density shall not be increased up to the maximum allowed in the zoning district.
(4) Exceptions.
(A) Replats of real property which have previously satisfied the park requirements in effect at
the time of the initial approval and for which no increase in the number of dwelling units are
proposed are exempt from the requirements of this section.
(B) Applications for property to be used for nonresidential purposes are exempt from the
dedication of land for park purposes and shall pay a fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per
acre, with the minimum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), to be deposited in the park
dedication fund, unless the development is subject to an agreement with the City which results
in the dedication or payment of fees for purpose of parks or open space. Deed restrictions or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/194
other legal instrument shall be required and submitted as part of the application to ensure that
the proposed uses are nonresidential.
(c) Standards for dedicated parkland.
(1) The dedicated land required hereby shall be well-drained, relatively level in areas that are
proposed for active park uses and suitable for appropriate leisure activities. However, most areas
within the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be for passive open space enjoyment.
(2) Public Park Access. Parkland shall be easily accessible from a public street for the public and
open to public view so as to benefit area residents, enhance the visual character of the City, protect
public safety, and minimize conflicts with adjacent land uses. A proposed subdivision adjacent to a
public park or open space area shall not be designed to restrict reasonable access into the park. Street
and pedestrian access connections between residential neighborhoods shall be provided, wherever
possible, to provide reasonable access to parks and open space areas. The final decision on the
acceptability of the proposed access and public availability, both physical and visual, of parkland
shall be reviewed and approved by the City Council. The parkland shall have a minimum of fifty
lineal feet (50') of frontage on a public street.
[(3) Reserved.]
(4) The parkland dedicated to the City shall not be subject to reservations of record, encumbrances
or easements which will interfere with the use of the land for park purposes.
(5) Required Improvements to Parkland. The following improvements shall be required and/or
coordinated with the City prior to acceptance of the dedication by the City.
(i) Fences Adjacent to Public Parks.
In the event that a proposed development sides or backs upon a proposed public park, a
fence of not less than six feet (6') nor more than eight feet (8'), in height, constructed of
visually open material such as split rail material, but not including chainlink, shall be
erected in conjunction with landscaping elements on the property line separating these
uses, or other dimension or materials as agreed to by the City. In no instance shall barb
wire be permitted. The purpose of the screening fence is to provide a visual and protective
barrier between the properties.
Prior to the construction of the required fence the owner of the proposed development
property shall submit proposed construction materials, plans detailing the design, and
estimated construction costs to the City Administrator for review and submission to the
City Council to determine cost apportionment as appropriate. The developer shall
coordinate with the City Administrator the construction of the required fence on the
property line dividing the public and privately owned property.
(ii) Paved frontage, curbs and gutters for all required street frontages abutting the outside
perimeter of the parkland.
(iii) Water, wastewater, electrical services and all other utilities connections provided to the
remainder of the subdivision shall be provided to the park, as needed and determined by the
City Council depending on the primary activity proposed on the parkland.
(d) Fee in lieu of Parkland Dedication.
(1) Applicability. The City may accept a cash payment in lieu of parkland dedication as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/194
(A) In instances where the amount of parkland required to be dedicated is three acres or less;
or
(B) The proposed parkland is unacceptable, unavailable or unsuitable for park purposes, and
does not otherwise meet the standards stated herein; or
(C) If the City accepts a combination of dedicated land and money.
(2) Where the City requires or accepts payment of cash in lieu of the dedication of parkland, such
payment shall be equivalent to six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) per dwelling unit for all residential
developments.
(3) All fees shall be paid in the form of a cashier’s check or other form acceptable by the City at
the time at the request to record the plat.
(4) Fees in lieu of land shall be paid into a “park dedication fund” to be established by the City. All
sums deposited to the fund shall be accounted for by the City and expended for such purposes as land
acquisition, construction of improvements, and purchase of equipment for the site directly related to
the subdivision and its immediate vicinity depositing the funds. The park dedication fund will be
administered by the City Council to best benefit the development, provided that the establishment of
a park site and installation of facilities or improvements shall be within the discretion of the City
Council.
(5) The money paid by the applicant will be expended or committed for expenditure on such park
site(s) within eight (8) years from the date of recording of the final plat. If such funds are not so
expended or committed within eight (8) years following final plat approval, the property owner upon
written request shall be entitled to a refund of such funds, less any amounts expended for such
purposes.
ARTICLE V. IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED PRIOR TO ACCEPTANCE OF THE SUBDIVISION BY
THE CITY
Section 5.1 Improvements, In General
(a) The requirements of this Ordinance as set forth below are designed and intended to ensure that, for all
subdivisions of land within the scope of this Ordinance, all improvements as required herein are installed
properly and:
(1) The City can provide for the orderly and economical extension of public facilities and services;
(2) All purchasers of property within the subdivision shall have a usable, buildable parcel of land;
and
(3) All required improvements are constructed in accordance with City standards.
(b) Adequate Public Facilities Policy. The land to be divided or developed must be served adequately by
essential public facilities and services. This policy may be defined further and supplemented by other ordinances
adopted by the City. Wherever the subject property abuts adjoining undeveloped land, or wherever required by
the City to serve the public good, utilities shall be extended to adjacent property lines to allow connection of
these utilities by adjacent property owners when such adjacent property is platted.
(c) Public improvements that may be required by the City for the acceptance of the subdivision by the City
shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Water and wastewater facilities;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/194
(2) Stormwater drainage, collection or conveyance facilities;
(3) Water quality controls;
(4) Streets;
(5) Streetlights;
(6) Street signs;
(7) Walkways (sidewalks), including barrier-free ramps at street intersections and other appropriate
locations;
(8) Alleys (generally not allowed in single-family residential subdivisions);
(9) Traffic-control devices required as part of the project;
(10) Screening and/or retaining walls;
(11) Appurtenances to the above, and any other public facilities required as part of the proposed
subdivision.
(d) All aspects of the design and implementation of public improvements shall comply with the City’s current
design standards and any other applicable City codes and ordinances, including preparation and submittal of
engineering plans and construction inspection.
Section 5.2 Monuments
(a) In all subdivisions and additions, monuments shall be established at the corner of each block in the
subdivision consisting of an iron rod or pipe not less than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter and eighteen inches
(18") deep, and set flush with the top of the ground. Lot corner monuments shall be placed at all lot corners
except corners which are also block corners, consisting of iron rods or pipes of a diameter of not less than onehalf
inch (1/2") and eighteen inches (18") deep, and set flush with the top of the ground. In addition, curve point
markers shall be established of the same specifications as lot corners. Each block corner monument shall include
a cap with the surveyor’s name and registration number attached to it. All block and lot corners shall be installed
prior to the final acceptance of the subdivision by the City and prior to filing the plat at the County. All survey
work around the boundary area, as well as within the subdivision, shall have an error of closure of one in 7,500
or less.
(b) A subdivision shall have at least two (2) concrete monuments set by the surveyor, if not already existing,
for two corners of the subdivision, and such concrete monuments shall be located at opposite ends (or at widely
separated corners) of the subdivision and clearly shown on the final plat prior to filing at the County. The final
plat shall also show clear ties to existing concrete monuments in the vicinity of the subdivision.
Section 5.3 Streetlights
All street lighting shall be in keeping with the rural atmosphere of the City, and shall be in conformance with the
zoning ordinance. In order to minimize light pollution and the overspill of lighting onto residential properties,
and in order to preserve the integrity of nighttime darkness, and the visibility of stars and heavenly bodies, no
streetlights shall be required in any residential subdivision in the City or its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Section 5.4 Street Names and Signs
(a) Street names must be submitted to the City, to the U.S. Postal Service, and to applicable emergency service
providers (including 911) for review and approval in accordance with the City’s guidelines for the naming of
streets. Proposed street names shall be submitted for review along with, and as a part of, the preliminary plat
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/194
application, and shall become fixed at the time of approval of the preliminary plat. On the final plat, street names
shall not be changed from those that were approved on the preliminary plat unless special circumstances have
caused the major realignment of streets or a proposed street name(s) is discovered to have already been used
elsewhere in the City, or some other similar eventuality. If additional street names are needed for the final plat,
then they must be submitted for review and approval by the City, the U.S. Postal Service, and applicable
emergency service providers (including 911) along with the final plat application. A fee may be established by
the City for the changing of street names after approval of the preliminary plat.
(b) Surnames of people or the names of corporations or businesses shall not be used as street names, unless
approved by the City Council. The City will maintain a list of existing street names, and “reserved” street names
that have been approved on a preliminary plat, and will update the list as new streets are platted.
(c) New street names shall not duplicate existing street names either literally or in a subtle manner, shall not
be so similar as to cause confusion between names, and shall not sound like existing street names when spoken.
For example, Smith Street vs. Smythe Street; Oak Drive vs. Oak Place vs. Oak Court vs. Oak Circle; Cascade
Drive vs. Cascading Drive; Lakeside Drive vs. Lake Side Drive vs. Lake Siding Drive; Oak Drive vs. Doak
Drive vs. Cloak Drive; Lantern Way vs. Land Tern Way.
(d) New streets which extend existing streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. Streets crossing
thoroughfares or other roadways shall bear the same name on both sides of the thoroughfare, wherever practical,
unless otherwise approved by City Council.
(e) The property owner shall provide payment for street name signs for the development. The cost of each
street name sign installation shall include the cost of the sign assembly, pole and the time for installation.
Payment by the property owner will be due prior to approval of the engineering plans by the City engineer.
(f) Street name signs shall be installed in accordance with the City’s guidelines before issuance of a building
permit for any structure on the streets approved within the subdivision.
Section 5.5 Street and Alley Improvements
(a) All on-site streets and alleys shall be constructed by the developer at the developer’s expense, unless
otherwise allowed by this Ordinance. The City Council may, at its option, accept escrow funds in lieu of
immediate roadway construction if the subdivision derives principal access from another improved roadway and
if delaying construction or improvement of the road will not harm or otherwise inconvenience neighboring
property owners or the general public.
(b) All streets and alleys shall be constructed using reinforced concrete, unless otherwise approved by the City
Council.
(c) In addition to the above mentioned minimum standards, barrier-free ramps for physically challenged
persons shall be constructed at all street corners, driveway approaches, appropriate mid-block crosswalks, and in
locations where accessible parking spaces are provided, and shall comply with Section 228 of the Highway
Safety Act, as currently amended, and with the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA), as amended.
(e) All signs and barricades shall be in conformity with ADA standards, and with specifications for uniform
traffic-control devices, as adopted by the Texas Department of Transportation and the Texas Department of
Public Safety.
(f) Approval is required prior to the installation of any driveway connecting to a public street. The City
engineer shall approve all driveway cuts.
Section 5.6 Screening and Landscaping Construction Regulations, Requirements and Design Criteria
(a) Screening.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/194
(1) Where subdivisions are platted so that the rear or side yards of single-family or two-family
residential lots are adjacent to an arterial thoroughfare; a four (4) lane collector street; are separated
from a thoroughfare by an alley; or back up to a collector or residential street, the developer shall
provide, at his or her sole expense, screening according to the following alternatives and standards.
All screening shall be adjacent to the right-of-way or property line and fully located on the private
lot(s), including columns and decorative features. All forms of screening shall conform to the
requirements of City ordinances and policies that govern sight distance for traffic safety.
(2) Screening Alternatives. Screening shall be provided in accordance with related City code(s)
and policy(s).
(3) A maintenance easement of five feet (5') in width shall be dedicated to the City on the private
lot side and adjacent to the screening wall or device.
(4) The screening wall shall be installed prior to the final acceptance of the subdivision. Landscape
materials may be installed after the subdivision is accepted, upon approval of the City administrator,
but in no case later than six (6) months following acceptance of the subdivision.
(5) All plants, such as trees, shrubs and ground covers, shall be living in fullness and height that is
customary for their container or ball size, as per the latest edition of the “American Standard for
Nursery Stock,” by the American Association of Nurserymen, as may be amended.
(6) All masonry, wood, which must be sealed or painted, steel or aluminum screening wall or fence
plans and details must be designed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer, and must be
approved by the City engineer.
(7) Required wall heights, including spans between columns, shall be from at least six feet (6') and
no more than eight feet (8'). Decorative columns, pilasters, stone caps, and other features may exceed
the maximum eight-foot (8') height by up to eighteen inches for a total maximum height of nine and
one-half feet (9.5') for these features, provided that such taller elements comprise no more than ten
percent (10%) of the total wall length in elevation view.
(8) Screening fences, walls and devices shall not be constructed within any portion of a utility
easement unless specifically authorized by the City and other applicable utility provider.
(b) Entryway Features.
(1) Subdivisions in excess of ten (10) platted lots may provide a low maintenance landscaped
entryway feature at access points from streets and thoroughfares into the subdivision. The entryway
feature shall be placed on private property and within an easement identified for such use, and shall
observe all sight visibility requirements. Limited portions of the feature or landscaping may be placed
within the right-of-way. Most of the feature or landscaping shall be located on private property so
that long-term maintenance responsibility will be borne by the property owner or an approved
homeowners association.
(2) Design Requirements. The entryway feature shall include low maintenance, living landscaped
materials as approved by the City Council. The design of the entryway feature shall also include an
automatic underground irrigation system, and may also include subdivision identification, such as
signage located on the wall. Any walls or structures used in the entryway feature must conform to the
City’s regulations pertaining to maximum height within the front yard of residential lots required by
the zoning ordinance wherever the adjacent lot sides onto the arterial street and the wall will be
located within the front yard setback area.
(3) The design of the entryway shall be in accordance with design policies approved by the City
and shall be reflected on the landscape and irrigation plans submitted along with the engineering
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/194
plans and the preliminary plat.
(4) The maintenance of the entryway shall be the responsibility of the applicant for a period of at
least two (2) years or until building permits have been issued for eighty percent (80%) of the lots in
the subdivision, whichever date is later. Following that period of time, maintenance responsibility
shall be borne by the private property owner(s) upon whose lot(s) the entryway feature is located, or
by a homeowners association meeting the requirements of this Ordinance. If, at some point in time,
the maintenance responsibility shifts to the City, the City shall have the right to upgrade, reduce or
eliminate entirely, at its sole option, the landscaping and other amenities in order to simplify or
minimize the amount of time and effort that maintenance of the entryway will require.
(c) Landscaping. All landscaping shall be in conformance with the zoning ordinance.
(d) Signage. All signage shall be in conformance with the City’s Sign Ordinance.
Section 5.7 Water and Wastewater Requirements
(a) The installation of all water and wastewater lines shall be in conformance with this Ordinance.
(b) No final plat shall be approved for any subdivision within the City or its extraterritorial jurisdiction until
the applicant has made adequate provision for a water system and a sanitary sewer system of sufficient capacity
to adequately provide service to all tracts and lots within the area to be subdivided.
(c) Water supply. Water satisfactory for human consumption shall be available to each lot in the proposed
subdivision from a source on the land, a community source, or a public utility source, in adequate and sufficient
supply for the intended uses on each lot within the subdivision. Plans and specifications for a private water
supply other than an investor-owned water supply corporation, or a corporation organized under Ordinance
1434a of the Texas Civil Statutes, must be submitted by a licensed professional engineer and approved by the
TCEQ prior to final plat approval. If the sole source of water supply for a proposed subdivision or development
is intended to be groundwater under the land, then a statement shall be prepared by a professional engineer
licensed to practice in the State of Texas, and shall be shown on the preliminary and final plat, stating that
adequate groundwater is available, and shall continue to be available in the foreseeable future, to serve the
subdivision.
(d) Private Water and Sewer Corporations. When a proposed subdivision is located within an area to be served
by an investor-owned water supply or sewerage service utility, or a water supply or sewerage service corporation
organized under Ordinance 1434a of the Texas Civil Statutes, the property owner shall furnish, before approval
of a preliminary plat, evidence of a contractual agreement between the property owner and the water or sewer
utility for financing, installing and maintaining utilities in the subdivision, and stating the capacity and quantity
of such utilities to be made available to the proposed development.
(e) Water system with mains of sufficient size and having a sufficient number of outlets to furnish adequate
domestic water supply and to furnish fire protection to all lots shall be provided. Water lines shall extend to the
property line, in order to allow future connections into adjacent undeveloped property, and a box for the water
meter(s) for each lot shall be installed either in the right-of-way or immediately adjacent to the right-of-way in
an easement.
(f) Services for utilities shall be made available to the property line of each lot in such a manner as will
minimize the necessity for disturbing the street pavement and drainage structure when connections are made.
(g) Fire protection shall be provided in accordance with this Ordinance.
Section 5.8 Improvement of Adjacent (Perimeter) Streets and Utilities
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/194
(a) When a proposed subdivision, whether residential or nonresidential, abuts on one or both sides of an
existing substandard street, or on a planned or future road as shown on the thoroughfare plan, being substandard
according to the then existing current thoroughfare plan, the developer shall be required to improve the existing
on-site facility, including appurtenant walkways, screening and landscaping, storm sewers, water quality
controls, and other utilities as defined in this Ordinance, to bring the same to City standards, or to replace it with
a standard City street as determined to be roughly proportionate to the proposed development as approved by a
professional engineer who holds a license issued under Chapter 1001, Occupations Code retained by the City, at
the applicant’s cost.
(b) The applicant may dispute the determination made by the engineer retained by the City and may submit a
written appeal to the City Council within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the determination of the
engineer. After hearing any testimony and reviewing the evidence, the City Council shall make the applicable
determination within 30 calendar days following the final submission of any testimony or evidence by the
applicant.
(c) Streets which dead-end at power lines or similar rights-of-way or easements, and which are intended for
future extension across these rights-of-way or easements, shall be constructed in the right-of-way or easement
for half the distance across the right-of-way or easement, and shall be further restricted as set forth in this
Ordinance. As with any other dead-end street, a note shall be placed on the final plat clearly labeling the deadend
streets that will, at some point, be extended across the power line easement, or right-of-way, and signage
shall be placed at the end of the constructed street stub, such as on the barricade, also stating that the street will
be extended in the future. Signage size and lettering shall be large enough to be legible by a person with normal
vision at a distance of twenty feet (20').
Section 5.9 Storm Drainage and Water Quality Controls
(a) An adequate storm sewer system consisting of inlets, pipes and other underground structures with
approved outlets shall be constructed where runoff of stormwater and the prevention of erosion cannot be
accomplished satisfactorily by surface drainage facilities. Areas subject to flood conditions or inadvertent
stormwater retention, such as standing or pooling water, as established by the City engineer, will not be
considered for development until adequate drainage has been provided.
(b) In no case shall drainage areas be diverted artificially to adjacent properties or across roadways.
Stormwater drainage from one residential lot onto another shall not be allowed unless such does not pose any
harm or inconvenience to the downstream property owner(s) and unless specifically approved by the City.
(c) The developer shall ensure that all drainage improvements within public easements or rights-of-way are
functioning properly prior to the expiration of the maintenance bond. The City shall inspect the improvements to
determine any maintenance or correction of deficiencies at the conclusion of this period.
ARTICLE VI. REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCEPTANCE OF SUBDIVISIONS BY THE CITY OF
TAHOKA
Section 6.1 Withholding City Services and Improvements Until Acceptance
The City hereby defines its policy to be that the City will withhold all City services and improvements of
whatsoever nature, including the maintenance of streets and the furnishing of and all other City services from all
additions until all of the street, utility, storm drainage and other public improvements, as well as lot
improvements, are properly constructed according to the approved engineering plans and to City standards, and
until such public improvements are dedicated to and accepted by the City.
Section 6.2 Guarantee of Public Improvements
(a) Property Owner’s Guarantee. Before approving the final plat of a subdivision located all or partially within
the City or its extraterritorial jurisdiction, the City Council must be satisfied that all required public
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/194
improvements will be constructed in accordance with the approved engineering plans and with the requirements
of this Ordinance.
(b) Improvement Agreement and Guarantee. The City Council may waive the requirement that the applicant
complete and dedicate all public improvements prior to approval of the final plat, and may permit the property
owner to enter into an improvement agreement by which the property owner covenants to complete all required
public improvements no later than two (2) years following the date upon which the final plat is approved. The
City Council may also require the property owner to complete or dedicate some of the required public
improvements prior to approval of the final plat, and to enter into an improvement agreement for completion of
the remainder of the required improvements during such two-year period.
(c) Security. Whenever the City permits an applicant to enter into an improvement agreement, it shall require
the applicant to provide sufficient security, covering the completion of the public improvements. The security
shall be in the form of cash escrow or, where authorized by the City, a performance bond or letter of credit or
other security acceptable to the City administrator and the City attorney, as security for the promises contained
in the improvement agreement. Security shall be in an amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the
estimated cost of completion of the required public improvements and lot improvements.
(d) Performance Bond. If the City Council authorizes the applicant to post a performance bond as security for
its promises contained in the improvement agreement, the performance bond shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) All performance bonds must be in the forms acceptable to the City administrator and the City
attorney;
(2) All performance bonds must be executed by such sureties as are named in the current list of
“Companies Holding Certificates of Authority as Acceptable Sureties on Federal Bonds and as
Acceptable Reinsuring Companies,” as published in Circular 570, as may be amended, by the
Financial Management Service, Surety Bond Branch, U.S. Department of the Treasury;
(3) All performance bonds must be signed by an agent, and must be accompanied by a certified
copy of the agent’s authority;
(4) All performance bonds shall be obtained from surety or insurance companies that are duly
licensed or authorized in the State of Texas to issue performance bonds for the limits and coverage
required.
If the surety on any performance bond furnished by the applicant is declared bankrupt, or
becomes insolvent, or its right to do business is terminated in the State of Texas, or the surety
ceases to meet the requirements listed in Circular 570, the developer shall, within twenty (20)
calendar days thereafter, substitute another performance bond and surety, both of which must be
acceptable to the City.
(e) Letter of Credit. If the City Council authorizes the applicant to post a letter of credit as security for its
promises contained in the improvement agreement, the letter of credit shall:
(1) Be irrevocable;
(2) Be for a term sufficient to cover the completion, maintenance and warranty periods, but in no
event less than two (2) years; and
(3) Require only that the City present the issuer with a sight draft and a certificate signed by an
authorized representative of the City certifying to the City’s right to draw funds under the letter of
credit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/194
(f) As portions of the public improvements are completed, the applicant may make application to the City
administrator to reduce the amount of the original security. If the City administrator is satisfied that such portion
of the improvements has been completed in accordance with City standards, he may, but is not required to, cause
the amount of the letter of credit to be reduced by such amount that he deems appropriate, so that the remaining
amount of the security adequately insures the completion of the remaining public improvements.
(g) Upon acceptance by the City of all required public improvements, the City shall authorize a reduction in
the security to 25% of the original amount of the security if the applicant is not in breach of the improvement
agreement. The remaining security shall be security for the applicant’s covenant to maintain the required public
improvements and to warrant that the improvements are free from defects for two (2) years thereafter. If the
required security for maintenance and warranty is provided by the contractor’s bond, maintenance bond, or by
others, the City will release the entire amount of the developer’s security.
Section 6.3 Temporary Improvements
(a) The applicant shall build and pay for all costs of temporary improvements required by the City, and shall
maintain those temporary improvements for the period specified by the City.
(b) Any temporary public improvement (e.g., a temporary cul-de-sac, alley turnout, drainage swale, erosioncontrol
device, etc.) shall be placed within an easement established specifically for that purpose. The recording
information of the instrument establishing the temporary easement shall be clearly shown on the final plat for the
subdivision prior to approval of the final plat. A temporary easement for a required public improvement shall not
be abandoned without the City Engineer’s approval and without written consent by the City.
Section 6.4 Government Units
Governmental units to which these contract and security provisions apply may file, in lieu of the contract and
security, a certified resolution or ordinance from officers or agents authorized to act in their behalf, agreeing to
comply with the provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 6.5 Failure to Complete Improvements
(a) For plats for which no improvement agreement has been executed and no security has been posted, if the
public improvements are not completed within the period specified by the City, the plat approvals shall be
deemed to have expired. In those cases where an improvement agreement has been executed and security has
been posted, and the required public improvements have not been installed within the terms of the agreement,
the City may:
(1) Declare the agreement to be in default and require that all the public improvements be installed
regardless of the extent of completion of the development at the time the agreement is declared to be
in default;
(2) Suspend final plat approval until the public improvements are completed, and may record a
document to that effect for the purpose of public notice;
(3) Obtain funds under the security and complete the public improvements itself or through a third
party;
(4) Assign its right to receive funds under the security to any third party, including a subsequent
owner of the subdivision for which public improvements were not constructed, in whole or in part, in
exchange for that subsequent owner’s promise to complete the public improvements on the property;
or
(5) Exercise any other rights available under the law.
Section 6.6 Acceptance of Dedication Offers
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/194
Acceptance of formal offers for the dedication of streets, public areas, easements or parks shall be by
authorization of the City Council. The approval by the City Council of a preliminary or final plat shall not, in
and of itself, be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by the City of any street, public area, easement or
park shown on the plat. The City may require the plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect.
Section 6.7 Maintenance and Guarantee of Public Improvements
The applicant shall maintain all required public improvements for a period of two (2) years following acceptance
of the subdivision by the City, and shall also provide a two-year maintenance bond, or such other guarantee or
warranty as is satisfactory to the City administrator and City attorney, that all public improvements will be free
from defects for a period of two (2) years following such acceptance by the City.
Section 6.8 Construction Procedures
(a) A site development permit is required from the City prior to beginning any site development-related work
in the City or its extraterritorial jurisdiction which affects erosion control, storm drainage, vegetation or tree
removal, or a floodplain.
(b) Preconstruction Conference. The City may require that all contractors participating in the construction
meet for a preconstruction conference to discuss the project prior to release of a site development or building
permit, and before any filling, excavation, clearing or removal of vegetation and trees that are larger than six
inch (6") caliper. All contractors shall be familiar with, and shall conform with, applicable landscaping
provisions of the zoning ordinance.
(c) Conditions Prior to Authorization. Prior to authorizing release of a site development permit, the City
engineer shall be satisfied that the following conditions have been met:
(1) The preliminary plat has been approved by the City Council, and any conditions of such
approval have been satisfied;
(2) All required engineering documents are completed and approved by the City engineer;
(3) All necessary off-site easements and dedications required for City-maintained facilities and not
shown on the plat must be conveyed solely to the City, such as by filing of a separate instrument,
with the proper signatures affixed;
(4) All contractors participating in the construction shall be presented with a set of approved plans
bearing the stamp of release of the City engineer, and at least one set of these plans shall remain on
the job site at all times;
(5) A complete list of the contractors, their representatives on the site, and telephone numbers
where a responsible party may be reached at all times must be submitted to the City; and
(6) All applicable fees must be paid to the City.
Section 6.9 Inspection and Acceptance of Public Improvements
(a) General Procedure. Construction inspection shall be supervised by the City engineer. Construction shall be
in accordance with the approved engineering plans and other applicable codes and ordinances. Any change in
design that is required during construction should be made by the licensed professional engineer whose seal and
signature are shown on the plans. Another engineer may make revisions to the original engineering plans if so
authorized by the owner of the plans, and if those revisions are noted on the plans or documents. All revisions
shall be approved by the City administrator. If the City administrator finds, upon inspection, that any of the
required public improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the City’s standards, then the
applicant shall be responsible for completing and correcting the deficiencies such that they are brought into
conformance with the applicable standards.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/194
(b) Letter of Satisfactory Completion. The City will not deem required public improvements satisfactorily
completed until the applicant’s engineer or surveyor has certified to the City administrator, through submission
of detailed sealed “as-built,” or record, drawings of the property which indicate all public improvements and
their locations, dimensions, materials and other information required by the City engineer, and until all required
public improvements have been completed. The “as-builts” shall also include a complete set of sealed record
drawings of the paving, drainage, water, sanitary sewer and other public improvements, showing that the layout
of the lines and grades of all public improvements are in accordance with engineering plans for the plat, and
showing all changes made in the plans during construction, and containing on each sheet an “as-built” stamp
bearing the signature and seal of the licensed professional engineer and the date. One reproducible drawing of
the utility plan sheets containing the as-built information shall also be submitted. The engineer or surveyor shall
also furnish the City with a copy of the approved final plat and the engineering plans. When such requirements
have been met, the City administrator shall thereafter make a recommendation to the City Council for
consideration of satisfactory completion of the public improvements. Once the board votes its approval of
satisfactory completion, the City administrator shall issue the Letter of Satisfactory Completion.
Acceptance of the development shall mean that the applicant has transferred all rights to all the public
improvements to the City for use and maintenance. The City Council may, at its option, accept dedication of a
portion of the required public improvements if the remaining public improvements are not immediately required
for health and safety reasons, and if the applicant has posted a performance bond, letter of credit or cash bond in
the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of those remaining improvements for a length
of time to be determined by the City Council. If the remaining public improvements are greater than ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and are not completed within the determined length of time, the City will impose
a ten percent (10%) penalty of the performance bond, letter of credit, or cash bond. The obligation to complete
the improvements remains with the applicant, and all future building permits or certificates of occupancy will be
withheld until the improvements are complete. If the remaining public improvements are less than ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00), the applicant shall pay the actual dollar amount. The length of time may be extended due to
inclement weather or unforeseen delays by mutual agreement between the developer and the City.
Upon acceptance of the required public improvements, the City administrator shall submit a certificate to the
applicant stating that all required public improvements have been satisfactorily completed.
Section 6.10 Deferral of Required Improvements
(a) The City Council may, upon petition of the applicant and favorable recommendation of the City engineer,
defer at the time of plat approval, subject to appropriate conditions, the provision of any or all public
improvements as, in its judgment, are not required in the immediate interests of the public health, safety and
general welfare.
(b) Whenever a petition to defer the construction of any public improvements required under this Ordinance is
granted by the City Council, the applicant shall deposit in escrow his or her share of the costs, in accordance
with City participation and oversizing policies, of the future public improvements with the City prior to approval
of the plat, or the applicant may execute a separate improvement agreement secured by a cash escrow or, where
authorized, a letter of credit guaranteeing completion of the deferred public improvements upon demand of the
City.
Section 6.11 Issuance of Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy
(a) No building permit shall be issued for a lot, building site, building or use unless the lot or building site has
been officially recorded by a final plat approved by the City Council, and unless all public improvements, as
required by this Ordinance for final plat approval, have been completed, except as may be permitted below:
(1) A building “foundation only” permit may be issued for a nonresidential or multifamily
development provided that a preliminary plat has been approved by the City Council, and provided
that the engineering plans have been released by the City engineer. However, the building permit
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/194
shall not be issued and building construction shall not be allowed to surpass the construction of fire
protection improvements.
(2) The City Council may release some residential building permits for not more than ten percent
(10%) of the lots within a new residential subdivision, provided that a preliminary plat has been
approved by the City Council and the engineering plans have been approved by the City engineer,
and provided that all public improvements have been completed for that portion of the development
including, but not limited to, those required for fire and emergency protection, such as streets
providing at least two points of emergency access, alleys, water lines serving fire hydrants, and other
similar, required public safety improvements. Except for property located and used for commercial
purposes and for which a development plat has been approved, no lot may be sold nor title conveyed
until the final plat has been approved by the City Council and recorded with the Lynn County Clerk.
(3) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a building or the use of property unless all
subdivision improvements have been completed and a final plat has been approved by the City
Council and recorded with the Lynn County Clerk. Notwithstanding the above, the City administrator
may authorize the conditional occupancy of a structure provided that an agreement providing cash
escrow, a letter of credit, or other sufficient surety is approved by the City administrator for the
completion of all remaining public improvements, and provided that the structure is safely habitable
in accordance with the City’s Building Codes.
ARTICLE VII. FILING FEES & PLAT-SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Section 7.1 Schedule of Fees and Re-Submission Requirements
(a) Fees and charges, as well as other submission requirements, for the submission of applications for the
approval of any type of plat and for engineering review and inspection shall be as shown in the Fee Schedule
[sic] of the City’s Code of ordinances, and may be amended from time to time. It is the applicant’s responsibility
to obtain and comply with the City’s current fee schedule and submission requirements.
(b) Such fees and charges shall be imposed and collected on all applications for approval of any application,
regardless of the action taken by the Commission and City Council thereon. Such fees shall be collected for the
purpose of defraying the costs of administrative, clerical, engineering, planning and inspection services
necessary to properly review and investigate plats and subdivision construction.
(c) Should an approval or application lapse or expire, or should it be denied by the Commission or the City
Council, then that application ceases “pending” status and the project, and its corresponding series of
development approvals and permits, shall be deemed to be ended, or “completed.” Any re-application for any
type of development approval for that property shall be considered commencement of a new project, and shall
be accompanied by new application materials, including new submission fees, and shall conform to all
applicable City ordinances in effect at the time of submission of the new application.
(d) All required fees, unless specifically stated otherwise herein, shall be paid as required in other sections of
this Ordinance. Inspection fees may be paid at the time the actual inspection is made of the project.
ARTICLE VIII. PENALTIES & ENFORCEMENT
Section 8.1 Stop Orders
Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance, the building official may order
the work stopped by notice in writing (referred to as a “Stop-work Order”) served on any persons engaged in the
doing or causing such work to be done. The Stop-work Order shall be posted on the property adjacent to the
activity in question, and any such person shall forthwith stop work until authorized by the building official to
proceed with the work.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/194
Section 8.2 Permit Revocation
A violation of this Ordinance shall authorize the City administrator to cancel any permit depending in whole or
in part on any approval under this Ordinance. If a permit is canceled, no further work shall be done on the
project made the subject of the permit until the violation has been cured and new submittals under this
Ordinance, as required by the City administrator, have been made and approved in accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance and a new permit has been issued.
Section 8.3 Denial of Approvals and Permits
A violation of this Ordinance shall authorize the City administrator to deny any approvals or permits sought by
the person violating this Ordinance.
Section 8.4 Penalties and Injunctive Relief
(a) Any person who violates any of these regulations for lands within the corporate boundaries of the City
shall be subject to a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per day, with each day constituting a
separate violation, pursuant to the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 54, as amended.
(b) Appropriate civil actions and proceedings may be maintained in law or in equity to prevent unlawful
construction, to recover damages, to impose additional penalties, to restrain, correct or abate a violation of these
regulations, whether such violation occurs with respect to lands within the corporate boundaries of the City or
within the City’s extraterritorial jurisdiction. These remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described
above.
Any person violating this Ordinance is subject to suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal
violations.
(Ordinance adopted 6/14/10)
CHAPTER 11
TAXATION
[RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE]
CHAPTER 12
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE 12.100 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Sec. 12.101 Numbering System-Base Lines
Main Street (U.S. 87) and Avenue J, south of Division Street, running through the city north and south and
Lockwood Street (U.S. 380) running through the city east and west, are hereby established as the base lines from
which all buildings are to be numbered in the city. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 17, Sec. 17-1)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/194
Sec. 12.102 Same-Directional Prefixes
The letters N, E, S and W, indicating the four (4) cardinal points of the compass, shall be added respectively as a
prefix to the names of all streets, avenues and thoroughfares in the city, as their direction from the base line may
indicate. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 17, Sec. 17-2)
Sec. 12.103 Same-Assignment of Numbers
It shall be the responsibility of the city to assign the proper numbers for all buildings. The owner shall state the
name of the street, lot number, block number, side thereof upon which is situated and the direction and exact
distance from the nearest cross street. A complete record of the numbering of all buildings shall be kept by the
city; such record shall be supplemented and amended from time to time when necessary. Building numbers shall
be public property and subject to change by the city, with or without notice. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter
17, Sec. 17-3)
Sec. 12.104 Same-Owners to Place Numbers
Owners of buildings in the city are required to place or have placed thereon the proper street number as
designated by the city in some conspicuous place so that the same can be plainly seen and read from the street.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 17, Sec. 17-4)
Sec. 12.105 Same-Size of Numbers
The numbers shall be at least three (3) inches high and composed of some bright metal, plastic or similar durable
material, or may be painted on the building and same shall as aforesaid, be placed in a conspicuous place on the
building. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 17, Sec. 17-5)
Sec. 12.106 Removal of Gravel, Etc.
It shall be unlawful for any person, without first having obtained the permission of the city council, to dig,
remove or carry away, or cause the same to be done from any street, alley or other public place any sod, stone,
earth, sand or gravel. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 17, Sec. 17-6)
Sec. 12.107 Depositing Dirt, Gravel, Etc.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or allow to spill any dirt, loam, sand, gravel or any other such
matter or substance in, on or about any street, alley or other public way in the city. (1979 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 17, Sec. 17-7)
Sec. 12.108 Injuring or Destroying
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to injure or destroy, or assist in injuring or destroying, any bridge
appurtenance, signboard, culvert, causeway, gutter or other public improvement in the city. (1979 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 17, Sec. 17-8)
Sec. 12.109 Posts in Sidewalks-Permit Required; Fee
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/194
(a) No person shall erect or maintain any post in the sidewalk without having first obtained a permit from the
building official.
(b) The permit fee shall be as prescribed by the building code.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 17, Sec. 17-9)
Sec. 12.110 Same-Specifications
No permit shall be issued except in accordance with the following standards:
(1) Posts shall be constructed at least four (4) feet in a perpendicular measurement from the
building. All posts shall be in a straight line parallel to the street and/or sidewalk.
(2) All provisions of the building code including the requirements that any projections such as
awnings, balconies and such be supported entirely by the building and have a noncombustible frame
work are applicable to this section.
(3) The construction must be securely erected and maintained so that there will be no danger of the
same being dislodged by ordinary winds or falling from other cause. No construction shall be
allowed that would constitute a traffic hazard.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 17, Sec. 17-10)
Sec. 12.111 Same-Indemnification for Damage
The city and its officers and employees shall not be liable in any manner to the permittee for or on account of
damage caused by the construction, erection and maintenance of any post or sign in the sidewalks. The permittee
hereby releases the city and agrees to hold it free and harmless and to indemnify it from all damages, claims or
demands that may result from the construction, erection or maintenance of any post or sign on the sidewalks. All
parties receiving a permit shall provide as a condition to receiving same a bond or indemnity insurance policy or
add the city to its liability insurance as an additional insured in the amount of at least one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) to indemnify the city for any loss or damage or liability that may result from the
construction or maintenance of such posts. This bond or indemnity insurance shall be renewed annually and kept
in full force and effect. Failing to continue to comply with this section and Section 12.110 shall cause the permit
and license to be revoked and the owner shall be required to remove said posts. If the owner fails to remove said
posts within ten (10) days after receipt of notice from the city to remove, the city shall have the right to remove
same. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 17, Sec. 17-11)
Sec. 12.112 Scaffolding on or Over Sidewalk
All scaffolding erected over or on a sidewalk shall be constructed in a good, workmanlike, substantial manner so
as to prevent injury to persons passing thereunder or working thereon. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 17,
Sec. 17-12)
Sec. 12.113 Obstructing Streets With Articles
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to unnecessarily obstruct any street or alley with wagon, cart, delivery
truck or vehicle of any kind, or with boxes, lumber, timber, firewood, posts, awnings, signs, merchandise or
other substances in any manner whatsoever so as to prevent free passage thereon.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/194
(b) Subsection (a) shall not be construed to prohibit any person who may be engaged in building, removing or
improving any building or other improvement from occupying with lumber, stone, brick or other material, that
portion of a public street or alley which is adjacent to such improvement or building; provided however, such
material shall not occupy a space larger than one-third (1/3) of the street or alley adjacent to such improvement
or building, nor shall such material be placed on such space more than ten (10) days before construction of such
building or improvement begins; nor shall the owner of such building or improvement allow any surplus lumber,
stone, brick or other rubbish to remain in said street or alley more than five (5) days after the completion of such
building or improvement.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 17, Sec. 17-13)
Sec. 12.114 Obstructing Sidewalks With Articles
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit any article whatsoever upon any sidewalk in
such a manner as to obstruct free passage upon same; provided however, nothing in this section shall be
construed to prevent merchants and dealers from placing packages of goods, wares or merchandise which they
may be receiving or shipping on any sidewalk, if the same do not occupy more than one-half (½) the width
thereof, and do not remain thereon more than six (6) hours; nor shall anything in this section prevent merchants,
dealers or auctioneers from occupying a space on the sidewalk adjoining their place of business, two (2) feet or
less in width (measured from the inside of the sidewalk), and the length of the property line, with signs, samples
or other articles; nor shall anything in this section prevent any building craftsmen or builder from occupying
with materials or temporary construction, a space not larger than one-half (½) the width of the sidewalk
adjoining any improvement or building they may be erecting or in any way working upon; nor shall such
persons be prevented from crossing or passing over any sidewalk with materials used in the construction of said
improvement or building.
(b) If any obstructions mentioned in this section are not removed within ten (10) days after notice to do so is
given by the chief of police, the offender will be subject to penalization hereunder, and upon conviction will be
fined in accordance with the penalty herein provided, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during or on which such obstruction remains after the expiration of such notice, and such obstruction
shall be removed by the city at the expense of the person so convicted.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 17, Sec. 17-14)
Sec. 12.115 Access Driveways to State Highways; Regulations Adopted
(a) The state “Regulations For Access Driveways To State Highways” are hereby adopted for the public
safety and protection of the city and of the citizens thereof and all of the provisions herein shall be construed for
the accomplishment of that purpose.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or disregard any of the provisions of said regulations.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 17, Sec. 17-15)
Sec. 12.116 Visibility; Corner Lots
In order to assure sign visibility at all street intersections, no fence, wall barrier or any other solid object will be
allowed to extend into the visibility triangle. This triangle has two sides starting at the center point of the
intersection for the two struts measuring ten feet in length down each respective street along the nearest edge of
the driving surface. The line connecting the end points of these two lines forms the third side of the triangle. In
the case of curbed intersections, measurement will begin at the bottom of the curb. Plants, flowers and trees will
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/194
be allowed in the visibility triangle as long as they allow an unobstructed view from three to eight feet in height
from the nearest level of the driving surface. (See diagram below.)
ARTICLE 12.200 TRAFFIC
Sec. 12.201 Short Title; Adoption of Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways
(a) This article may be known and cited as the Traffic Code.
(b) All provisions of the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, as now in effect in the state and
generally referred to as V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, including all amendments to such statute as of this date, is
hereby adopted and is supplemented by the regulations set forth in this article.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 18, Sec. 18-1; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference—Since adoption of this provision, the regulations contained in the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways
(V.T.C.S., Article 6701d) have been recodified and are now located in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code.
Sec. 12.202 Enforcing Officers-Designated; Authority
It shall be the duty of the police department of this city to enforce the provisions of this article. Officers of the
police department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic either in person or by means of visible or audible
signs in conformance with the provisions of this article; provided, in event of a fire or other emergency or to
expedite traffic, as conditions may require, or to safe-guard pedestrians, officers of the police department or the
fire department may direct traffic, notwithstanding the provisions of this article. (1979 Code of Ordinances,
Chapter 18, Sec. 18-2)
Sec. 12.203 Same-Making and Enforcing Regulations
The police department and police officers are hereby empowered to make and enforce regulations necessary to
make effective the provisions of this article and to make and enforce temporary regulations to cover emergencies
or special conditions. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 18, Sec. 18-3)
Sec. 12.204 Bicycles, Pushcarts, Etc., on Sidewalks
Except in residential areas, it shall be unlawful for any person to ride or run any bicycle, tricycle, or like vehicle
on any sidewalk within the city, or to use said sidewalks on which to push or to pull handcarts or pushcarts or
other like vehicle. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 18, Sec. 18-4)
Sec. 12.205 Railroads Blocking Thoroughfares; Maximum Time
It shall be unlawful for any person having in his charge any railroad car or engine in this city, to stop said car or
engine on any railroad on or across a street crossing or sidewalk and allow the same to remain thereon for a
longer time than five (5) minutes at any one time. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 18, Sec. 18-5)
Sec. 12.206 Parking Oversized Vehicles
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of any truck, bus or trailer having a capacity
in excess of three-fourths (3/4) ton or which is more than eighteen (18) feet in length, seven (7) feet in width or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/194
seven (7) feet in height, to park, the same upon any street in the residential area of the city; provided however,
the provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the parking of any such truck, bus or trailer, on any
residential street for the purpose of the actual loading and unloading of goods, wares and merchandise when
such vehicle is accompanied by a driver; and provided further, “loading” and “unloading” as used in this section
shall be limited to the actual time necessarily consumed in such operation.
(b) Exceptions. A city resident will be allowed to park a truck, recreational vehicle, trailer, bus, farm
equipment, or other oversized vehicle with a size in excess of three-fourths (3/4) ton, eighteen (18) feet in
length, seven (7) feet in width, and seven (7) feet in height on a residential street, with the following restrictions:
(1) An annual parking permit has been purchased from the city at a cost of two hundred dollars
($200.00), said permit to be valid from January 1st through December 31st, prorated accordingly, but
in no case shall a permit cost less than one hundred dollars ($100.00);
(2) The oversized vehicle may not be parked for more than twelve (12) hours in a seventy-two (72)
hour period;
(3) The oversized vehicle must be parked on a street directly adjacent to the property of the owner
of the vehicle;
(4) Oversized vehicles may only be parked on streets with a minimum width of at least sixty-four
(64) feet;
(5) The oversized vehicle must be parked in such a manner as to not interfere with the safe flow of
traffic; and
(6) The oversized vehicle must display upon it or have placed upon both ends of the vehicle, while
parked, a clearly visible warning device, such as a parking cone, reflector, or other similar device.
(c) Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction in municipal court shall be fined in accordance with the general
penalty provision in Section 1.109 of this code and each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance adopted 5/17/10)
Sec. 12.207 “Burning Off”
It shall be unlawful for the driver or operator of a motor vehicle, while driving and operating a motor vehicle
upon a public street or parking lot, parking area or driveway of a business place within the city, to willfully
accelerate so rapidly as to cause the tires on said motor vehicle to spin or skid or slide upon the roadway in a
manner commonly known as “burning off” whether the motor vehicle is being started from a parked, stopped or
standing position or in motion and whether or not said motor vehicle is traveling straight or turning. (1979 Code
of Ordinances, Chapter 18, Sec. 18-7)
Sec. 12.208 Cotton Module Truck Traffic
(a) Authority to establish. The city council may prohibit cotton module truck and cotton burr truck traffic on
certain streets within the city as may be necessary for the health and safety of its citizens, proper flow of traffic
through the city, and for the protection of the city streets and neighborhoods.
(b) Definitions. For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them by this section:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/194
Cotton module truck. A single motor vehicle used exclusively to transport cotton and or seed cotton.
Cotton burr truck. A single motor vehicle used exclusively to transport cotton burrs,
Municipal street. Every street or roadway within the city that is not a truck route as defined herein.
Truck route. Federal highways/interstates, state highways, or state farm-to-market roads which are located in
whole or in part within the corporate limits of the city.
(c) Restrictions. No person shall operate a cotton module truck or a cotton burr truck upon any municipal
street within the corporate limits of the city. Cotton module or cotton burr trucks must use a truck route when
traveling within the corporate limits of the city, and are prohibited from using municipal streets as shortcuts or
links between truck routes.
(d) Penalty provision. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction in municipal court shall be fined in accordance with the
general penalty provisions in Section 1.109 of this code.
(Ordinance 0216A adopted 2/8/16)
ARTICLE 12.300 SPEED LIMITS*
Sec. 12.301 Generally
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motor vehicle upon any street, roadway or
highway in the city at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing, having
regard to the actual and potential hazards when approaching and crossing an intersection or a railway grade
crossing, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any
narrow or winding roadway or when special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason
of weather or highway conditions; and in every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid
colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the highway in compliance with legal
requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
(b) Where no special hazard exists that requires lower speed for compliance with subsection (a) of this
section, the speed of any vehicle not in excess of the limits specified in this article or otherwise established
according to law shall be lawful, but any speed in excess of the limits so specified shall be prima facie evidence
that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 18, Sec. 18-8)
Sec. 12.302 Schedule
Speed limit designations are not listed herein, but are specifically saved from repeal. A listing of all such
designations is maintained on file in the office of the city secretary. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 12.400 STOP INTERSECTIONS
The various street intersections in the city designated as stop intersections are recorded in the office of the city
secretary. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 18, Sec. 18-10)
ARTICLE 12.500 YIELD INTERSECTIONS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/194
The various intersections designated as yield intersections are recorded in the office of the city secretary. (1979
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 18, Sec. 18-11)
ARTICLE 12.600 PARKING AND STANDING*
Sec. 12.601 Truck-Tractors, Trailers and Commercial Vehicles
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, park or stand the following vehicles upon any street or alley
on public or private property, or within any single-family or multifamily dwelling front yard in the city:
(1) Road-tractor, tractor-trailer, truck-tractor;
(2) Motor vehicle, truck, bus, van, trailer, semi-trailer or similar vehicle with a gross vehicle
weight in excess of seventeen thousand five hundred (17,500) pounds.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, park or stand a road-tractor, tractor-trailer or truck-tractor
upon the street, highway or roadway in a commercial retail or industrial zoned district.
(c) This section shall not prevent the parking or standing of the above-described vehicles in such areas for the
purpose of expeditiously loading or unloading passengers, freight, or merchandise.
(d) Exceptions:
(1) A city resident will be allowed to park a truck, recreational vehicle, trailer, bus, farm
equipment, or other oversized vehicle with a size in excess of three-fourths (3/4) ton, eighteen (18)
feet in length, seven (7) feet in width, and seven (7) feet in height on a residential street, with the
following restrictions:
(A) An annual parking permit has been purchased from the city at a cost of two hundred
dollars ($200.00), said permit to be valid from January 1st through December 31st, prorated
accordingly, but in no case shall a permit cost less than one hundred dollars ($100.00);
(B) The oversized vehicle may not be parked for more than twelve (12) hours in a seventytwo
(72) hour period;
(C) The oversized vehicle must be parked on a street directly adjacent to the property of the
owner of the vehicle;
(D) Oversized vehicles may only be parked on streets with a minimum width of at least sixtyfour
(64) feet;
(E) The oversized vehicle must be parked in such a manner as to not interfere with the safe
flow of traffic; and
(F) The oversized vehicle must display upon it or have placed upon both ends of the vehicle,
while parked, a clearly visible warning device, such as a parking cone, reflector, or other similar
device.
Sec. 12.602 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction in municipal court shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty
provision in Section 1.109 of this code and each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/194
(Ordinance 0510C adopted 5/17/10)
ARTICLE 12.700 THROUGH TRUCK TRAFFIC
Sec. 12.701 Authority to establish
(a) The city council may prohibit through truck traffic on certain streets within the city as may be necessary
for the proper flow of traffic through the city and for the protection of the city streets.
(1) Prohibited streets. Truck traffic is prohibited on the following streets:
(A) The 1100 Block between North 5th Street, North 6th Street, and 7th Street of the original
town.
(B) The 1200 Block between North 5th Street, North 6th Street, and 7th Street of the original
town.
(C) The 1300 Block between North 5th Street, North 6th Street, and 7th Street of the original
town.
(b) No person shall intentionally or knowingly operate any vehicle with a rated capacity in excess of ten
thousand pounds GVWR (10,000) according to the manufacturer’s classification upon any of the streets listed
above.
(c) This section shall not apply to:
(1) Recreational vehicles and personal trailers. As used herein, recreational vehicles means a
vehicular portable structure designated for a temporary or short-term occupancy for travel,
recreational or vacation uses, including vacation travel trailers, converted buses, tent trailers of
similar devices used for temporary portable housing. As used herein, personal trailer means a
wheeled device made to be hauled by a personal motor vehicle upon a road or highway, and includes
a horse trailer, car trailer, motorcycle trailer, boat trailer, lawn equipment trailer, gooseneck trailer,
and any other trailer designed and intended to be used to carry animals, boats, large items, or motordriven
means of transportation;
(2) Street construction, maintenance and repair vehicles engaged in the construction, maintenance,
or repair of city streets;
(3) Vehicles used by public services companies engaged in providing or maintaining their services
within the city;
(4) Authorized emergency vehicles responding to a catastrophe or emergency calls or otherwise
participating in the city authorized training, displays, parades or the like;
(5) Vehicles being operated in accordance with instructions from a police officer of the city; or
(6) Pickup trucks.
Sec. 12.702 Penalty
Any operator who operates a truck in contravention of this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $200.00
for the first offense and $500.00 for each additional offense.
(Ordinance 110A adopted 11/8/10)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/194
CHAPTER 13
UTILITIES
ARTICLE 13.100 UTILITIES AND SERVICES IN GENERAL
Sec. 13.101 Water Tap Fees
Fees for tapping the city water system shall be as set by the city council from time to time.
Sec. 13.102 Water Service Rates
Water service rates monthly shall be as set by the city council from time to time.
Sec. 13.103 Sewer Tap Fees
All tapping of sewer lines within the city shall be done by the water and sewer department of the city
exclusively. The charge for tapping said lines shall be as set by the city council from time to time.
Sec. 13.104 Sewer Service Rates; Generally
Monthly service charges for the use of the sewer system is hereby authorized and levied, to be collected each
month as a part of the patron’s water bill, under the following classifications which are declared all inclusive
(except for additional industrial waste charges) for all types of connections, and in the amount as set by the city
council from time to time.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 13.105 Connection to City Water Supply Required
(a) Definitions. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and terms shall have the
meaning set forth below:
Person. Any natural person, or partnership, or association, private or public corporation or entity.
Private water supply system. A system owned and operated by a person for collection and delivery of piped
water for human and domestic consumption into commercial, industrial, or residential buildings or structures.
Public water and supply system. The city water supply system.
(b) Municipal water supply.
(1) No person shall build, establish, expand or maintain a private water supply system within the
city unless there shall be no municipal water supply system within one hundred (100) feet from the
point on property of such person which is nearest the public water supply system, and the city is
unable or unwilling to extend service to the requesting property.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/194
(2) Any buildings used for human habitation or for human occupancy, including all business
buildings, unless specifically exempted by the council on the grounds that no human beings occupy
or use such buildings and no human needs are generated therein, and are located within the city
limits, shall be required to utilize the municipal water service and to connect thereto.
(3) The owner of such property shall pay all assessments for water in accordance with the city
assessment policies as may be enacted by the city.
(4) Any privately owned water system within the city limits shall be required to connect to the
municipal water system within one (1) year of the date of this ordinance, or upon failure of the
private water system for any reason, whichever event occur first.
(5) Agricultural buildings hereafter constructed within the city on property adjacent to water main
or in a block through which the water system extends, must be provided with a connection to the
municipal water system for all human needs.
(Ordinance 11130A adopted 12/10/13)
ARTICLE 13.200 INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISCHARGE STANDARDS
Sec. 13.201 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them.
B.O.D. (Biochemical Oxygen Demand). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade expressed in parts
per million by weight.
Garbage. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and
sale of produce.
Industrial Sewage Wastes. All solid or liquid wastes from any canning process or any other industrial process or
undertaking, as distinct from normal sewage wastes, resulting from any commercial, manufacturing or industrial
operation or process, which water borne or liquid wastes enter the city sewage system, or any portion thereof.
Natural Outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater.
pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
Plumbing Fixture. A water closet, lavatory, bathtub, household laundry, separate shower, kitchen sink or any
other similar receptacle that discharges waste into the sewage system.
Properly Shredded Garbage. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been
shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (½) inch in any dimension.
Public Sewer. A sewer controlled by public authority in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights.
Residence. A home or dwelling in which no business is conducted that requires plumbing fixtures other than
water closets, bathtubs, showers, kitchen sinks, lavatories, household laundry sinks and other plumbing fixtures
designed for residential use and to carry sanitary sewage only as herein defined. For the purpose of this
definition, a rooming house, duplex apartment, apartment house, tourist and trailer camp of not more than ten
(10) rooms served by one water meter shall be considered a residence.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/194
Sanitary Sewer. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not
intentionally admitted.
Sewage. The water or water borne waste from water closets, urinals, lavatories, sinks, bathtubs, showers,
household laundries, basement floor drains, garage floor drains, storerooms, soda fountains, cuspidors,
refrigerator drips, drinking fountains, stable floor drains and all other similar fixtures and receptacles that
discharge waste into the sewer system or a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may
be present.
Sewage Treatment Plant. Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.
Sewage Works or Sewerage System. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.
Sewer. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
Storm Sewer or Storm Drain. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage
and polluted industrial wastes.
Suspended solids. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids
and which are removable by laboratory filtering.
Watercourse. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, continuously or intermittently.
Water Superintendent or Superintendent. The water superintendent of the city or his deputy, agent or
representative.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-20)
Sec. 13.202 Waters Prohibited From Discharge to Sanitary Sewer-Designated
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-21)
Sec. 13.203 Same-Disposition
Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated
as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling
water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer,
combined sewer or natural outlet. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-22)
Sec. 13.204 Substances Prohibited From Discharge
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters, wastes or substances
to any public sewers:
(1) Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquids, solid or gas.
(2) Waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/194
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two
(2) mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
(3) Waters or wastes having a pH lower than five point five (5.5), or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or a hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage
works.
(4) Solid or viscous substances in such quantities or of such size as to be capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage
works, such as but not limited to ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings,
entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(5) The following toxic substances: Antimony, barium, boron, cadmium, (hexa) chromium, (tri)
chromium, copper, lead, manganese, mercury, nickel, selenium, silver and zinc.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-23)
Sec. 13.205 Substances Which May be Accepted or Rejected; Enumeration
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or
waste to a public sewer if it appears likely in the opinion of the superintendent that such wastes can harm either
the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can
otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of
the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the
sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees
Fahrenheit, (65° C).
(2) Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of
one hundred (100) mg/1 or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit, (0° and 65° C).
(3) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage
grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (¾) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be
subject to the review and approval of the superintendent.
(4) Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating
solutions whether neutralized or not.
(5) Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or
toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the superintendent for such materials.
(6) Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste producing or odor producing
substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the superintendent
as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal
or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/194
(7) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
(8) Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of nine point five (9.5).
(9) Materials which exert or cause:
(A) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers
earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to sodium
chloride and sodium sulfate).
(B) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions).
(C) Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as
to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works.
(D) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting “slugs” as defined and
understood in the trade.
(10) Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by
the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the
sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-24)
Sec. 13.206 Same-Rejecting or Requiring Pretreatment or Regulation; Requiring Payment
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged, to the public sewers, which waters
contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 13.205, and which in the judgment of
the superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by
existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions of Section 13.213.
If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the
plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-25)
Sec. 13.207 Interceptors
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary
for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand
or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/194
dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent and shall be
located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19,
Sec. 19-26)
Sec. 13.208 Maintaining Treatment and Flow Facilities
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. (1979 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-27)
Sec. 13.209 Measurements, Tests, Analyses
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in
this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater,” published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the
control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special
manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in
the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by
customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property. [The particular analyses involved will determine whether a
twenty-four (24) hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty-four
(24) hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH’s are determined from periodic grab samples.] (1979 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-28)
Sec. 13.210 Manholes
When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial
wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in
the building sewer to facilitate observation, samples and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when
required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him
so as to be safe and accessible at all times. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-29)
Sec. 13.211 Inspections
The plumbing inspector and superintendent of the water and sewer department are authorized and directed to
make such inspections of all premises of all patrons and prospective patrons of the sewerage system as may be
necessary to determine the number of sewer connections and the condition of such sewer connections. (1979
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-30)
Sec. 13.212 Connecting Old Drains
Before any old private drains shall be connected with the sewer system, the owner of the private drain shall
prove to the satisfaction of the water superintendent that it is clean and conforms in every respect with these
rules and regulations and with the plumbing regulations of the city. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec.
19-31)
Sec. 13.213 Industrial Charge Formula
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/194
The industrial charge for sewer service is to be computed by the following formula:
I.C. = WR (BOD + SS) K
200 200
where: I.C. = monthly industrial charge in dollars.
WR = amount of water billed in thousands of gallons per month.
BOD = the five day @ 20 degrees C BOD of the industrial wastes in mg/l.
SS = suspended solids of the industrial wastes in mg/l.
K = constant value of 0.05.
200 = approximate five day @ 20 degrees C BOD of “normal” domestic sewage in mg/l.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-32)
Sec. 13.214 Special Agreements or Arrangements
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement
between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. (1979 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-33)
Sec. 13.215 Damaging System or Appurtenances-Generally
No person, except city personnel with legal authority, shall injure, break or remove any section of any manhole,
lamp hole, flush tank, catch basin or any part of the sewer system. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec.
19-34)
Sec. 13.216 Same-Trenching Work Near Public Sewers
Any person other than authorized city personnel desiring to lay pipes for water, gas, steam or any purpose in any
street or alley upon which public sewers are laid, shall give at least twenty-four (24) hours notice to the water
superintendent, plumbing inspector or other designated city official before opening the street or alley and the
manner of excavating for the laying and back-filling over such pipe shall be subject to the approval of the water
superintendent, plumbing inspector or other designated city official. All such work shall be planned and
executed so that no injury shall occur to any public sewer or to any house sewer or drain connected therewith.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-35)
Sec. 13.217 Violation-Notice; Correction
Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served by the city with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.
The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, permanently cease all violations. If the offender
continues violation after the expiration of the time stated, the water superintendent may prohibit the further use
of the sewerage system by the offender and may remove or close the offender’s sewerage and water connections.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-36)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/194
Sec. 13.218 Same-Preventing Illegal Discharges
The city, acting through authorized officers, shall have the power to stop and prevent from discharging into the
sewer system any private sewer or drain through which substances are discharged which are liable to injure the
sewers or obstruct the flow of the sewage or interfere with the operation of the disposal plant. (1979 Code of
Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-37)
Sec. 13.219 Same-Liability for Damage
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or
damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-38)
Sec. 13.220 Same-Punishment
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be punished by a fine as provided in Section 1.109 of this code; each day the violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-39)
ARTICLE 13.300 SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL
Sec. 13.301 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Garbage. All animal and vegetable matter, such as waste material and refuse from kitchens, residences, grocery
stores, drugstores, butcher shops, restaurants, cafes, hotels, rooming and boarding houses, as well as other
deleterious substances.
Refuse. All substances included in the terms “garbage,” “trash” and “rubbish.”
Rubbish. Waste and refuse material such as tin cans, bottles, glass, rags, rubber, pieces of wood, scraps of iron,
tin, wire or other metals, and any brick, concrete, mortar or other materials resulting from tearing down, building
or remodeling of any property.
Trash. Waste and refuse material such as feathers, coffee grounds, paper of all kinds, boxes, barrels, crates,
grass, weeds, shrubs, yard cleanings, grass clippings, leaves, tree trimmings and sweepings from sidewalks.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-50)
Sec. 13.302 Cans and Receptacles-Required
Every owner, occupant, tenant or lessee using or occupying any building, house or structure within the city for
residences, churches, schools, colleges, lodges, commercial business or other purposes shall provide and
maintain garbage cans or receptacles of sufficient number and size, as hereinafter specified, to hold the garbage,
trash and rubbish that will normally accumulate on the premises. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec.
19-51)
Sec. 13.303 Same-Type of Construction and Size
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/194
(a) Every owner, occupant, tenant or lessee shall provide a container or containers for garbage and rubbish of
not less than five (5) nor more than thirty-two (32) gallon capacity with a tight-fitting lid.
(b) The lids or covers of all containers shall at all times be kept secure and fastened so that cats, dogs,
rodents, flies and other insects may not have access to the contents thereof, and said lids shall be removed only
while the containers and receptacles are being filled or emptied, as the case may be.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-52)
Sec. 13.304 Same-Condemnation When Defective
Garbage containers that have deteriorated to the extent of having jagged or sharp edges capable of causing injury
to the garbage collectors or others whose duty it is to handle the containers or to such an extent that the lids will
not fit tightly or securely, will be condemned by the city acting through the superintendent of the garbage
department or by the health department. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-53)
Sec. 13.305 Same-Persons Authorized to Handle or to Transport Refuse
It shall be unlawful for anyone except the employees of the city or their duly authorized contractors to empty
garbage cans or trash and rubbish receptacles or convey or transport garbage or trash and rubbish on the streets,
alleys and public thoroughfares. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-54)
Sec. 13.306 Same-Location; Bundling or Baling of Boxes
(a) In residential areas, receptacles as required shall be placed inside of the property line at the edge of the
alley where there is no alley fence; and where there is an alley fence, the receptacles must be placed against the
outside of the fence. Where there is no alley, the receptacles must be placed in front of said property between the
sidewalk and curb at a place most accessible to the collectors. Under no conditions will city vehicles or
employees be allowed to enter private property for the purpose of picking up garbage.
(b) Business establishments are required to use the same type of container as for residences, and such
containers shall be placed in the alleys where there is an alley; and where there is no alley, containers must be
placed on or near the curbline of such place of business. All boxes and cartons must be broken down and tied
into bundles, not exceeding seventy-five (75) pounds in weight. Business establishments having such quantities
of waste paper to make the use of barrels impracticable are required to use paper balers.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-55)
Sec. 13.307 Same-Protection of Contents
The contents of all cans and receptacles shall be protected so that the wind cannot blow out and scatter same
over the streets, alleys and premises in the city. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-56)
Sec. 13.308 Same-Pilfering or Vandalizing
The meddling with garbage cans or trash, or rubbish receptacles in any way, pilfering, scattering contents and
junking in any alley or street within the city is prohibited. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-57)
Sec. 13.309 Wet Garbage
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/194
All garbage or trash and rubbish that is mixed with water or liquids shall be drained before being put in the can
or receptacle. All garbage which has been drained shall be well wrapped in paper or other material before being
deposited in the can. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-59)
Sec. 13.310 Weight and Length of Rubbish and Trash to be Hauled
The total weight of each garbage can and contents, or of each trash and rubbish receptacle and contents, shall not
exceed seventy-five (75) pounds, so that each can or receptacle may be removed conveniently. In the event trash
and rubbish is of such a nature that it cannot be put in the receptacle, it shall be carefully prepared in units or
pieces under seventy-five (75) pounds in weight and placed at such point as the representative of the city shall
find and designate to be the most accessible for collecting and removing. Tree limbs, shrubs and hedge cuttings
shall not exceed five (5) feet in length and shall be prepared in pieces or units under seventy-five (75) pounds in
weight and placed in an orderly manner at such point as the representative of the city shall find and designate to
be the most accessible for collecting and removing. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-59)
Sec. 13.311 Heavy Accumulation Such as Brick, Broken Concrete, Rock, Etc.
Heavy accumulations such as brick, broken concrete, rock, stones, ashes, lumber, clinkers, cinders, dirt and
plaster, sand, gravel, automobile frames, dead trees and other bulky, heavy material shall be disposed of at the
expense of owner or person controlling same. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-60)
Sec. 13.312 Frequency of and Charges for Residential Pickup
(a) The collection and removal of garbage, trash and rubbish from houses, buildings and premises used for
residential purposes shall be twice each week. Fair and reasonable charges for this residential service shall be for
a calendar month and will be changed from time to time as deemed necessary by the city council.
(b) The basis of the above service charge is the collection and removal of the normal accumulation of all
garbage of each family unit twice each week, and the collection and removal of the maximum of eight (8) cubic
feet or the volume of two (2) thirty-two (32) gallon cans or receptacles of trash and rubbish twice each week.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-61)
Sec. 13.313 Frequency of and Charges for Commercial Pickup
(a) The collection and removal of garbage, trash and rubbish from houses, buildings and premises used for
commercial and business purposes shall be daily, five (5) days each week, except for holidays. Charges for the
commercial and business service which are fair and reasonable shall be a minimum of seven dollars and fifty
cents ($7.50) per month.
(b) The basis of the service charge will be the number of collections each week and the cubic yardage of such
garbage, trash and rubbish.
(c) The representative of the city shall determine the cubic yardage of garbage, trash and rubbish and the
service charge, which shall be approved by the city administrator.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-62; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 13.314 Billing for Charges
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/194
To avoid duplication in billing and as a convenience to the public, fees for the service herein provided for shall
be billed on the monthly water bills and shall be promptly remitted to the city monthly as the same accrue. (1979
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-63)
Sec. 13.315 Sanitary Landfill-Use; Scattering From Vehicles
(a) The disposal of garbage, trash and rubbish, and that designated under Section 13.311, or any kind of
rubbish in any place within the city, except as authorized by the city administrator is prohibited.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to haul waste material in such a manner that the trash and refuse is
allowed to blow and scatter on the streets, highways and alleys of the city.
(1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-64; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 13.400 BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS
Sec. 13.401 Enforcement Authorities
The water superintendent or building official or their designee shall be responsible for the protection of the
public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants or
pollutants through the water service connection. If, in the judgment of said water superintendent or building
official or their designee an approved backflow-prevention assembly is required (at the customer's water service
connection; or, within the customer's private water system) for the safety of the water system, the water
superintendent or building official or his/her designated agent shall give notice in writing to said customer to
install such an approved backflow prevention assembly(s) at specific location(s) on his/her premises. The
customer shall immediately install such approved assembly(s) at his/her own expense; and, failure, refusal, or
inability on the part of the customer to install, have tested, and maintain said assembly(s) shall constitute
grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such requirements have been satisfactorily met.
Sec. 13.402 Definitions
Water Superintendent and Building Official. The water superintendent and building official in charge of the
Water Department or Code Enforcement Department of the City of Tahoka, Texas are granted the authority and
responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross-connection control program and for the enforcement
of the provisions of this article.
Approved. Accepted by the authority responsible as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this
article or as suitable for the proposed use.
Auxiliary Water Supply. Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the city's approved public
water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or
any natural source(s), such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, and so forth; used waters; or industrial fluids.
These waters may be contaminated or polluted, or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable
water source over which the city does not have sanitary control.
Backflow. The undesirable reversal of flow in a potable water distribution system for any reason, including a
cross-connection.
Backpressure. A pressure, equal to or higher than the supply pressure, caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler,
or any other means that may cause backflow.
Backsiphonage. Backflow caused by any reason, including a negative or reduced pressure in the supply piping.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/194
Backflow Preventer. An assembly or means designed to prevent backflow.
(1) Air Gap. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest
opening from any pipe or faucet conveying water or waste to a tank, plumbing fixture, receptor, or
other assembly and the flood level rim of the receptacle. These vertical, physical separations must be
at least twice the diameter of the water supply outlet, never less than 1 in. (25mm).
(2) Reduced-Pressure Backflow-Prevention Assembly. The approved reduced-pressure principal
backflow-prevention assembly consists of two independently acting approved check valves together
with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located
between the check valves and below the first check valve. These units are located between two
tightly closing resilient-seated shutoff valves as an assembly and equipped with properly located
resilient-seated test cocks.
(3) Double Check Valve Assembly. The approved double check valve assembly consists of two
internally loaded check valves, either spring loaded or internally weighted, installed as a unit between
two tightly closing resilient-seated shutoff valves and fittings with properly located resilient-seated
test cocks. This assembly shall only be used to protect against a non-health hazard (that is, a
pollutant).
Contamination. An impairment of a potable water supply by the introduction or admission of any foreign
substance that may possibly degrade the quality and may create a potential health hazard.
Cross Connection. A connection or potential connection between any part of a potable water system and any
other environment containing other substances in a manner that, under any circumstances could allow such
substances to enter the potable water system. Other substances may be gases, liquids, or solids, such as
chemicals, waste products, steam, water from other sources (potable or nonpotable), or any matter that may
adversely affect the water.
Cross Connections - Controlled. A connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable water system
with an approved backflow-prevention assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously
afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.
Cross-Connection Control by Containment. The installation of an approved backflow-prevention assembly at the
water service connection to any customer's premises, where it is physically and economically unfeasible to find
and permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential cross connections within the customer's water
system; or it shall mean the installation of an approved backflow-prevention assembly on the service line leading
to and supplying a portion of a customer's water system where there are actual or potential cross connections that
cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross connection.
Hazard, Degree of. The term is derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse
effect of the hazard upon the potable water system.
(1) Hazard - Health. A cross connection or potential cross connection involving any substance that
could, if introduced in the potable water supply, cause death, illness, spread disease, or create a risk
of causing such effects.
(2) Hazard - Plumbing. A plumbing-type cross connection in a consumer's potable water system
that has not been properly protected by an approved air gap or an approved backflow-prevention
assembly.
(3) Hazard - Nonhealth. A cross connection or potential cross connection involving any substance
that generally would not be a health hazard, but would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically
objectionable, if introduced into the potable water supply.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/194
(4) Hazard - System. An actual or potential threat of damage to the physical properties of the
public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system or of a pollution or
contamination that would have an effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.
Industrial Fluids System. Any system containing a fluid or solution that may be chemically, biologically, or
otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration, such as would constitute a health, system,
pollution, or plumbing hazard, if introduced into an approved water supply: This may include, but not be limited
to: polluted or contaminated waters; all types of process waters and used waters originating from the public
potable water system that may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and
alkalis; circulating cooling waters connected to an open cooling tower; and/or cooling towers that are chemically
or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters, such as wells, springs,
streams, rivers, bays harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems, and so forth; oils, gases, glycerine, paraffins,
caustic and acid solutions, and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes for firefighting
purposes.
Pollution. The presence of any foreign substance in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a
nonhealth hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
Water - Potable. Water that is safe for human consumption as described by the public health authority having
jurisdiction.
Water - Nonpotable. Water that is not safe or approved for human consumption.
Service Connection. The terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system, at its point
of delivery to the customer's water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the
service connection shall mean, the downstream end of the meter. There shall be no unprotected takeoffs from the
service line ahead of any meter or backflow-prevention assembly located at the point of delivery to the
customer's water system. Service connection shall also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and
all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system.
Water-Used. Any water supplied from a public potable water system to a consumer's water system after it has
passed through the point of delivery.
Sec. 13.403 Requirements
(a) Water System.
(1) The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the utility system and the
customer system.
(2) Utility system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system, and shall include
all those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the city, up to the point where
the customer's system begins.
(3) The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment,
storage, and delivery of water to the distribution system.
(4) The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water
from the source to the customer's system.
(5) The customer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the
utility distribution system that are utilized in conveying utility-delivered domestic water to points of
use.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/194
(b) Policy.
(1) No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the city unless
the water supply is protected as required by state laws and regulations and this article. Service of
water to any premises shall be discontinued by the city if a backflow-prevention assembly required
by this article is not installed, tested, and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow-prevention
assembly has been removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises.
Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.
(2) The customer's system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized
representatives of the water or code enforcement department to determine whether cross connections
or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations exist. When such a
condition becomes known, the water superintendent or building official shall deny or immediately
discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the
customer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with state and city statutes and ordinances
relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
(3) An approved backflow-prevention assembly shall be installed on each service line to a
customer's water system at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served;
but in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the conditions exist:
(A) In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply that is not or may not be safe
bacteriological or chemical quality and that is not acceptable as an additional source by the
water superintendent or building official, the public water system shall be protected against
backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow-prevention assembly in the
service line, appropriate to the degree of hazard.
(B) In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable
substances are handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public
water system, the public system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by
installing an approved backflow-prevention assembly in the service line, appropriate to the
degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from
the utility system that have been subject to deterioration in quality.
(C) In the case of premises having (1) internal cross connections that cannot be permanently
corrected and controlled, or (2) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to
all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it
impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross connections exist, the
public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an
approved backflow-prevention assembly in the service line.
(4) The type of protective assembly required under subsections (b)(3)(A), (b)(3)(B) and (b)(3)(C)
shall depend upon the degree of hazard that exists as follows:
(A) In the case of any premises where here is an auxiliary water supply as stated in
subsection (b)(3)(A) of this section and it is not subject to any of the following rules, the public
water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reducedpressure
principal backflow-prevention assembly.
(B) In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that would be objectionable
but not hazardous to health, if introduced into the public water system, the public water system
shall be protected by an approved double check value assembly.
(C) In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health that is
handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/194
the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved
reduced-pressure principle backflow-prevention assembly. Examples of premises where these
conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical
manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries, and plating plants.
(D) In the case of any premises where there are "uncontrolled" cross connections, either
actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation
or an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow-prevention assembly at the service
connection.
(E) In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions
or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection
survey, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by either
an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced-pressure principle backflow-prevention
assembly on each service to the premises.
(F) In the case of any premises where, in the opinion of the water superintendent or building
official, an undue health threat is posed because of the presence of extremely toxic substances,
the water superintendent or building official may require an air gap at the service connection to
protect the public water system. This requirement will be at the discretion of the water
superintendent or building official and is dependent on the degree of hazard.
(G) Any backflow-prevention assembly required herein shall be a model and size approved
by the water superintendent or building official. The term approved backflow prevention
assembly shall mean an assembly that has been manufactured in full conformance with the
standards established by the American Water Works Association titled:
AWWA C510-89 - Standard for Double Check Valve Backflow-Prevention, and
AWWC C511-89 - Standard for Reduced-Pressure Principal Backflow-Prevention Assembly,
and have met completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of
Southern California established by "Specification of Backflow-Prevention Assemblies" - Sec.
10 of the most current issue of the Manual of Cross-Connection Control.
Said AWWA and FCCHR standards and specifications have been adopted by the water
superintendent or building official. Final approval shall be evidenced by a "Certificate of
Approval" issued by an approved testing laboratory certifying full compliance with said
AWWA standards and FCCHR specifications.
The following testing laboratory has been qualified by the water superintendent or building
official to test and certify backflow preventers:
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic
Research
University of Southern California
University Park
Los Angeles, CA 90089
Testing laboratories, other than the laboratory listed above, will be approved as they become
generally recognized as having met the standards referred to above.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/194
Backflow preventers that may be subjected to backpressure or backsiphonage that have been
fully tested and have been granted a certificate of approval by a qualified laboratory and are
listed on the laboratory's current list of approved backflow-prevention assemblies may be used
without further testing or qualification.
(H) It shall be the duty of the customer-user at any premises where backflow-prevention
assemblies are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once
per year by a certified Backflow-Prevention Assembly Tester. In those instances where the
water superintendent or building official deems the hazard to be great enough, certified
inspections may be required at more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be at
the expense of the water user and shall be performed by the assembly manufacturer's
representative, water department personnel, or by a Certified Backflow-Prevention Assembly
Tester approved by the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission. It shall be the duty
of the water superintendent or building official to see that these tests are made in a timely
manner. The customer-user shall notify the water superintendent or building official in advance
when the tests are to be undertaken so that the customer-user may witness the tests if so desired.
These assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled, or replaced at the expense of the customer-user
whenever said assemblies are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs, and overhaul
shall be kept and made available to the water superintendent or building official.
(I) All presently installed backflow-prevention assemblies that do not meet the requirements
of this section but were approved assemblies for the purpose described herein at the time of
installation and that have been properly maintained, shall, except for the inspection and
maintenance requirements under subsections (b)(4)(H), be excluded from the requirements of
these rules so long as the water superintendent or building official is assured that: they will
satisfactorily protect the utility system. Whenever the existing assembly is moved from the
present location, requires more than minimum maintenance, or when the water superintendent
or building official finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be
replaced by an approved backflow-prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this
section.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
CHAPTER 14
ZONING
ARTICLE 14.100 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION*
Sec. 14.101 Created
There is hereby created the planning and zoning commission of the city. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2,
Sec. 2-40)
Sec. 14.102 Number of Members, Appointment
The planning and zoning commission shall consist of six (6) regular members and one (1) alternate member
appointed by the governing body of the city. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2, Sec. 2-41)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/194
Sec. 14.103 Terms of Members
The term of office of the members of the planning and zoning commission shall commence with the initial
meeting of the governing body in each elective year and expire with the last annual meeting of the governing
body in the year that said term of appointment is concluded. The term of each appointment to the commission
shall be for a term of three (3) years, except that initially, four members shall be appointed for a term of one
year; four members for a term of three years; four members for a term of two years; and thereafter, each year the
governing body shall appoint four (4) members for a term of three (3) years as hereinabove provided. (1979
Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2, Sec. 2-42)
Sec. 14.104 Meetings
The planning and zoning commission shall meet no less than once each three (3) months and no more than once
each month, said meetings to be at a time and place designated by the chairman of the commission. (1979 Code
of Ordinances, Chapter 2, Sec. 2-43)
Sec. 14.105 Officers
The planning and zoning commission shall elect from their number at the first annual meeting of said
commission in each year, said officers to serve for a period of one (1) year. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter
2, Sec. 2-44)
Sec. 14.106 Powers
The planning and zoning commission shall have the power to investigate the need for the advisability and the
necessity and to recommend the passage of city ordinances by the governing body for the purpose of promoting
health, safety, morals or the general welfare of the community in order to regulate and restrict the height, number
of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot that may be occupied, the size of yards,
courts and other open spaces, the density of population and the location and use of buildings, structures and land
for trade, industry, residence or other purposes. Such recommendations shall be made in accordance with a
comprehensive plan and designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other
dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land and to avoid the undue
concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools,
parks and other public requirements and such recommendations shall be made with reasonable consideration to
the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses; to conserve the value of buildings and
encourage the most appropriate use of land, but same shall not require the removal or destruction of property
except as provided elsewhere in this code or in the zoning ordinance. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2, Sec.
2-45)
Sec. 14.107 Recommending Districts and Regulations
For all purposes the planning and zoning commission may recommend the division of the municipality into
districts of such number, shape and area as may be deemed best suitable for the purposes herein enumerated and
the regulation within such districts of the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or use of
buildings, structures or land therein. (1979 Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2, Sec. 2-46)
EXHIBIT A
ZONING ORDINANCE
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/194
Sec. 1. Interpretation and purposes.
The zoning regulations and districts as herein established, have been made in accordance with a comprehensive
plan, for the purpose of promoting health, safety, morals, and the general welfare, of the city. They have been
designed to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure safety from fire, panic and other danger, to provide
adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population, to
facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public
requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things for the character of the
district and for its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of the buildings
and encouraging the most appropriate use of the land throughout the city.
Sec. 2. Zoning districts and map.
Zoning regulations and districts, as herein set forth, are approved and established. The city is hereby divided into
classes of use districts termed respectively as follows, all are shown upon the zoning map which is adopted with
and is declared to be a part of this ordinance, and shall be considered as much a part of the same as if the matters
of information set forth thereby were all fully contained and described herein. Said map shall, on its face, be
identified and verified in the manner following: It shall bear the title “Zoning Map of the City of Tahoka,
Texas;” it shall bear even date with the passing of this ordinance; it shall bear the names of the city council
members, the city consultants, and it shall be attested by the signatures of the mayor and the city secretary. The
original of said map shall be kept in the city hall and a replica thereof shall be produced upon paper in such
reduced scale as will permit of such replica copy being passed upon and attached to the page of the ordinance
records immediately following transcription therein of this ordinance.
Sec. 3. Use districts.
“A” Dwelling Unit: Buildings or land, in any portion of the city may be used for any of the uses listed under this
classification, but in an “A” district no building or structure shall be hereafter erected which consists of less than
seven hundred and fifty (750) square feet of floor space exclusive of garages and out-buildings or attached
garages, or structurally altered, which is arranged or designed to be used for other than one or more of the
following uses:
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Public schools, parks, or playgrounds.
(3) Accessory buildings, including a private garage and servant’s quarters, when located not less
than eighty (80) feet from the front line, nor less than five (5) feet from any other street line, nor less
than three (3) feet from either side line.
(4) Incidental uses: Uses customarily incident to any of the above uses, when situated in the same
dwelling and not involving the conduct of a business, including customary home occupations when
engaged in by the occupants of the dwellings, such as dressmaker, the office of a physician, surgeon,
dentist, musician or artist, when used as his order private dwelling. Said incidental use, however,
shall never be permitted as a principal use, but only as a secondary use when indispensably necessary
to the enjoyment of the premises for any of the uses permitted by this section and actually made of
the premises but not otherwise.
(5) Signs: No window displays, no name plate exceeding two (2) square feet in area, no temporary
bulletin board or sign board exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area appertaining to the lease, hire,
or sale or construction of a building or premises, nor advertising sign of any other character shall be
permitted in any “A” district.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/194
(6) Golf courses, but not including miniature, driving range, or any other form of commercial
amusements.
(7) Temporary buildings, when they are to be used only for construction purposes or field office for
the sale of the real estate of the immediate addition. Such temporary construction buildings must be
moved immediately upon completion or abandonment of construction and the field office must be
removed immediately upon request of the city inspector.
“B” Dwelling District: Buildings or land, in any portion of the city except in an “A” district, may be used for any
of the following uses; but in a “B” district no building or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be
hereafter erected or structurally altered which is arranged or designed to be used for other than one or more of
the following uses:
(1) Any use permitted in an “A” district.
(2) Fire stations.
(3) Churches.
(4) Kindergartens, playschools or day nurseries; when not more than ten (10) pupils.
(5) Parking automobile areas; as accessory use only.
(6) Telephone exchanges (no business office).
(7) Two-family dwellings.
(8) Water supply reservoirs and towers, gas and electric public utility regulator stations, but the
size, height, and location of said stations to be fixed by the city council.
(9) There must be a minimum of six hundred (600) square feet of floor space for single family
dwelling; duplex apartments when permitted must have a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square
feet of floor space.
“B-1” Dwelling district: Buildings or land, in any portion of the city except in an “A” district or “B” district,
may be used for any of the following uses; but in a “B-1” district no building or land shall be used, and no
building or structure shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered which is arranged or designed to be used
for other than one or more of the following uses:
(1) Any use permitted in an “A” or “B” district.
(2) There must be a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet of floor space for a single family
dwelling; duplex apartments must have a minimum of eight hundred (800) square feet of floor space.
(3) There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty-five (25) feet from the
property line to the front line of the building, covered porch, covered terrace or attached accessory
building.
(4) Trailer camps.
“B-2” Dwelling district: Buildings or land, in any portion of the city except in any of the preceding districts, may
be used for any of the following uses; but in a “B-2” district no building or land shall be used, and no building or
structure shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered which is arranged or designed to be used for other than
one or more of the following uses:
(1) Any use permitted in any of the foregoing districts.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/194
(2) Multiple dwellings, apartment houses and group houses, including tourist camps or courts, and
lodges. .
(3) Hospitals and clinics, excepting tubercular and veterinary hospitals and clinics and those for
alcoholic, narcotic, insane and feeble-minded patients.
(4) Hotels in which businesses may be conducted for the sole convenience of the occupants of the
buildings; provided, however, there shall be no entrance to such place of business except from the
inside of the building.
(5) Institutions of a philanthropic nature other than penal or correctional institutions.
(6) Libraries and museums.
(7) Multiple dwellings, apartment houses and group houses, including tourist or trailer camps,
courts or lodges.
(8) Private clubs, fraternities, sororities, lodges, except those whose chief activities are services
customarily carried on as a business.
“D” Local retail district:
(1) Any use permitted in any of the foregoing dwelling districts.
(2) Automobile parking lots (not storage).
(3) Banks, offices, studios, office buildings, drugstores, camera stores.
(4) Restaurants or cafes.
(5) Retail pressing, dyeing and cleaning shops.
(6) Retail stores, barbershops, beauty parlors, and other shops for custom work or for the making
of articles to be sold at retail on the premises; provided, no “secondhand goods” stores or yards will
be permitted in the “D” district.
(7) Bakeries, laundries, candy manufacturing (when employing less than six (6) persons on the
premises).
(8) Hotels.
(9) Theaters, moving picture shows.
(10) Job printing and newspapers.
“E” Local business district:
(1) Any use permitted in any of the foregoing districts.
(2) Auto sales (where the major business is the display and sale of new automobiles by an
authorized dealer and repair work and storage facilities shall be purely incidental, provided further
that the area allowed for the repairs and storage of cars shall not be nearer than twenty (20) feet from
the front line of the building).
(3) Mortuaries, greenhouses, or nursery offices.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/194
(4) Public storage garages (only minor repairs).
(5) Retail ice delivery stations, gasoline filling stations.
(6) Tourist court or lodges.
(7) Wholesale office and sample room.
(8) Any use not included in any other class; provided such use is not noxious or offensive by
reason of the emission of odor, dust, gas fumes, noise or vibration; provided further that no kind of
manufacture or treatment shall be permitted in the “E” district other than the manufacture or
treatment of products clearly incidental to the conduct of a retail business conducted on the premises.
“F” Business district:
(1) Any use permitted in any of the foregoing districts.
(2) Bakeries.
(3) Bottling works.
(4) Candy manufacturing.
(5) Art printing.
(6) Electro plating, electric works, including armature winding, galvanizing.
(7) Laundries, dyeing and cleaning works.
(8) “Secondhand” goods stores (when housed entirely in building).
(9) Pecan shelling.
(10) Public garages, including repairing.
(11) “Secondhand” automobile yards (not including wrecking).
(12) Storage warehouses.
(13) Wholesale houses.
(14) Any use not included in any other class provided such use is not noxious or offensive by
reason of the emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas fumes, noise or vibration; provided further, that no
kind of manufacture or treatment not listed above shall be permitted in an “F” district other than the
manufacture or treatment of products clearly incidental to the conduct of a business conducted on the
premises.
“G” Industrial districts:
(1) Any use permitted in any of the foregoing districts.
(2) Blacksmith or horseshoeing shops.
(3) Ice cream manufacture, ice manufacture, cold storage plants, electric power plants, and
creameries and dairy products manufacture and processing, wholesale milk distribution.
(4) Cotton storage yards.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/194
(5) Broom manufacture.
(6) Building materials, storage yards, lumber yards.
(7) Carpet cleaning.
(8) Chicken hatcheries.
(9) Central mixing plants for cement, mortar, plaster and paving materials.
(10) Commercial amusement parks, swimming pools, skating rinks, dance halls, driving ranges,
archery ranges, miniature golf courses.
(11) Emery cloth and sand paper manufacture.
(12) Flour mills.
(13) Iron, steel or copper fabrication plants.
(14) Livery freight depots or garages.
(15) Machine shops.
(16) Mattress manufacture.
(17) Paper box manufacture.
(18) Penal or correctional institutions, institutions for the care of tubercular, insane, feebleminded,
alcoholic, or narcotic patients.
(19) Billboard or advertising signs pertaining to business on site; size restricted by sign ordinance.
(20) Planing mills and wooden box manufacture.
(21) Refrigerator manufacture.
(22) Contractor’s plants and storage.
(23) Stone monumental works.
(24) Veterinary hospitals.
(25) Yeast plants.
(26) Manufacture of any kind not listed under “H” First manufacturing district or under “I”
Second manufacturing district, provided that such use is not noxious or offensive by reason of the
emission of dust, smoke, gas, noise or vibration.
(27) Roustabout gangs.
(28) Well servicing.
(29) Dirt contractors.
(30) Trucking contractors.
(31) Feed stores.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/194
(32) Recreation parlors.
(33) Bowling alleys.
“H” First manufacturing district:
(1) Any use permitted in any of the foregoing districts.
(2) Alcohol manufacture.
(3) Automobile wrecking.
(4) Bag cleaning.
(5) Blast furnaces.
(6) Boiler works.
(7) Brick, tile, pottery or terra cotta manufacture.
(8) Canning or preserving manufacture, egg breaking.
(9) Celluloid and similar cellulose material manufacture.
(10) Cotton compresses, cotton ginning, cotton bailing, cotton warehouses and cotton seed
manufacture.
(11) Coal hoists, coal pockets or coal tar trestles.
(12) Disinfectants and insecticides.
(13) Dye stuff manufacture.
(14) Fish smoking and curing.
(15) Feed mills.
(16) Forage plants.
(17) Grain elevators.
(18) Iron, steel, brass or copper foundries.
(19) Oil cloth or linoleum manufacture.
(20) Oil or rubber goods manufacture.
(21) Petroleum products, wholesale storage of.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/194
(22) Pickle manufacture.
(23) Potash works.
(24) Poultry killing, cleaning and dressing, storage of live poultry.
(25) Pyroxlim manufacture.
(26) Railroad roundhouses or shops.
(27) Rock crushers.
(28) Rolling mills.
(29) Rubber or gutta-percha manufacture or treatment.
(30) Shoe polish manufacture.
(31) Stone mills or quarries.
(32) Storage or bailing of rags, iron, junk or paper.
(33) Stove polish manufacture.
(34) Tile roofing or water proof manufacture.
(35) Textile manufacture.
(36) Wool pulling or scouring.
(37) Livestock auction sales with barns and temporary concentration shipping, loading and
unloading facilities.
(38) Manufacture or industrial operations of any kind not heretofore listed; but exclusive of any
kind of use listed under “I” district.
“I” Second manufacturing district:
(1) Any use not prohibited by city ordinance.
(2) Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as repealing any existing ordinance of the city
regulating nuisances, or to permit uses which are now prohibited by ordinances.
Newly annexed territory: All territory annexed to the city hereafter shall be classified as “A,” single family
dwelling district, until permanently zoned by the governing body. The city planning and zoning commission
shall, as soon as practicable, after annexation of any territory to the city, institute proceeding on its own motion
to give the newly annexed territory a permanent zoning and the procedure to be followed shall be the same as is
provided by law for the adoption of original zoning regulations.
Sec. 4. Regulations for buildings and structures.
(1) The height of buildings in the “A,” “B,” or “C” or “D” districts shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet or two
and one-half (2½) stories and the height of buildings in the “E” district shall not exceed forty-five (45) feet or
three (3) stories.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/194
(2) One family dwellings in the thirty-five (35) feet districts may be increased in height by not more than ten
(10) feet when two (2) side yards of not less than twenty-five (25) feet each are provided. Such dwellings,
however, shall not exceed three (3) stories in height.
(3) In the thirty-five (35) and forty-five (45) foot height districts, public or semi-public buildings, hotels,
apartments, hospitals, sanitariums or schools may be erected to a height not exceeding seventy-five (75) feet
when the front, side and rear yards are each increased an additional foot for each foot such buildings exceed
thirty-five (35) feet and forty-five (45) feet, respectively, in height.
(4) The height of buildings in the “C” district shall not exceed seventy-five (75) feet or six (6) stories, but
above the height permitted at said yard line, four (4) feet may be added to the height of the buildings for each
one foot the building or portion thereof is set back from the required yard lines; provided, however, that the
cubical content of such buildings shall not exceed the cubical content of a prism having a base equal to the area
of the lot and a height of one hundred (100) feet.
(5) The height of buildings in the “F” district shall not exceed one hundred (100) feet and the height of
buildings in the “G,” “H,” and “I” districts shall not exceed one hundred (100) feet, but above the height
permitted at the rear lines four (4) feet may be added to the height of the building for each one foot that the
building or portion thereof is set back from the required yard lines; provided, however, that the cubical content
of such building shall not exceed the cubical content of a prism having a base equal to the area of the lot and
height of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet.
(6) In the “F” district a tower may be constructed without reference to the above limitations, provided the
largest horizontal dimensions of any side of the tower shall not exceed sixty (60) feet and provided the
horizontal area shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the lot, and provided such tower shall be
removed at least twenty-five (25) feet from all lot lines and at least fifty (50) feet from any other.
(7) Chimneys, water towers, penthouses, scenery lofts, sugar refineries, monuments, cupolas, spires, domes,
standpipes, false mansards, parapet walls, similar structures and necessary mechanical appurtenances may be
erected as to their height in accordance with existing or hereafter adopted ordinances of the city.
(8) On through lots one hundred fifty (150) feet or less in depth the height of a building may be measured
from the curb level on either street. On through lots more than one hundred fifty (150) feet in depth, the height
regulation and basis of height measurement for the street permitting the greater height shall apply to a depth of
more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from that street.
Sec. 5. Front yards.
(1) In the “A” district there shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than thirty (30) feet from the
property line to the front line of the building, covered porch, covered terrace or attached accessory building.
(2) In the “B” and “B-1” districts there shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty-five (25)
feet from the property line to the front line of the building, covered porch, covered terrace or attached accessory
building.
(3) In the “B-2” and “C” districts there shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet
and in the “F” and “G” districts there shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than fifteen (15) feet from
the property line to the front line of the building, covered porch, covered terrace or attached accessory building.
(4) In the “D,” “E,” “H,” and “I” districts no front yard is required unless building is erected or structurally
altered for dwelling purposes in which even, a front yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet in depth is required.
Sec. 6. Rear yards.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/194
(1) In all districts where buildings are erected or structurally altered for dwelling purposes shall be a rear yard
having a depth of not less than twenty (20) percent of the depth of the lot, provided such rear yard need not
exceed twenty-five (25) feet.
(2) In the “D” and “E” districts there shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) percent of
the depth of the lot provided such rear yard need not exceed twenty-five (25) feet.
(3) In the “F,” “G,” “H,” and “I” districts, when property is not used for dwelling purposes, and when not
abutting on the rear of a dwelling district, no rear yard is required. If abutting on the rear of a dwelling district,
“A,” “B,” “B-1,” “B-2” or other dwelling districts then a rear yard of at least ten (10) feet is required.
(4) In computing the required bit of a rear yard for any building or such yard abutting an alley, the depth of the
lot maybe considered to the center of the alley and the required bit of rear yard measures from the center of said
alley.
(5) An accessory building not exceeding one story in height may occupy not more than sixty (60) percent of a
minimum required rear yard.
(6) An accessory building exceeding one story in height may occupy not more than forty (40) percent of a
minimum required rear yard.
Sec. 7. Side yards.
(1) In districts “A,” “B,” “B-1,” “B-2,” “C,” and in all other districts where a building is erected or
structurally altered for dwelling purposes there shall be two (2) side yards, one on each side of the building
having combined width of not less than twenty (20) percent of the width of the lot, provided that in no case shall
either side yard be less than five (5) feet, and provided further that the combined widths of the two (2) side yards
need not exceed twelve (12) feet. In the “D” district where a building is erected or structurally altered for
dwelling purposes, said building shall have side yards of not less than ten (10) feet from the property line and
they shall have a back yard of not less than five (5) feet from the property line.
(2) In the “C” district and in the other districts where a building is erected or structurally altered for dwelling
purposes for building more than three (3) stories in height, but not exceeding six (6) stories in height, each of the
two (2) side yards shall be increased three (3) feet in width for each additional story above the third. For
buildings more than eight (8) stories, or one hundred (100) feet in height, there shall be an additional set-back as
provided in the height regulations above.
(3) In the “D,” “E,” “F,” “G,” “H” and “I” districts if the property is not used for dwelling purposes no side
yards are required, unless a lot abuts upon the side of a lot zoned for dwelling purposes, there shall be a side
yard, if provided for a business or industrial building, shall not be less than four (4) feet.
(4) For the purpose of side yard regulations, two (2) or more detached one- or two-family dwellings shall be
considered as one building when occupying one lot, provided, however, there shall be a minimum of ten (10)
feet between the sides of the building on the same lot.
(5) In the case of group houses or court apartments, when buildings rear upon the side yard, the width of the
said yard shall be increased by one foot for each building or apartment abutting thereon. If any stairways open
onto or are served by such side yard, the minimum width of such side yard shall be ten (10) feet.
(6) The width of a place or court shall not be less than forty (40) feet measured between buildings or from
buildings to the opposite property line, provided that open or unenclosed porches may project into the required
place or court not more than twenty (20) percent of the width of such place or court.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/194
(7) All other requirements including front, side and rear yards shall be complied with in accordance with the
district in which such group houses or court apartments are located.
(8) Every part of a required yard or court shall be open from its lowest point to the sky unobstructed except
for the ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, cornices; provided, however, the above projections shall not
extend into a court more than twenty-four (24) inches nor into a minimum side yard more than twenty-four (24)
inches.
(9) The side and front yard requirements for dwellings shall be waived where dwellings are erected above
stores or shops.
(10) On corner lots the side yard regulations shall be the same as for interior except in the case of side street
or reversed frontage (where the corner lot faces an intersecting street) in which case there shall also be a side
yard on the street side equal to the front yard on the lots in the rear. No accessory building on said corner lot
shall project beyond the front yard line on the lots in the rear. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to
reduce the buildable width of a corner lot facing an intersection street, and of record at the time of passage of
this ordinance to less than twenty-eight (28) feet, nor to prohibit the erection of an accessory building where the
regulation cannot reasonably be complied with. In no event shall there be a corner lot with a building situated
thereon which is closer than ten (10) feet to either street.
Sec. 8. Lot area.
(1) In the “A” district the minimum area of the lot shall be seventy-five hundred (7500) square feet including
any alley influence.
(2) In the “B” and “B-1” districts the minimum area of the lot shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet for one
family dwelling and seven thousand (7,000) square feet for two family dwelling.
(3) In the “B-2,” “C,” “D,” “E,” “F,” “G,” “H,” and “I” districts the minimum area of the lot shall be five
thousand (5,000) square feet for a one family dwelling; six thousand (6,000) square feet for a two family
dwelling; and for apartment houses or buildings arranged or designed for more than two (2) families the
minimum lot area shall be seven thousand (7,000) square feet for each family in excess of two (2).
(4) On any lot held under separate distinct ownership from adjoining lots at the same time of the passage of
this ordinance, such separately owned property being of record at the time, a single family dwelling may be
erected even though the lot be of less area than required by the regulating to area in the district in which it is
located; provided, however, that in any event the combined area of the dwelling and accessory building shall not
cover more than forty (40) percent of the total area of the lot.
(5) No lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that the yards or other open spaces shall be smaller than
prescribed by this ordinance, nor shall the density of population be increased in any manner except in
conformity with the area regulations herein established. Side yard areas used to comply with minimum
requirements of this ordinance for a building shall not be included as a part of the required areas of any other
building.
Sec. 9. Special area regulations.
(1) On any lot on which a front yard is required by this ordinance no wall, fence or other structure shall be
erected and no hedge, tree, shrub or other growth or structure of any kind shall be maintained in such location
within such required front yard so as to obstruct view.
(2) Any fence, wall, hedge, or shrubbery higher than a base line extending from a point two and one-half (2½)
feet above walk grade to a point four and one-half (4½) feet above walk grade at the depth of front yard required
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/194
is hereby declared to be an obstruction to view, except single trees, having single trunks which are pruned to a
height of seven (7) feet above walk grade.
Sec. 10. Nonconforming uses.
(1) Any use of property existing at the time of the passage of this ordinance that does not conform to the
regulations prescribed in the preceding sections of this ordinance shall be deemed a nonconforming use; except
that any duplex or apartment use existing at the time of the passage of this ordinance shall be thereafter deemed
a conforming use. Any lawful use existing within a building at the time of the passage of this ordinance, in any
business, industrial or manufacturing district, shall be deemed a conforming use upon the lot devoted to such use
at the time of the passage of this ordinance.
(2) The lawful use of land existing at the time of the passage of this ordinance, although such does not
conform to the provision hereof, may be continued, but if such nonconforming use is discontinued, any future
use of said premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. If a building occupied by a
nonconforming use is destroyed by fire or the elements it may not be reconstructed or rebuilt except to conform
with the provisions of this ordinance.
(3) The lawful use of the building at the time of the passage of this ordinance may be continued, although
such does not conform to the provisions hereof, and such use may be extended throughout the building provided
no structural alteration, except those required by law or ordinance, are made therein. If no structural alterations
are made, a nonconforming use of a building is once changed to a nonconforming use of a higher or more
restricted classification it shall not later revert to the former lower or less restricted classification.
(4) The right of nonconforming use to continue shall be subject to such regulations as to maintenance of the
premises and conditions of operation as may in the judgment of the board of adjustment be reasonably required
for the protection of adjacent property.
(5) Nothing in this ordinance shall be taken to prevent restoration of a building destroyed to the extent of not
more than fifty-one (51) percent of its reasonable value by fire, explosion or other casualty, or act of God, or a
public enemy, nor the continued occupancy or use of such building, or part thereof, which existed at the time of
such partial destruction.
Sec. 11. Zoning map designations.
(1) When definite distances in feet are not shown on the zoning map, the district boundaries on the zoning
map are intended to be along existing street, alley or property lines, or extensions of or from the same. When the
location of a district boundary line is not otherwise determined, it shall be determined by the scale of the map
measured from a given line.
(2) Where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the zoning map,
the board of adjustment may apply the designation shown on the mapped streets in such a way as to carry out the
intent and purpose of the plan for the particular area in question.
Sec. 12. Completion of existing buildings.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building
actually under construction at the time of the passage of this ordinance and which entire building shall be
complete within one year from the date of the passage of this ordinance. Nothing herein contained shall require
any change in plan, construction or designated use of a building for which a building permit has been heretofore
issued and which entire building shall be complete within six (6) months from the date of the passage of this
ordinance. If any amendment to this ordinance is hereafter adopted changing the boundaries of districts, the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/194
provisions of this ordinance with regard to building, or premises existing or buildings under construction or
building permits issued in the area affected by such amendment at the time of the passage of such amendment.
Sec. 13. Certificate of occupancy and compliance.
(1) No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be used, occupied or changed in use until a
certificate of occupancy and compliance shall have been issued by the city inspector stating that the building or
proposed use of a building or premises complies with the building laws and the provisions of these regulations.
(2) Certificates of occupancy and compliance shall be applied for coincident with the application for building
permit and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the erection or structural alterations of such building shall
have been completed in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. A record of all certificates shall be
kept on file in the office of the city inspector and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a
proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected.
(3) No permit for excavation for any building shall be issued before application has been made for a
certificate of occupancy and compliance.
Sec. 14. Board of adjustment.
(a) There is hereby created a board of adjustment consisting of five (5) members, each to be appointed by the
city council for a term of two (2) years and removable for cause by the appointing authority. Vacancies shall be
filled by the appointment by the original appointing authority of a suitable person to serve out the unexpired
term of any member whose place on the board has become vacant for any cause. The board is hereby vested with
power and authority, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards to make such
exceptions to the terms of this ordinance in harmony with its general purpose and intent and in accordance with
general or special rules therein contained for the purpose of rendering full justice and equity to the general
public.
The board may adopt rules to govern its proceedings provided, however, that such rules are not inconsistent with
this ordinance. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the
board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oath and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of
its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent, or failing to vote, indicate
such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed
immediately in the office of the board and shall be public record.
(b) Appeals to the board of adjustment can be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer or department
of the municipality affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be taken within
fifteen (15) days time after the decision has been rendered by the administrative officer, by filing with the appeal
specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board
all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
An appeal shall stay all proceedings of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is
taken certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him that by reason of
facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise, than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of
adjustment or by a court of record on application on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on
due cause shown.
The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal, give the public notice thereof,
as well as due notice to the parties in interest and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing
any party may appear in person or by attorney or by agent.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/194
(c) The board of adjustment shall have the following powers:
(1) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this ordinance.
(2) To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the ordinance upon which the board is
required to pass under this ordinance.
(3) To authorize upon appeal in special cases, such variances from the terms of the ordinance as
will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, the literal enforcement
of the provisions of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this
ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done.
(d) In exercising its powers the board may, in conformity with the provisions of article 1011a and including
1011j of the 1925 Civil Statutes of Texas revise or reform, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and make such order, requirement, or decision of the
officer from whom the appeal is taken.
(e) The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board shall be necessary to revise any order, requirement,
decision or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the application on any
matter upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance or to affect any variance in said ordinance.
(f) Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment, any
taxpayer, any officer, or department of the municipality may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified,
setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such
petition shall be presented to the court within ten (10) days after the filing of the decision in the office of the
board and not thereafter.
Sec. 15. Penalty for violation.
Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance or fail to comply therewith
or with any of the requirements thereof, or shall build or alter any buildings in violation of any detailed
statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to
fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and each day such violations shall be permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense. The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof, where
anything in violation of this ordinance shall be placed, or shall exist, any architect, builder, contractor, agent,
person or corporation, employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any
such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as provided above.
Sec. 16. Definitions.
The following shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this ordinance:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the
plural number; words in the plural number include the singular number; the word “building” includes
the word “structure;” the word “lot” includes the word plot; the word “shall” is mandatory and not
discretionary.
(2) Accessory Building: A subordinate use or building customarily incident to and located on the
lot occupied by the main use or building.
(3) Alley: A way which extends only secondary means of access to abutting property.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/194
(4) Apartment: A room or suite of rooms in an apartment house or tenement arranged, designed or
occupied as the residence of a single family, individual, or group of individuals.
(5) Apartment House: A building or portion thereof arranged, designed, or occupied by three (3)
or more families living independently of each other.
(6) Boarding House: A building other than a hotel where lodging and meals for five (5) or more
persons are served for compensation.
(7) Courts, Tourist: A building or group of buildings designed, arranged or used for temporary
occupancy having accommodations for housing or parking automobiles in close proximity to the
quarters occupied by the owner of such automobile and providing three (3) or more of such quarters.
(8) Courts, Trailer: An area designed and used for the temporary occupation by automobile trailer
or tent quarters and providing for one or more of such quarters.
(9) Customary Home Occupations: Occupations ordinarily carried on in a home that are not
detrimental or injurious to adjoining property. These may include meals or renting rooms to not more
than five (5) persons not members of the household, dressmaking, millinery, washing and ironing.
Customary home occupations shall not include barbershops, tinners shops, transfer or moving van
offices, flower shops, carpenter shops, electricians shops, plumbers shops, radio shops, auto repairing
or sign painting.
(10) Depth of Rear Yard: The mean horizontal distance between the rear line of a building other
than an accessory building and the center line of the alley where an alley exists, otherwise the rear lot
line.
(11) Depth of Lot: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot line.
(12) District: A section of the city for which the regulations governing the area, height and use of
buildings are uniform.
(13) Dwelling, Multiple: A building used or designed as a residence for three (3) or more families
or households, living independently of each other.
(14) Dwelling, Group Houses: Detached or semi-detached dwellings built on one lot, usually in
opposing rows separated by a walkway or court.
(15) Dwelling, One Family: A detached building having accommodations for and occupied by
only one family.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/194
(16) Dwelling, Two Family: A detached building for separate accommodations for and occupied
as, or to be occupied as, a dwelling for only two (2) families.
(17) Family: A family is any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit;
as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, a lodging house, or both, or hotel as
herein defined.
(18) Front Yard: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building, between the building
and the street extending across the front of the lot.
(19) Gross Floor Area: The gross floor area of an apartment house shall be measured by taking
outside dimensions of the apartment building at each floor excluding, however, the floor area of
basements or attics when not occupied as living quarters.
(20) Garage, Private: A garage with capacity for not more than five (5) motor-driven vehicles for
storage only and for private use.
(21) Garage, Public: Any premises not a private garage, as defined above, used for housing of
more than three (3) motor-driven vehicles or where any such vehicles are repaired for operation, or
kept for remuneration, hire or sale.
(22) Garage, Storage: Any premises, except those defined as a private or public garage, used
exclusively for the storage of automobiles.
(23) Height: The height of a building or portion of a building shall be measured from the average
established grade at the street lot line or from the average natural ground level, if higher; or if no
street grade has been established to the highest point of the roof’s surface if a flat surface to the deck
line of mansard roofs; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for hip or gable roofs. In
measuring the height of a building, the following structures shall be excluded: chimneys, cooling
towers, radio towers, ornamental cupolas, domes, or spires, elevator bulk heads, penthouses, tanks,
water towers, and parapet walls not exceeding four (4) feet in height.
(24) Hotel: A building occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of individuals who
are lodged with or without meals, in which as a rule the rooms are occupied for hire, in which
provisions are not made for cooling in any individual apartment, and in which there are more than
twelve (12) sleeping rooms, a public dining room for the accommodations of more than twelve (12)
guests, and a general kitchen.
(25) Institution: A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or nonprofit establishment for
public use.
(26) Lodging House: A building other than a hotel where lodging for five (5) or more persons is
provided for compensation.
(27) Lot: Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings, and including
such open spaces as are required under this ordinance, and having its principal frontage upon a public
street or officially approved place.
(a) Interior-is a lot other than a corner lot.
(b) Through-a lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets.
(c) Fractional-a portion of a lot that has been cut off of a corner lot, having the side line of an
adjacent lot as its rear line and the rear line of the remainder of the corner lot as a side line.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/194
(d) Front line-the line of an interior lot which is adjacent to the street. On corner lots it is the
prolongations of the front lot line of adjacent interior lots as originally platted.
(28) Lot Lines: The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
(29) Lot, Corner: A lot situated at the junction of two (2) or more streets and having a width not
greater than one hundred (100) feet.
(30) Nonconforming Uses: A building or premises occupied by a use that does not conform to the
regulations of the use in the district in which it is situated.
(31) Open Space: Area included in any side, rear or front yard or any unoccupied space on a lot
that is open and unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projection of cornices, eaves or
porches.
(32) Person: The word “person” when used in this ordinance shall for the purpose of this
ordinance, mean every person, firm, copartnership, association, partnership, corporation or society;
and the term “person” shall include both singular and plural, and the masculine shall embrace the
feminine gender.
(33) Place: An open, unoccupied space reserved for purposes of access to abutting property.
(34) Rear Yard: A space unoccupied except by buildings of accessory use as hereinafter permitted
extending for the full width of the lot between a building other than a building of accessory use and
the rear lot line.
(35) Reserved Frontage: A portion of a corner lot fronting the street which was originally platted
as aside street.
(36) Side Yard: An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building situated between the
building and the side line of the lot and extending through from any street or from the front yard or to
the rear line of the lot. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line shall be deemed a side line.
(37) Stables, Private: A stable with a capacity for not more than five (5) horses, mules or other
domestic animals.
(38) Stables, Public: A stable with a capacity for more than five (5) horses, mules or other
domestic animals.
(39) Street: Any public thoroughfare dedicated to the public and not designated as an alley.
(40) Story: That portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor
next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between such floor end the ceiling next
above.
(41) Story, Half: A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which at least two
(2) exterior walls are not more than two (2) feet above the floor of such story.
(42) Structural Alterations: Any change in the supporting member of a building such as bearing
walls, columns, beams or girders.
(43) Width of Side Yard: The mean horizontal distance between a side wall of a building and the
side line of the lot.
Sec. 17. Changes and amendments.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/194
(1) The city council may from time to time amend, supplement, or change by ordinance the boundaries of the
districts or the regulations herein established.
(2) Before taking action on any proposed amendment, supplement or change, the city council shall submit
same to the planning and zoning commission for its recommendations and report.
(3) A public hearing shall be held by the city council before adopting any proposed amendment, supplement
or change. Notice of such hearing shall be given by publication three (3) times in the official publication of the
city, stating the time and place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier than fifteen (15) days from the
first date of publication or by certified mail.
(4) Unless such proposed amendment, supplement or change has been approved by the planning and zoning
commission, or if a protest against such amendment, supplement or change has been duly filed with the city
secretary, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more of the area of the lot
included in such proposed change or within two hundred (200) feet from any point of the proposed change in
any direction, such amendment shall not become effective except by a three-fourths (¾) vote of the city council.
Sec. 18. Validation clause.
Should any part of this ordinance be held invalid, no other part shall necessarily be affected thereby.
Sec. 19. Adoption date.
This ordinance was read, passed and adopted at meeting of the city council held the second day of May, 1977.
(Appendix A, Ordinance adopted 5/2/77)