CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF TAYLOR LAKE VILLAGE, TEXAS 
____________ 
Adopted: December 10, 1998 
Effective: December 10, 1998 
____________ 
Published in 1998 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
TAYLOR LAKE VILLAGE, TEXAS 
____________ 
Jon Keeney 
Mayor 
____________ 
Doug Blanchard 
Bob Davee 
Tony Galt 
Einar Goerland 
Doug Shows 
City Council 
____________ 
Scott Bounds 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Stacey Fields 
City Secretary 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
TAYLOR LAKE VILLAGE, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Einar H. Goerland 
Mayor 
____________ 
Natalie S. O'Neill 
Richard E. Dawson 
Robert R. Ingram 
Mark M. Sheridan 
Jodieth A. D. Seeger 
City Council 
____________ 
John F. Olson 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Debbie Bloodworth 
City Secretary 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Taylor Lake Village, Texas. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Ron McLaughlin, Supervising Editor, and Robert MacNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Alice Cumming, former City Secretary, and John Olson, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Taylor Lake Village, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Taylor Lake Village, Texas. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Taylor Lake Village, Texas. 1998. 
ORDINANCE NO. 98-407 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF TAYLOR LAKE VILLAGE, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF TAYLOR LAKE VILLAGE, TEXAS: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Taylor Lake Village, Texas," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 78, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before July 1, 1998, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for violations of provisions relating to fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse. In all other cases, the fine shall not exceed $500.00. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after July 1, 1998, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective immediately. 
Passed and adopted by the city council this 10th day of December, 1998. 
/s/   
      Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/   
      City Secretary   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date Adopted Include/Omit Supp. No. Supp. No. 3 08-549  3- 5-2008 Include 3 10-591  4- 7-2010 Include 3 10-592  4- 7-2010 Include 3 10-593  4- 7-2010 Include 3 10-595  6- 2-2010 Include 3 10-596  7- 7-2010 Omit 3 10-598  7-21-2010 Include 3 10-599  7-21-2010 Include 3 10-600  8- 4-2010 Include 3 10-601  8- 4-2010 Include 3 11-609  4-20-2011 Omit 3 11-610  8- 3-2011 Include 3 11-615 10- 5-2011 Include 3 12-618  4-18-2012 Include 3 12-620  5- 2-2012 Include 3 12-623  9- 5-2012 Include 3 13-629  2- 6-2013 Omit 3 Supp. No. 4 13-633  6-19-2013 Omit 4 13-634  7-17-2013 Include 4 13-635  9-11-2013 Include 4 13-636 11- 6-2013 Include 4 15-650  5-20-2015 Include 4 15-651  5-20-2015 Include 4 Supp. No. 5 15-652  7- 1-15 Include 5 15-654 10- 7-15 Include 5 16-662  3- 2-16 Include 5 16-663  6-15-16 Include 5 16-664  6-15-16 Include 5 16-665 10- 5-16 Include 5 16-666 10- 5-16 Include 5 16-671 12-14-16 Include 5  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Taylor Lake Village, Texas," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Taylor Lake Village Code" or "this Code." 
State Law reference- Authority of city to adopt codification of civil and criminal ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001 et seq. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances passed by the city council, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council. Words used in this Code and not defined in this section shall have their ordinarily accepted meaning. 
    Authority of public body. A grant of authority to three or more persons as a public body confers the authority on a majority of the total membership fixed by ordinance. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.013(a). 
    Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
    Building. The word "building" means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof or other covering, and designed or used for the shelter or enclosure of any person, animal or property of any kind, including tents, awnings or vehicles situated on private property and used for purposes of a building. 
    City. The word "city" means the City of Taylor Lake Village, Harris County, Texas. 
    City council, council. Whenever the term "city council" or "council" is used, it is construed to mean the city council of the City of Taylor Lake Village, Texas. 
    Code. Whenever the term "Code" or "this Code" is referred to, without further qualification, it shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Taylor Lake Village, Texas, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, the day of the act, event or default after which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included, unless it is a Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.014. 
    County. The words "the county" and "this county" mean Harris County, Texas. 
    Day. The word "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code requires or authorizes an officer or employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty, unless the terms of the section specifically provide otherwise. 
    Family. The word "family" means an individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a group of not to exceed three persons not all related by blood, marriage or adoption, occupying the premises and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
State Law reference- Gender, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.012(c), 312.003. 
    Highway or street. The word "highway" or "street" means the width between the boundary lines of a publicly maintained way any part of which is open to the public for vehicular travel. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.301(5). 
    In the city. The words "in the city" shall mean and include all territory over which the city now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police, regulatory and other powers. 
    May. The word "may" is permissive. 
    Mobile home. The term "mobile home" means a structure designed for, or used as, semipermanent habitation and which is transportable on its own chassis in one or more sections and which is capable of being used without a permanent foundation. 
    Month. The word "month" means a calendar month. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(7). 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Nuisance factor. The term "nuisance factor" means any offensive or unpleasant thing which annoys or disturbs a person of ordinary sensibility in the free use, possession, or enjoyment of his property or which endangers one's health or life or property, such as: 
(1)	Noise; 
(2)	Dust; 
(3)	Smoke; 
(4)	Fumes; 
(5)	Odor; 
(6)	Glare; 
(7)	Flashes; 
(8)	Heat; 
(9)	Electronic or atomic radiation; 
(10)	Effluent; 
(11)	Vibration; 
(12)	Shock waves; 
(13)	Gases; 
(14)	Vicious, mischievous, and barking dog(s); 
(15)	Unlawful diversion of drainage onto adjacent property; 
(16)	Unshielded yard or building lighting; 
(17)	Electrical or magnetic interference. 
    Number. The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.012(b). 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
State Law reference- Oath, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.005(1), 312.011(8). 
    Officers, agencies. The words "city secretary," "chief of police" or other designations of officers, employees, departments, boards, commissions and other agencies mean the secretary, chief of police or such other officers, employees, departments, boards, commissions and agencies, respectively, of the City of Taylor Lake Village, Texas. 
    Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they shall mean Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Savings Time, as may be officially in current use in the state. 
State Law reference- Standard time defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.016. 
    Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, company, corporation, organization, society, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, executor, receiver, trustee, lessee and any other legal entity. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.005(2). 
    Personal property. The words "personal property" include every species of property, except real property as defined in this section. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
State Law reference- Preceding, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(11). 
    Property. The word "property" includes real and personal property. 
State Law reference- Property, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(13). 
    Roadway. The word "roadway" means the portion of a highway, other than the berm or shoulder, that is improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. If a highway includes at least two separate roadways, the term applies to each roadway separately. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.302(11). 
    Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" means the portion of a street that is: 
(1)	Between a curb or lateral line of a roadway and the adjacent property line; and 
(2)	Intended for pedestrian use. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.302(16). 
    Signature, subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" includes any symbol executed or adopted by a person with present intention to authenticate a writing. 
State Law reference- "Signed" defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.005(6). 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" mean the State of Texas. 
    Structure. The word "structure" means anything constructed, assembled, or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on or in the ground. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. Words used in the future tense include the present. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.012(a). 
    Vehicle. The word "vehicle" means every device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway. 
    Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. The designation "Vernon's Ann. C.C.P." means Vernon's Annotated Code of Criminal Procedure, as now or hereafter amended. 
    Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. The designation "Vernon's Ann. Civ. St." means Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, as now or hereafter amended. 
    V.T.C.A. The designation "V.T.C.A." means Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated, as now or hereafter amended. 
    Written or in writing. The words "written" and "in writing" include any representation of words, letters, symbols or figures, whether by writing, printing or otherwise. 
State Law reference- "Written" defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.005(11). 
    Year. The word "year" means 12 consecutive months. 
State Law reference- "Year" defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.005(12); Code Construction Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.001 et seq.; construction of Local Government Code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 1.002; application of Penal Code definitions, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 1.03. 
Sec. 1-3. - Section catchlines and other headings. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. No provision of this Code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any such catchline or in any heading or title to any chapter, article or division. 
State Law reference- Headings in state codes, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.024. 
Sec. 1-4. - References to chapters, sections. 
    All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
State Law reference- Construction of statutory references, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.027. 
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the sections. 
Sec. 1-6. - Editor's notes and references. 
    The editor's notes, cross references and state law references in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to assist the user of this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
State Law reference- Repeal of statute, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.030, 312.007. 
Sec. 1-8. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, or other acts. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)	Except where otherwise provided therein, the maximum fine for violating any provision of this Code, or any ordinance, rule or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, shall not exceed $2,000.00; for all other violations, the maximum fine shall not exceed $500.00; provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	In addition to the penalties otherwise provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance, which provision is intended for the protection of the public health, safety or morals, shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city as provided by law. 
(c)	The penalties in this section shall be cumulative and not exclusive of any other rights or remedies the city may have. 
State Law reference- Amount of fine or penalty imposed by the city, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001; abatement of health nuisances, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.011 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.003. 
Sec. 1-10. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)	Ordinances creating, locating, opening, dedicating, paving, widening, vacating or closing specific streets, alleys and other public ways; 
(2)	Ordinances releasing special easements; 
(3)	Ordinances naming or changing the names of specific streets and other public ways; 
(4)	Ordinances establishing the grades of specific streets and other public ways; 
(5)	Ordinances authorizing or relating to specific issues of bonds; 
(6)	Ordinances creating or relating to specific sewer and paving districts and other specific local improvement districts; 
(7)	Ordinances annexing territory to, or disannexing territory from, the city; 
(8)	Ordinances calling or providing for a special election; 
(9)	Ordinances appropriating money; 
(10)	Ordinances making the annual tax levy; 
(11)	Ordinances approving plats and dedication deeds; 
(12)	Ordinances approving or authorizing specific contracts with the state or with others; 
(13)	Ordinances authorizing a specific lease, sale, or purchase of property; 
(14)	Ordinances granting rights-of-way or other rights and privileges to specific railroad companies or others; 
(15)	Ordinances granting a specific public utility or any other person the right or privilege of constructing lines in the streets, alleys and other public areas, or of otherwise using such streets, alleys and places; 
(16)	Ordinances granting a franchise to a specific public utility; 
(17)	Ordinances establishing subdivision or zoning regulations or changing the zoning classification of specific pieces of real property; 
(18)	Ordinances granting variances to the zoning ordinance; 
(19)	Ordinances consistent with this Code establishing traffic or parking regulations at specific locations; 
(20)	Ordinances accepting specific street improvements or other construction; 
(21)	Any temporary or special ordinance. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Severability of provisions. 
    Unless expressly provided otherwise, if any provision of this Code or any code adopted by reference in this Code or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this Code or any code adopted by reference in this Code that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Code or any code adopted by reference in this Code are severable. 
State Law reference- Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.032, 312.013. 
Sec. 1-12. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)	All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repeal of chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated herein, so that a reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Taylor Lake Village, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as enacted. 
(c)	If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Taylor Lake Village, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows:...." The new section shall then be set out in full as enacted. 
(d)	All sections, divisions, articles or chapters desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-13. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive parts of permanent and general ordinances passed by the council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code). 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-14. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby, unless so authorized by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city council. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
Sec. 1-15. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)	The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.030. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Court, ch. 18; emergency management, ch. 22; administration of junk vehicles provisions, § 30-34; administration of flood damage prevention regulations, § 34-61 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 38; planning and zoning, ch. 54; planning and zoning commission, § 54-31 et seq.; taxation, ch. 70; administrative provisions for zoning regulations, app. A, part III; zoning board of adjustment, app. A, § 15. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Acceptance of state law provisions regarding naming and operation of city. 
    The city accepts the provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. titles 1-10, as amended, relating to cities and towns and upon and after the adoption of this chapter, its name shall be "City of Taylor Lake Village." The city further approves, ratifies, and confirms the operation of the city since September 1, 1987, as a type A general law municipality. 
(Ord. No. 74, § 2, 10-15-75; Ord. No. 95-363, § 2, 8-16-95) 
Sec. 2-2. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall begin on October 1 of the calendar year and end on September 30 of the next succeeding calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 14, § 1, 12-4-62; Ord. No. 76, § 1, 5-19-76) 
Sec. 2-3. - Operating budget; preparation and approval. 
    The operating budget of the city for the next succeeding year shall be prepared and approved by the city council not less than 30 days in advance of the subject fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 14, § 2, 12-4-62; Ord. No. 76, § 2, 5-19-76) 
Secs. 2-4-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Ordinances calling or providing for a special election saved from repeal, § 1-10(8); officers and employees, § 2-71 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-26. - Allowance for mayor and member of city council. 
    The mayor and members of the city council shall be entitled to reimbursement of all expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties; provided however, any expenses incurred by the mayor in excess of $200.00 during any calendar month, or any expenses incurred by a member of the city council in excess of $100.00 during any calendar month shall receive approval of the city council. The mayor or councilmembers who elect to decline monthly reimbursement may file a letter with the city secretary and monthly reimbursement will stop from the next month forward unless or until that election is revoked in writing and filed with the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 04-506, § 1, 10-20-04) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 04-506, § 1, adopted Oct. 20, 2004, repealed the former § 2-26, and enacted a new § 2-26 as set out herein. The former § 2-26 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 83-201, § 1, adopted March 2, 1983; Ord. No. 03-482, § 1, adopted May 15, 2003. 
Sec. 2-27. - Court session expense allowance for municipal court judges. 
    The judges of the municipal court of the city shall hereafter receive an expense allowance of an amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city secretary for each court session attended. 
(Ord. No. 81, § 2, 2-16-77) 
Sec. 2-28. - Terms of office. 
    The term of office for the mayor, councilmembers and other elected officials of the city shall be for a two-year period. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 1, 1-15-73) 
Sec. 2-29. - Elections-Place numbers. 
    Place numbers one through five are to be assigned to the five councilmember seats on the city council. In order to ensure overlapping continuity within the city government the mayor and councilmembers in places two and four will stand for election in one year, while the remaining councilmembers in places one, three and five will stand for election in the following year. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 2, 1-15-73) 
Sec. 2-30. - Same-Terms. 
    This elective procedure will become effective with the 1973 elections. In this election candidates for the office of mayor and councilmember places two and four will be elected for a term of two years. Candidates for councilmember places one, three and five will be elected for a period of one year. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 3, 1-15-73) 
Secs. 2-31-2-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RULES OF PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-46. - Rule 1. Regular meetings. 
    The regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the first and third Wednesday of each month at 7:30 p.m. at the city hall. The meeting on the third Wednesday may be cancelled if the business of the city does not require holding a meeting. Whenever the day of a regular meeting is a legal holiday, such regular meeting shall be held on the following Wednesday at the same time and place, unless otherwise provided for by motion of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 79-124, § 1(Rule 1), 9-19-79; Ord. No. 15-651, § 1, 5-20-15) 
Sec. 2-47. - Rule 2. Special meetings. 
    Special meetings of the city council shall be called by the city secretary upon the written request of a majority of the members of the council qualified and serving, or by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 79-124, § 1(Rule 2), 9-19-79) 
Sec. 2-48. - Rule 3. Right of citizens to be heard. 
    Any citizen of the city shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard at any regular or special meeting of the city council in regard to any matter to be considered by the council at such meeting. 
(Ord. No. 79-124, § 1(Rule 3), 9-19-79) 
Sec. 2-49. - Rule 4. Presiding officer. 
    The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the city council, but if for any reason the mayor is absent from the city, sick or unable to act, then the mayor pro tem shall preside at such meetings and at such times shall exercise all of the powers and discharge the duties of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 79-124, § 1(Rule 4), 9-19-79) 
Sec. 2-50. - Rule 5. Order of business. 
    The proceedings of the city council shall be as follows: 
(1)	Calling the roll and marking absentees. 
(2)	Adopting and, if necessary, correcting the minutes. 
(3)	Mayor's remarks. 
(4)	Receiving of reports. 
(5)	Public hearing and receiving of petitions. 
(6)	Consideration of resolutions. 
(7)	Consideration of ordinances. 
(8)	Authorizations by council. 
(9)	Appointments. 
(10)	Opening of bids. 
(11)	Other unfinished business. 
(12)	New business. 
(Ord. No. 79-124, § 1(Rule 5), 9-19-79) 
Sec. 2-51. - Rule 6. Clerk. 
    The city secretary shall be the clerk or secretary of the council whose duty it shall be to act as reading and recording clerk to the council and to certify the correctness of the minutes and the journal and to perform such other duties as may be required of the clerk by the city council and the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 79-124, § 1(Rule 6), 9-19-79) 
Sec. 2-52. - Rule 7. Readings required of ordinances and resolutions. 
    The passage of all ordinances and resolutions shall be by reading the same at one meeting by caption or title, unless a reading in full is requested by a member of the council. The order of adoption of ordinances or resolutions shall be as follows: The mayor shall read the caption or title, after which the presiding officer shall call for a motion on the ordinance or resolution. The motion need only state that the ordinance or resolution be adopted as read, and the motion will then be considered in the same manner as any other motion. 
(Ord. No. 79-124, § 1(Rule 7), 9-19-79) 
Sec. 2-53. - Rule 8. Suspension of rules. 
    Any one or all of these rules may be suspended by a vote of two thirds of the members of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 79-124, § 1(Rule 8), 9-19-79) 
Sec. 2-54. - Rule 9. Robert's Rules of Order. 
    The rules of procedure as stated in Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, edition of 1971, a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part hereof, shall govern the proceedings of the city council except when in conflict with provisions of city ordinances or the rules of procedure adopted hereby. 
(Ord. No. 79-124, § 1(Rule 9), 9-19-79) 
Secs. 2-55-2-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Mayor and council, § 2-26 et seq.; employee benefits, § 2-101 et seq.; municipal court judge, § 18-21 et seq.; emergency management director, § 22-2; police department, § 38-31 et seq.; reserve police force, § 38-56 et seq. 

Sec. 2-71. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Appointed officer means all persons holding an appointive office of, or position of employment with, the city which, in consideration of holding such office or position of employment, entitles such person to remuneration or compensation. Such term shall not include offices which are held on a volunteer basis. 
(Ord. No. 83-204, § 1, 7-6-83) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-72. - Appointment; confirmation. 
    All appointed officers of the city shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council as soon as practicable after each general municipal election. 
(Ord. No. 83-204, § 2, 7-6-83) 
Sec. 2-73. - Terms. 
    The term of office of each appointed officer shall be until the following year at the first regular city council meeting after the general municipal election, or until his successor is appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council; provided, however, that for appointive salaried offices which, by general statute, are required to have two-year terms, such officers shall be appointed as provided in section 2-72 except that they shall be appointed to serve concurrently with the term of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 83-204, § 3, 7-6-83) 
Sec. 2-74. - Removal from office. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, any person appointed to an office as provided in this article shall serve at the will of the city council, and may be removed at any time, with or without cause, except where in direct conflict with the general laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 83-204, § 4, 7-6-83) 
Secs. 2-75-2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-71 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-101. - Nonparticipation in state firefighters' relief and retirement fund. 
    The city hereby elects not to participate in the state firefighters' relief and retirement fund. 
(Ord. No. 98, § 1, 10-19-77) 
Secs. 2-102-2-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RETIREMENT 

Sec. 2-126. - Agreements with state employee retirement system. 
    The city council, acting for and on behalf of the city, shall enter into all necessary agreements with the Employees Retirement System of Texas for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the TMRS Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 851 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 89-289, § 1, 2-15-89) 
Sec. 2-127. - Mayor to be agent for execution of necessary agreements. 
    The mayor is hereby appointed as the agent of the city council and of the city to execute all necessary agreements and instruments for and in behalf of the city council and city. 
(Ord. No. 89-289, § 2, 2-15-89) 
Sec. 2-128. - Assessments, collections, payments and reports to be made by city secretary. 
    The city secretary is hereby directed to be the person responsible for making assessments, collections, payments and reports as required by the Employees Retirement System of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 89-289, § 3, 2-15-89) 
Sec. 2-129. - Social security fund. 
    A sufficient sum of money shall be allocated and set aside from available funds for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of TMRS Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 851 et seq. Such money, so allocated and set aside, shall be known as the City of Taylor Lake Village Social Security Fund, which fund shall be set aside and maintained in the regular city depository. 
(Ord. No. 89-289, § 4, 2-15-89) 
Secs. 2-130-2-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 2-146. - Title, policy and purpose of article. 
    This article shall be known and cited as the "Records and Information Management Ordinance for the City of Taylor Lake Village, Texas." It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to develop a records and information management program that provides for efficient, economical and effective control over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all city records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition. 
(Ord. No. 90-309, § 1, 11-7-90) 
Sec. 2-147. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City record means a local government record, as set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 441.151(8). 
    Director and librarian means the executive and administrative officer of the state library and archives commission. 
(Ord. No. 90-309, § 2, 11-7-90) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-148. - City records declared public property. 
    All city records are hereby declared to be property of the city. No city officer or employee shall have, by virtue of his office or employment, any personal or property right to any such records even though he may have developed or compiled them. No person shall destroy, remove or use any city record except as authorized by law, this article or the policies and procedures of the city; provided, however, that no policy or procedure regarding use, removal or destruction of city records shall be adopted which conflicts with this article or applicable state or federal law. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to authorize the disclosure of city records which are exempt from disclosure under state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 90-309, § 3, 11-7-90) 
Sec. 2-149. - Records and information management responsibility established. 
    There is hereby established a records and information management program. The city secretary shall administer the records and information management program and shall be responsible for city-wide files management. In addition, the city secretary shall have direction and control of the city's records disposition program. 
(Ord. No. 90-309, § 4, 11-7-90) 
Sec. 2-150. - Duties of city secretary. 
    The city secretary shall: 
(1)	Assist in establishing and developing policies and procedures for a records management program for the city; 
(2)	Administer the records management program and provide assistance to custodians for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping; 
(3)	In cooperation with the custodians of the records: 
a.	Prepare and file with the director and librarian the records control schedules and amended schedules required by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 203.041, and the list of obsolete records as provided by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 203.444; and 
b.	Prepare or direct the preparation of requests for authorization to destroy records not on an approved control schedule as provided by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 203.045, or requests to destroy the originals of permanent records that have been microfilmed as provided by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 204.008, and of electronic storage authorization requests as provided by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 205.007. 
(4)	In cooperation with custodians, identify and take adequate steps to protect essential city records; 
(5)	In cooperation with custodians, ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of city records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the city's records management program, this article and rules adopted pursuant hereto; 
(6)	Disseminate to the city council and custodians information concerning state laws, administrative rules and the policies of the government relating to local government records; and 
(7)	In cooperation with custodians, establish procedures to ensure that the handling of city records by the records management officer or those under the officer's authority is carried out in compliance with the records management program and with due regard for: 
a.	The duties and responsibilities of custodians that may be imposed by law; and 
b.	The confidentiality of information in records to which access is restricted by law. 
(Ord. No. 90-309, § 5, 11-7-90) 
Sec. 2-151. - Responsibilities of city department heads. 
    All city department heads are responsible for the implementation and operation of effective files operations, record transfers and dispositions, and other activities in accordance with the provisions of this article within their areas of responsibility. They shall designate records coordinators within their offices and provide the city secretary the names of such designees and of all file stations and file custodians under their supervision. Persons designated as records coordinators shall report directly to the head of their department on matters relating to the records management program and should have appropriate access to all files in their department. 
(Ord. No. 90-309, § 6, 11-7-90) 
Sec. 2-152. - Responsibilities of records coordinators. 
    Each records coordinator shall coordinate the records management program between the city secretary and personnel in the record coordinator's office to ensure that the provisions of this article are followed. This responsibility shall include overseeing the application of records schedules within the office or department. 
(Ord. No. 90-309, § 7, 11-7-90) 
Sec. 2-153. - City offices to use record schedules. 
    All city offices and departments shall adopt records retention and disposition schedules and destroy, transfer or otherwise dispose of records only according to such schedules. 
(Ord. No. 90-309, § 8, 11-7-90) 
Sec. 2-154. - Development of records retention and disposition schedules. 
(a)	Initial retention periods to be included in records schedules shall be established by the city secretary and department heads. These retention schedules shall be submitted to the city attorney for review who shall notify the city secretary within 15 days of the approval or objection of any retention period. If no objection has been submitted within 15 days, the records schedule shall be adopted and have full force as sufficient authorization for records destruction or other action. If objection is made, the city secretary shall amend the retention period to the satisfaction of the office or department concerned and the city attorney. Revision of retention periods shall be submitted for review to the city attorney in the same manner as the original retention periods. 
(b)	When a records retention and disposition schedule is adopted, it shall thenceforth constitute full authority to destroy, transfer or take other actions, and the city council hereby directs that such actions be taken by the city secretary or under her supervision. The city secretary shall notify the state librarian of the intended destruction, as may be required by law, but no further notice to the city council or other city office shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 90-309, § 9, 11-7-90) 
Sec. 2-155. - Destruction of original city records. 
    No original city record shall be destroyed if such destruction is contrary to any state or federal law. Prior to the destruction of any original city record, the city secretary shall obtain the advice and consent of the city attorney. Any original city record, the subject matter of which is in litigations, may not be destroyed until such litigation is final. 
(Ord. No. 90-309, § 10, 11-7-90) 
Sec. 2-156. - One-time destruction of obsolete records. 
    Prior to adoption of records schedules for an office, one-time destruction of accumulated obsolete records of that office may be made by or under the supervision of the city secretary. Prior to such destruction the city secretary shall submit lists of records to be destroyed to the department head and the city attorney, who shall give notice within 30 days of any records they believe should not be destroyed, and such records shall be retained for a period agreed upon. The city secretary shall also submit notice as required by law to the state librarian. Obsolete records shall include those no longer created by the office or department and no longer needed for administrative, legal, fiscal or other research purposes. 
(Ord. No. 90-309, § 11, 11-7-90) 
Sec. 2-157. - Records center. 
    A records center shall be maintained by the city which shall utilize one or more locations to store inactive records; to ensure the security of such records from deterioration, theft or damage during the period of storage; and to permit fast, efficient retrieval of information from stored records. 
(Ord. No. 90-309, § 12, 11-7-90) 
Sec. 2-158. - Preservation of permanent records. 
    The city secretary shall develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of historically valuable records of the city. If city-owned facilities are not available, the city secretary shall arrange for the transfer of such records to the state library for perpetual care and preservation in one of its nearby regional historical resource depositories, or shall make other arrangements for their permanent preservation not contrary to law or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 90-309, § 13, 11-7-90) 
Sec. 2-159. - Noncurrent records not to be maintained in office files. 
    Records no longer required in the conduct of current business by any office of the city shall be promptly transferred to the records center or archives or the state library, or be destroyed at the time such action is designated on an approved records schedule. Such records shall not be maintained in current office files or equipment. 
(Ord. No. 90-309, § 14, 11-7-90) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 30. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal control officer means a person in the city hired or contracted for the control and enforcement of this chapter. Police officers of the city are authorized to act as or for the animal control officer. 
    At-large means an animal shall be deemed to be at-large when it is not located on the property of its owner and not under control of a competent person. 
    City pound means any premises designated by the council as the appropriate premises for the purpose of impounding and caring for all animals found to be at-large in violation of this chapter or suspected of being rabid, or known to be rabid. 
    Owner means any person, group of persons or any corporation owning, keeping or harboring an animal. 
    Restraint means controlled by a leash, at heel beside a competent person and obedient to that person's commands, or within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets, or within the property limits of its owner or keeper. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 1, 1-17-79) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-2. - Owner restraint of at-large animals required. 
    All dogs within the city shall be restrained by their owner, or person having control or custody of any dogs, at all times, subject to the exemptions provided herein. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, or having control over, or having custody of any animal to permit or allow such animal to be at-large upon any public roadway, street, alley, court, square, park, sidewalk or any other public grounds or public property within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 2, 1-17-79; Ord. No. 02-458, § 1, 4-3-02) 
Sec. 6-3. - At-large animals prohibited; exemption. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control over, or having custody of, any animal to permit or allow such animal to be at-large upon any private properties, residential or commercial, within the corporate limits of the city. Nothing in this section should be construed to prohibit allowing an animal to be at-large within a fenced area with the permission of the owner of the premises. Provided, however, that city council may establish "no restraint" areas on public property, which shall be appropriately signed and marked with the times and any special conditions of use. Within such "no restraint" areas, owners or persons having custody or control of dogs shall be responsible for the conduct of their dogs, and such dogs must remain under voice control of the owner or person, and the owner or person having custody or control of any dog shall be fully liable for any damage to persons, property, or other dogs. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 3, 1-17-79; Ord. No. 02-458, § 2, 4-3-02) 
Sec. 6-4. - Limit on harbored dogs and cats. 
    There shall be no more than three adult dogs or three adult cats harbored in any one household within the corporate limits of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or have control over more than three adult dogs or more than three adult cats within the city, and it shall further be unlawful for any head of a household within the city to permit within his household or upon his residential premises, the harboring of more than three adult dogs or three adult cats. Dogs and cats under the age of six months are excluded from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 4, 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-5. - Maintaining unvaccinated animals. 
    Any owner who shall maintain or keep an animal more than six months of age on any premises within the corporate limits of the city which has not been vaccinated as required by article III of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 19, 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-6. - Vaccination required. 
    The owner or custodian (excluding animal shelters) of each domestic dog or cat shall have the animal vaccinated against rabies by four months of age. The animal must receive a booster within the 12-month interval following the initial vaccination. Every domestic dog or cat must be revaccinated against rabies at a minimum of at least once every 36 months with a rabies vaccine licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture. Every dog or cat shall have some means for identifying current vaccination status such as, collar, tag or microchip. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 5, 1-17-79; Ord. No. 03-476, § 1, 5-7-03) 
Sec. 6-7. - Refusal to quarantine or deliver unvaccinated animals a misdemeanor. 
    Any person who shall refuse to voluntarily quarantine his animal upon notification by the animal control officer of the necessity therefor, or who shall refuse to deliver any unvaccinated animal or other animal subject to impoundment under section 6-81, to the animal control officer, or any of his deputies, upon demand for impounding, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 20, 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-8. - Misdemeanor for owner to allow animals to be at-large. 
    Any owner, keeper or custodian of an animal who shall allow such animal to be at-large, whether on public or private property, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 21, 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-9. - Removal of collar or tag. 
    Any person who shall willfully remove from any animal a collar or tag shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 22, 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-10. - Killing or harming of animals prohibited; exception. 
    Any person who shall intentionally kill, cut, maim, harm or injure, in any manner, any dog, cat or other domestic animal or any domestic or wild bird including, but not limited to, ducks or any squirrel within the city, unless such actions are conducted in defense against an attack by such animal upon some person, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 23, 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-11. - Inspection of animals. 
    The animal control officer or his authorized deputies shall have the right, at any reasonable time, to inspect any animal to determine if such animal is vaccinated as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 24, 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-12. - Dogs or cats of dangerous or vicious propensities. 
(a)	Confinement required. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or keeping a dog or cat to fail to keep such dog or cat confined if such person knows that such dog or cat has dangerous or vicious propensities. For the purposes of this section, the term "confined" shall mean the keeping of a dog or cat in a location from which such dog or cat cannot escape, and into which a member of the general public could not gain access without forcible entry, mechanical assistance or other physical aid, or the permissive act of the owner or occupant. The term "dangerous or vicious propensities" shall mean traits, tendencies or characteristics displayed by a dog or cat that would, upon a chance encounter, place a person of ordinary sensibilities in fear of bodily harm, or would lead a reasonable person to believe that another domestic animal would, upon a chance encounter, be in immediate danger of serious bodily injury or death from such dog or cat. 
(b)	Notification to owner or keeper. Upon receipt of notice that a dog or cat has dangerous or vicious propensities, the animal control officer shall cause notice thereof to be given to the owner or keeper of such dog or cat by mailing same, certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal delivery, with the officer's return thereon indicating the time and date such notice was delivered. Such notice shall be prima facie evidence that the owner or keeper of such dog or cat has knowledge of the applicable dog's or cat's dangerous or vicious propensities. 
(c)	Appeal. The owner or keeper of a dog or cat who has received a notice that a dog or cat owned or kept by such person has been declared to have dangerous or vicious propensities may appeal such determination to the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 18, 1-17-79; Ord. No. 03-468, § 1, 2-19-03; Ord. No. 07-536, § 1, 8-1-07) 
Sec. 6-12.5. - Attacks/remedial procedures. 
(a)	Impoundment. Upon notification that a dog or cat has bitten, scratched or otherwise attacked any person, or mauled or killed any domesticated animal, the animal control officer investigate the allegation, and if he deems there is credible evidence that such event occurred, he shall seize such dog or cat and cause same to be impounded for a period of not less than ten days. Notwithstanding the foregoing, such dog or cat may, at the election of the owner or keeper thereof, be impounded at a certified veterinary facility, subject to written verification and acceptance for impoundment by the veterinarian. All expenses of impoundment, whether at a city impoundment facility or at a private veterinary facility, shall be the sole responsibility of the owner of keeper of such dog or cat. Fees for impoundment at a city facility shall be as established from time to time by the city council of city. After the expiration of ten days of impoundment, the owner or keeper shall be entitled to redeem the impounded dog or cat upon (i) payment of applicable impoundment fees, and (ii) issuance by the animal control officer of a dangerous animal registration certificate. 
(b)	Dangerous animal registration certificate. The animal control officer shall issue a dangerous animal registration certificate upon the filing of an application by the owner or keeper of a dog or cat, which application shall be subject to compliance with the following, and which shall be agreed to by the owner or keeper: 
(1)	The dog or cat subject to the registration certificate shall have a two-inch by two-inch (2" × 2") blaze red warning tag attached to its collar, which shall be kept attached by the owner or keeper for as long as such dog or cat remains in the city. In lieu thereof, such dog or cat may be equipped with a two-inch-wide blaze red collar, which shall be kept attached to the dog or cat for as long as such dog or cat remains in the city. 
(2)	The owner of keeper of such dog or cat shall post signs at the residence where such dog or cat resides, containing letters six inches in height, that contain the words "vicious dog" or "vicious cat," as applicable. Such signs shall be posted at each fence gate, and adjacent to each exterior door to the residence to which the general public has access. 
(3)	The owner or keeper of such dog or cat shall describe the confinement area(s) to be utilized to assure compliance with this section, and which shall be subject to intermittent inspection by the animal control officer. 
(4)	Payment of an application fee of $250.00. 
(5)	Dangerous animal registration certificates shall be valid for a period of one year. It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of a dog or cat required to have a dangerous animal registration certificate pursuant to this section to cause or permit such dog or cat to be within the city, whether temporarily or permanently, without having first received a dangerous animal registration certificate for the period in which the dog or cat is situated within the city. 
(c)	Appeal. Notwithstanding the provisions of (a) through (c) above, upon receipt of a complaint that a dog or cat has bitten, scratched or otherwise attacked any person, or mauled or killed any domesticated animal, the owner or keeper thereof shall have the right to appeal such determination to the municipal court. Notice of appeal shall be given not less than 30 days following impoundment of the applicable dog or cat. If the municipal court determines that the dog or cat was improperly impounded, the court shall order the city to reimburse such owner or keeper for any impoundment fees collected, to rescind requirements the dangerous animal registration certificate, and to return the dangerous animal registration certificate application fee. 
(d)	Destruction of dog or cat. If any dog or cat within the city shall bite, scratch, or otherwise attack any person, or maul or kill any domesticated animal, who or which was not at the time trespassing upon the property of the owner or person having control of such animal, the municipal court shall, upon motion of the animal control officer, order and hold a hearing, and if such court shall determine at such hearing that such animal is vicious and dangerous to persons or other domestic animals, the court may order that such animal be kept muzzled, or that such animal be kept within an enclosure, or that such animal be delivered to the animal control officer and destroyed." 
(Ord. No. 07-536, § 1, 8-1-07) 
Sec. 6-13. - Feeding wild animals. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to feed a wild animal within the city. 
(b)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Feed means providing food for a wild animal, including the leaving of food, unattended, at a location available to wild animals. 
    Wild animal means a nondomesticated animal which is at large, or otherwise not within the control of an owner. The term "wild animal" shall not include bird of wildfowl of any type. 
(Ord. No. 98-395, § 2, 5-6-98) 
Secs. 6-14-6-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 6-41. - Seizure of at-large animals. 
    It shall be the duty of the animal control officer or any of his deputies, while on duty, to seize and impound, subject to the provisions of this chapter, all animals found at-large upon any public street, alley, court, square, park, sidewalk or any other public property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 6, 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-42. - Seizure of untagged dogs or cats. 
    It shall be the duty of the animal control officer or any of his deputies while on duty to seize and impound, subject to the provisions of this chapter, all dogs and cats not wearing the tag required under section 6-6, found at-large upon any vacant unfenced lot, tract or parcel of land within the corporate limits of the city. Such animal control officer or deputy is hereby authorized to enter upon any vacant unfenced lot, tract or parcel of land for the purpose of seizing and impounding any such dog or any such cat running at-large thereon. Nothing in this section should be construed as authority to enter private residential premises without the permission of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 7, 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-43. - Citizen seizure. 
(a)	Any person may take up and deliver to the animal control officer any animal which the animal control officer is, by the provisions of this chapter, required to impound. 
(b)	Any animal found trespassing or at-large upon any private property may be taken up by the owner of such property and delivered to the animal control officer. Every person other than the animal control officer or his deputies that takes up any animal under the provisions of this chapter, shall immediately thereafter give notice to the animal control officer, and every such person, or any person in whose custody such animal may in the meantime be placed, shall deliver such animal to the animal control officer without fee or charge. The animal control officer shall thereupon proceed in his duties as though such animal had been found at-large and impounded by him. When animals are found at-large and their ownership is known to the animal control officer or his deputies, such animals need not be impounded, but the officer may, in his discretion, cite the owners of such animals to appear in municipal court to answer charges of violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 115, §§ 8, 9, 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-44. - Registry required. 
    The animal control officer or his deputies upon receiving any animal shall make a complete registry, entering the breed, color and sex of such animal and the place and time of taking into custody. If wearing the tag required under section 6-6, he shall enter the name and address of the owner and the number of the tag. Tagged animals shall be kept separated from untagged animals. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 10, 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-45. - Notice of impounding. 
    As soon as possible after any animal has been delivered to the animal control officer of the city, it shall be his duty to post a notice at the city office describing each of such animals, whether bearing a veterinarian tag or not, and giving the number of the tag and the name of the person owning the animal in each case where the animal bears a tag. In case the animal bears a tag, then in addition to posting notice as required in this section, it shall be the duty of the animal control officer to notify the person to whom such tag was issued, by letter, postal card or telephone. The mailing of such letter or postal card shall be deemed sufficient notice whether the person addressed shall receive the same or not. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 11, 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-46. - Redemption; fee. 
    The owner of any untagged animal impounded may redeem such animal at any time prior to disposition or destruction by having such animal duly tagged, vaccinated against rabies, and the payment of a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 12, 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-47. - Period of impoundment-Tagged animals; notice to owner; disposition of unclaimed animals. 
    It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to keep all unclaimed animals wearing a veterinarian's tag for a period of ten days from the date of the impounding. If at the expiration of such period of time and after reasonable efforts to notify the owner such animal has not been redeemed by the owner, the city secretary shall be notified; and if the animal is not redeemed within three days after such notice, on the direction of the city secretary it shall be disposed of or destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 13, 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-48. - Same-Untagged animals; notice to owner; disposition of unclaimed animals. 
    It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to keep all unclaimed untagged animals for a period of five days. If, at the expiration of such period of time, and after reasonable efforts to notify the owner, if determinable, such animal has not been redeemed, the city secretary shall be notified; and if the animal is not redeemed within three days after such notice, on the direction of the city secretary it shall be destroyed or disposed of as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 14, 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-49. - Destruction of unclaimed animals; alternative. 
    All animals impounded and not redeemed or reclaimed after the period of time for redemption has expired, shall forthwith without further notice be destroyed in the most practicable humane manner by the animal control officer; provided, however, that in lieu of destruction of such animal by the animal control officer, such officer is authorized to donate such animals to the Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 15, 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-50. - Recordkeeping; disposition of money collected. 
    The animal control officer shall keep necessary records as are required to show in detail the disposition of all animals impounded and the money collected by him, and such other records as are required by the city secretary. All money collected shall be delivered to the city secretary, who will deposit such funds in the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 16, 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-51. - Reports. 
    The animal control officer shall file such reports as are required by the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 17, 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-52. - Pound established; fees. 
    The city council shall adopt appropriate resolutions designating a city pound and/or person to receive and impound dogs and other animals seized within the limits of the city, and the city council hereby reserves the right to choose to contract for these services. The location of such pound shall be at such place within or without the city as the city council may determine appropriate. The council additionally may, by appropriate resolution, provide for fees to be paid by the owners of such animals upon their reclamation from the city pound, and may authorize the mayor to enter into a contract to accomplish the purposes of any such resolutions passed, including a contract for the disposition of animals remaining unclaimed in the city pound and payment to the pound or person acting as manager thereof of reasonable fees for the disposition of unclaimed animals in accordance with section 6-49. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 27, 1-17-79) 
Secs. 6-53-6-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RABIES CONTROL 

Sec. 6-81. - Biting incidents; reports; quarantine. 
    Every animal which bites a person shall be promptly reported to the animal control officer and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at the direction of the animal control officer for a period of ten days and shall not be released from such quarantine except by written permission of the animal control officer. Such quarantine may be conducted on the premises of the owner, if the owner of the animal can display a valid rabies vaccination certificate issued within the 12-month through 36-month period next preceding the biting incident, or, at owner's option and expense, at the shelter designated as the city pound or, at the owner's option and expense, in a veterinary hospital of his choice. In the case of stray animals, or in the cases of animals whose ownership is unknown such quarantine shall be at the shelter designated as the city pound. However, owners of animals for which no valid rabies vaccination certificate issued within the 12-month through 36-month period next preceding the biting incident can be displayed or presented shall have their animal quarantined at a veterinary hospital of their choice at such owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 25(a), 1-17-79; Ord. No. 03-476, § 2, 5-7-03) 
Sec. 6-82. - Surrender of animal for quarantine; expenses. 
    The owner, upon demand made by the animal control officer, shall forthwith surrender any animal which is suspected of having been exposed to rabies, for supervised quarantine, which expense shall be borne by the owner, and may be reclaimed by the owner if adjudged free of rabies, upon payment of fees as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city secretary and upon compliance with licensing provisions as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 25(b), 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-83. - Pathological examination of dead animal's head. 
    When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid, or suspected by a licensed veterinarian as being rabid, and dies while under such observation, the animal control officer shall immediately send the head of such animal to the state health department for pathological examination, and shall notify the city health officer of reports of human contacts, and the diagnosis made of the suspected animal. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 25(c), 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-84. - City-wide quarantine upon positive diagnosis. 
    When the report of the state health department or a laboratory examination approved by the health department gives a positive diagnosis of rabies, the animal control officer may recommend to the village health officer a city-wide quarantine for a period of 30 days, and, upon the invoking of such quarantine, no animal shall be taken into the streets or permitted to be in the streets during such period of quarantine. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 25(d), 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-85. - Animals bitten by animals; procedures. 
    During such period of rabies quarantine as mentioned in this article, every animal bitten by an animal adjudged to be rabid shall, at the owner's option and expense, be treated for rabies infection by a licensed veterinarian, or held under six months quarantine by the owner in the same manner that other animals that are quarantined under this article, or if such owner will not comply with either of the latter provisions, such animal shall be impounded and may be destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 25(e), 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-86. - Extension of quarantine period. 
    If there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring during the period of quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended by the city health officer for an additional reasonable period of time. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 25(f), 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-87. - Killing or disposal of rabid animal. 
    No person shall kill, or cause to be killed, any rabid animal, or dispose of by burial, incineration or other means, any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal having bitten a human, except as provided in this article, nor remove such animal from the city limits without written permission from the animal control officer or chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 25(g), 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-88. - Surrender of carcass of rabid animal. 
    The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall upon demand be surrendered to the animal control officer or chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 25(h), 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-89. - Direction of disposition by city authorities. 
    The animal control officer or chief of police shall direct the disposition of any animal found to be infected with rabies. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 25(i), 1-17-79) 
Sec. 6-90. - Failure or refusal to surrender animal for quarantine or destruction. 
    No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction as required in this article when demand is made therefor by the animal control officer or chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 25(j), 1-17-79) 
Chapters 7-9 - RESERVED 
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Fees. 
    The city council may by resolution establish the fees and charges for building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical work and other permits and inspections. Permit fees, inspections fees and any other fee or charge which may be imposed or required under the provisions of any of the construction and technical codes adopted by this chapter shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 10-595, § 1, 6-2-2010; Ord. No. 12-623, § 1, 9-5-2012) 
Sec. 10-2. - Registration requirements for contractors. 
    The following requirements shall be applicable to all mechanical, plumbing, electrical, and general contractors performing work within the city: 
(1)	Administrative fee. All contractors shall be required to register with the city and pay, with the exception of plumbers licensed under Texas Occupations Code chapter 1301, an annual administrative fee for such registration prior to undertaking work within the city limits. The registration fee shall be an amount established by city council in the schedule of fees on file with the city secretary. "Contractor" shall be defined as a person, other than a homeowner, who is required to obtain a permit from the city before beginning construction or repair work on any residence or commercial establishment within the city limits. All contractors shall complete a registration form provided by the city and provide copies of all the documents listed below, as well as any other documentation requested by the city. Failure to provide this information, or update same, shall constitute cause for revocation of such registration. 
(2)	Insurance. All contractors shall be required to present proof of liability insurance in the minimum amount of $300,000.00 at the time of registration with the city. Proof of workman's compensation insurance shall not be required. 
(3)	License. The following specific licenses shall be required of each type of contractor, each of which shall be issued by, and in accordance with, the laws of the State of Texas: 
a.	Mechanical-Mechanical license. 
b.	Plumbing-Plumbers' license. 
c.	Electrical-Master electrician's license. 
d.	General-No license required. 
(Ord. No. 02-457, § 1, 3-20-02; Ord. No. 10-595, § 1, 6-2-2010; Ord. No. 12-623, § 1, 9-5-2012) 
Sec. 10-3. - Building department. 
    The city will maintain a building department to administer and enforce building codes, zoning regulations, flood ordinance regulations, and related matters as adopted by the city. 
(1)	The building department will be operated by the building official under the direct supervision of the mayor. Other city employees and contractors may participate in building department matters. City council will provide guidance and direction to the mayor on building department matters. 
(2)	The building department will issue building permits, conduct inspections, and engage in other activities required to ensure that construction, building, and remodeling work on property within the city's jurisdiction is completed in accordance with all applicable building codes, zoning regulations, flood ordinance, and similar requirements. 
(3)	The city will assess to permittees and others using building department services, fees in accordance with the current fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 11-610, § 3, 8-3-2011) 
Sec. 10-4. - Building official. 
    The city establishes the position of Building Official of the City of Taylor Lake Village. 
(1)	The building official will be responsible for implementing the functions of the building department and must be qualified to conduct the relevant duties as outlined in the building official job description. 
(2)	The engagement term, tenure, compensation, and duties of the building official will be governed by building official contract currently in effect. 
(Ord. No. 11-610, § 3, 8-3-2011) 
Sec. 10-5. - Additional building department service providers. 
    As appropriate and as determined by city council, the city may engage qualified outside service providers to support and augment the services of the building department. 
(1)	Such providers may include building inspectors, plan reviewers, engineers, or other specialties. 
(2)	Qualified providers must be approved and accepted by city council prior to their engagement and use for city-related work. 
(3)	Costs, including any associated administrative fees, for services rendered by persons classified as additional building department service providers must be borne by the building permittee requesting or requiring an outside service provider. 
(Ord. No. 11-610, § 3, 8-3-2011) 
Sec. 10-6. - Severability. 
    In the event any clause, phrase, provision, sentence, or part of this article or the application of the same to any person or circumstance shall for any reason be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect, impair, or invalidate this article as a whole or any part or provision hereof other than the part declared to be invalid or unconstitutional; and the City Council of the City of Taylor Lake Village, Texas, declares that it would have passed each and every part of the same notwithstanding the omission of any such part thus declared to be invalid or unconstitutional, whether there be one or more parts. 
(Ord. No. 11-610, § 3, 8-3-2011) 
Secs. 10-7-10-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-623, adopted Sept. 5, 2012, repealed Ord. No. 10-595, adopted June 2, 2010, which amended former §§ 10-32-10-41. Said sections pertained, respectively, to the National Fuel Gas Code; Uniform Mechanical Code; Uniform Plumbing Code; Standard Existing Buildings Code; Uniform Fire Code; National Electrical Code; International Residential Code; International Energy Code; NFPA 30 Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code; and NFPA 30A for Motor Fuel Dispensing Facilities and Repair Garages. The reader is directed to § 10-31. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Secs. 10-21-10-30. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-31. - 2012 Edition of International Code Council Codes (I-Codes) and the latest National Electrical Code. 
(a)	Adoption. The following codes: 
  2012 International Building Code 
  2012 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings 
  2012 International Mechanical Code 
  2012 International Plumbing Code (includes the 2012 IPSDC) 
  2012 International Fire Code 
  2012 International Fuel Gas Code 
  2012 International Energy Conservation Code 
  2012 International Existing Building Code 
  2012 International Wildland-Urban Interface Code 
  2012 ICC Performance Code for Buildings and Facilities 
  2012 International Property Maintenance Code 
  2012 International Zoning Code 
  2012 International Private Sewage Disposal Code 
  2012 International Green Construction Code(tm) (IgCC(tm)) 
  2012 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code(tm) (ISPSC(tm)) 
  2011 National Electrical Code (NFPA 70) 
are hereby adopted as the "Building Code" of the City of Taylor Lake Village, as published by the International Code Council, Inc. 
(b)	Local amendments. Local amendments to the code are shown in Exhibit A, attached hereto. 
(c)	Most stringent standard to apply. In any specific case, where sections of the code, or any existing city ordinance that adopts a professionally recognized building code or construction standard, specify different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements, the most restrictive standard shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(d)	Future amendments. Future amendments of the model codes (not including clarifications or technical notices of any type) are not adopted by this section, and must be subsequently approved and adopted by the city council. 
(e)	Effect of codes. The adoption of the model codes by the city shall not be construed to relieve or lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating, or controlling any building or structure for any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the city council, the city, its agents or representatives assume any such liability by reason of these regulations or the inspections authorized by this code or any permits or certificates issued under the codes. 
(f)	Penalty. Any person, corporation, or entity who or which violates any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,000.00. Each day in which any violation shall occur, or each occurrence of any violation, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 95-362, § 1, 7-19-95; Ord. No. 04-491, §§ 1-6, 2-18-04; Ord. No. 12-623, §§ 2-6, 9-5-2012) 
Editor's note- Exhibit A is not set out herein, but is on file with the city. 
Secs. 10-32-10-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 30. 

Sec. 10-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building means any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground including, but not limited to, signs, fences, walls, poles and buildings, whether of a temporary or permanent nature. 
(Ord. No. 85-236, § 1, 7-5-85) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-67. - Conditions constituting. 
    Any building or structure which has any of the following defects shall be deemed a substandard building or structure and constitute a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens: 
(1)	Any building or structure that has become deteriorated or damaged through exposure to the elements including, without limitation, flood, wind, hail or rain, or damage through fire, or damage by any other cause, to the extent that either the roof, windows or doors, or portions of the house, building or structure which protect such from the weather will no longer reasonably protect from the weather. 
(2)	Any building or structure which is so structurally deteriorated or damaged that it is in danger of collapse or which cannot be expected to withstand the reasonably anticipated storms or hurricanes. 
(3)	Any building used for the occupancy of one or more persons which is not connected to an approved public sanitary sewer or does not provide connection to a properly installed and approved septic system. 
(4)	Any building or structure not constructed or maintained in conformity with the fire code of the city when such nonconformity constitutes a serious hazard to the safety of persons or property. 
(5)	Any building or structure not wired in conformity with the electrical code of the city when such nonconformity constitutes a serious hazard to the safety of persons or property. 
(6)	Any building or structure not constructed in conformity with the plumbing code of the city when such nonconformity constitutes a serious hazard to the safety of persons or property. 
(7)	Any building or structure not constructed in conformity with the building code of the city when such nonconformity constitutes a serious hazard to the safety of persons or property. 
(8)	Any building or structure so constructed or maintained as to constitute a menace to health or safety, including: 
a.	All conditions conducive to the harboring of rats, snakes, mice, other disease-carrying animals or insects reasonably calculated to spread disease; 
b.	Conditions hazardous to the safety of persons or property, such as inadequate bracing, structural support, construction, or the presence of deteriorated materials; or 
c.	Conditions constituting an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health or safety of minors. 
(Ord. No. 85-236, § 2, 7-5-85) 
Sec. 10-68. - Declaration of nuisance. 
    All substandard buildings or structures within the provisions of this article which shall constitute a hazard to the health, safety or general welfare of its occupants, the citizens of the city, or to the public, are declared to be public nuisances and shall be ordered to be repaired, vacated or demolished as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 85-236, § 3, 7-5-85) 
Sec. 10-69. - Inspections and reports. 
    It shall be the duty of the city building official, or other representative designated by the city council, to inspect all buildings or structures reported to be, or believed to be, substandard; to present a report of such inspection to the city council; and to give notice of the intention of the city council to hold hearings and follow the procedures provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 85-236, § 4, 7-5-85) 
Sec. 10-70. - Procedures for repair, vacation or demolishing. 
    Substandard buildings or structures may be ordered to be, and, pursuant to such order, shall be repaired, vacated or demolished under the following conditions, regulations and procedures: 
(1)	Emergency measures. When there exists an emergency, certain measures may be taken, notification given and procedures followed as set forth in this subsection: 
a.	When it shall appear that a building or structure in the city is a substandard building or structure under the terms of this article and that such building or structure or the manner of its use constitutes an immediate and serious danger to life, public safety or property, the condition shall be deemed a hazard justifying the use of emergency measures, and the city council may order any of the following emergency measures to be taken: 
1.	Immediate vacation of such building, structure or adjoining buildings or structures; 
2.	Vacation of the danger area around such building or structure; 
3.	Such temporary emergency shoring and bracing of walls, roofs and supports as are required to eliminate the immediate and serious threat of damage to life or property; 
4.	Post notices on or near such building or structure, notifying the public of such orders and ordering all persons to keep out of such building or structure and the surrounding areas of danger. 
b.	When any of the above emergency measures are ordered to be taken, notice of such order shall be given by personal service on the owner and/or occupant of the building or structure or his representatives, or if such premises is unoccupied, by attaching a copy of such notice in a place of prominence on such building or structure and causing a copy of such notice to be mailed to the owner or his representative by certified mail, return receipt requested. Upon the adoption of such emergency order the city council shall schedule a public hearing and cite the owner or his representative to appear and show cause why such building or structure should not be declared a substandard building or structure and why he should not be ordered to repair, vacate or demolish such building or structure. Such citation shall be served with the notice of emergency order in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. Such hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of subsection (2) of this section. 
(2)	Normal procedure. 
a.	When it shall come to the attention of the city council that a building or structure in the city is substandard under the provisions of this article, the city council may schedule a hearing and cite the owner of the building or structure or his representative to appear and show cause why such building or structure should not be declared to be a substandard building or structure and why he should not be ordered to repair, vacate or demolish the building or structure. The date of such hearing shall be not less than ten days after such citation shall have been made. 
b.	Such citation may be served by delivery of a copy thereof to the owner and occupant, or if such premises is unoccupied, by attaching a copy of such citation in a place of prominence on such building or structure and causing a copy of such citation to be mailed to the owner or his representative by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
c.	On the day set in such citation the hearing shall be conducted, and, on the basis of such hearing, the city council shall determine whether or not the building or structure is a substandard building or structure, and shall issue such orders as shall appear reasonably necessary to prevent the building or structure from being a hazard to life or property and to eliminate the substandard qualities. 
(Ord. No. 85-236, § 5, 7-5-85) 
Sec. 10-71. - Standards for orders to repair, vacate or demolish. 
    The following standards may be followed by the city council in ordering the repair, vacation or demolition of a substandard building or structure: 
(1)	If the substandard building or structure can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer be in a condition which is in violation of the provisions of this article, it shall be ordered repaired. 
(2)	If the substandard building or structure is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of its occupants, the citizens of the city or to the public, it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
(3)	In any case where a substandard building or structure cannot be repaired so that its existence will no longer be in violation of the provisions of this article, it shall be ordered demolished. 
(Ord. No. 85-236, § 6, 7-5-85) 
Sec. 10-72. - Remedial action. 
(a)	Repair or removal; lien. After the hearing, if the building or structure is found to be substandard, the city council may direct that the building or structure be repaired or removed within a reasonable time. If such repair or removal has not been made at the expiration of the allotted time, the city may demolish and remove the building or structure at the expense of the city and assess the expenses by filing a lien on the land on which the building or structure stood or to which it was attached. 
(b)	Notice of lien assessment. Notice of the assessment of the lien shall be signed in the name of the city by the mayor. It shall state that the city council has ordered or directed the removal of a building or structure determined to be substandard, after notice to the owner and public hearing in accordance with the ordinances of the city, and that the failure of the owner to remove such substandard building or structure has resulted in the removal thereof at the expense of the city, which expense has been assessed by the city council on the land on which the building or structure stood or to which it was attached. Such notice shall further designate and describe the property against which the lien is assessed and the amount of the assessment. 
(c)	Filing and service of notice. Such notice shall be filed with the clerk of the county in which such property is located with a copy served on the owner of such property or his representative by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(Ord. No. 85-236, § 7, 7-5-85) 
Sec. 10-73. - Enforcement; court action. 
    It shall be the duty of the city attorney or attorney for the city to enforce the orders of the city council regarding substandard buildings, when authorized, by bringing an action in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 85-236, § 9, 7-5-85) 
Secs. 10-74-10-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 58; subdivision design standards for sanitary sewer, § 66-116. 

Sec. 10-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Organized disposal system means any public or private system for the collection, treatment and disposal of sewage operated in accordance with the terms and conditions of a valid waste control order (permit) issued by the state natural resource conservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 1, 9-22-76) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-102. - Prohibited disposal of household sewage. 
    No person shall dispose of household sewage by septic tank if an organized disposal system is available within 300 feet from any part of a lot requiring a system for disposal of household sewage. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 1, 9-22-76) 
Sec. 10-103. - Nuisance location of septic tank. 
    Any septic tank located within 300 feet from an available organized disposal system as described in section 10-102 is hereby declared a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 3, 9-22-76) 
Secs. 10-104-10-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING 

Sec. 10-131. - Regulation of single-family and duplex industrialized housing. 
(a)	Single-family or duplex industrialized housing must have all local permits and licenses that are applicable to other single-family or duplex dwellings. 
(b)	For purposes of this section, single-family or duplex industrialized housing is real property. 
(c)	Any industrialized housing shall: 
(1)	Have a value equal to or greater than the median taxable value for each single-family dwelling located within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located, as determined by the most recent certified tax appraisal roll for the county; 
(2)	Have exterior siding, roofing, roof pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration compatible with the single-family dwellings located within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located; 
(3)	Comply with city aesthetic standards, building setbacks, side and rear yard offsets, subdivision control, architectural landscaping, square footage, and other site requirements applicable to single-family dwellings; and 
(4)	Be securely fixed to a permanent foundation. 
(d)	For purposes of subsection (c), "value" means the taxable value of the industrialized housing and lot after installation of the housing. 
(Ord. No. 04-484, § 1, 2-4-04) 
Sec. 10-132. - Permits required. 
    Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, erect, install, or move any industrialized housing into the city shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permits. In addition to any other information otherwise required for said permits, the application shall: 
(1)	Identify each single-family dwelling located within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is to be located, and show the taxable value for each such dwelling as determined by the most recent certified tax appraisal roll for the county; 
(2)	Describe the exterior siding, roofing, roof pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration for each single-family dwelling located with 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is to be located; 
(3)	Describe the permanent foundation and method of attachment proposed for the industrialized housing; 
(4)	State the taxable value of the industrialized housing and the lot after installation of the industrialized housing; and 
(5)	Indicate the deed restrictions otherwise applicable to the real property on which the industrialized housing is to be located. 
(Ord. No. 04-484, § 1, 2-4-04) 
Sec. 10-133. - Offenses. 
    A person commits an offense if the person: 
(1)	Fails to make an application for permit as required by this article; or 
(2)	Constructs, erects, installs or moves any industrialized housing into the city which does not comply with this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-484, § 1, 2-4-04) 
State Law reference- Texas Occupation Code Chapter 1202, § 1202.253. 
Secs. 10-134-10-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION OF RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNITS 

Sec. 10-151. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to safeguard the life, health, safety, welfare, and property of individuals who, by rent, lease, or by permission, occupy a rental unit, and the general public by developing a process to enforce the minimum building standards, to identify and contact property owners of rental units in a timely manner of violations of the minimum building standards or other life safety code provisions, and to provide equitable and practical criminal, administrative, and civil penalties for the violation of minimum building standards. 
(Ord. No. 16-663, § 2, 6-15-16) 
Sec. 10-152. - Rental registration application required. 
(a)	The owner of each rental unit within the city shall register the rental unit with the city building official. 
(b)	The registration shall be on a rental registration application form prescribed by the building official and shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)	The street address and unit number, if any, of the rental unit; 
(2)	The trade name, physical address, and business address of the rental unit owner; 
(3)	The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the property manager and resident manager, if any; 
(4)	The name and physical address of designated employees or authorized representatives who shall be assigned to respond to emergency conditions at the rental unit, and a telephone number where the designated employees or representatives can be contacted during any 24-hour period. Emergency conditions shall include fire, natural disaster, flood, burst pipes, collapse hazard, and violent crime. A post office box shall not suffice for the address requirements of this section; 
(5)	The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of any mortgagees of the rental unit; 
(6)	If the property is owned by a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, limited partnership, trust or real estate investment trust, the name and address of any of the following: 
a.	For a corporation, a corporate officer; 
b.	For a partnership, a general partner; 
c.	For a limited liability company, the managing or administrative member; 
d.	For a limited partnership, a general partner; 
e.	For a limited liability partnership, a general partner; 
f.	For a limited liability limited partnership, a general partner; 
g.	For a trust, a trustee; 
h.	For a real estate investment trust, a general partner or an officer; 
i.	For any other legal entity not named above, a duly authorized agent; and 
(7)	Number of tenants occupying the rental unit; 
(8)	The tenants' names, including contact information for all persons on the current lease or rental agreement for the rental unit; and 
(9)	The signature of the owner or the owner's agent. 
(c)	If the property is owned by a person, other than an individual, who lives outside the State of Texas, the owner shall designate a registered agent in the State of Texas, who will accept legal service on behalf of the owner. If the property is owned by a person who is an individual and who lives outside the State of Texas, the individual shall either designate a registered agent, in the State of Texas who will accept legal service on behalf of the owner or provide a physical address where the owner may receive legal service. A designation of a registered agent under this section shall include the name and address of the agent. 
(d)	If any change in the information required by this section occurs the owner shall notify the building official within 30 days of the change in a manner prescribed by the building official. 
(e)	Any existing tenancy or lease executed prior to the adoption of this chapter shall not be affected, but the rental unit must nevertheless be registered, inspected, and licensed in accordance with this chapter. 
(f)	A person commits an offense if the person owns a rental unit and receives compensation from a tenant unless the rental unit is registered and licensed in accordance with this chapter. 
(g)	The owner of each rental unit shall submit a rental registration application to the building official within 60 days of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy for any new project; within 30 days of a change in occupancy or tenant of the rental unit, within 30 days of a change in ownership; and within one year of any prior registration for the rental unit. 
(Ord. No. 16-663, § 2, 6-15-16) 
Sec. 10-153. - License and fees; renewal of registration. 
(a)	The owner shall submit the rental registration application and the registration fee for each rental unit, which city council shall establish by resolution, to the building official. 
(b)	The building official shall issue a rental registration license within ten calendar days of the receipt of a proper completed rental registration application, including any required inspections or certifications, as required by section 10-154. 
(c)	A license is valid for one year from the date the completed registration form is filed in the office of the building official, and payment of the registration fee for that year has been made, unless the ownership or tenancy of the property changes. 
(d)	A license is not assignable or transferable. If a change of ownership or tenancy of the property occurs during the period that a license is otherwise valid, the owner shall have 30 days from the date the change of ownership occurred to file a new registration with the building official. 
(Ord. No. 16-663, § 2, 6-15-16) 
Sec. 10-154. - Inspection and certification. 
(a)	The building official may provide a form for reporting code violations to the city to tenants. 
(b)	The building official may conduct: 
(1)	Initial inspections as required for rental registration or change in tenants; and 
(2)	Periodic inspections as required or allowed by any other applicable law or ordinance. 
(c)	The building official is authorized to make follow-up inspections of a rental unit that fails an initial inspection or a periodic inspection. 
(d)	Any property owner has the right to refuse any inspection by the building official. As an alternative to the inspection requirement for the rental registration, the owner may provide to the building official a signed letter certifying that the owner's rental unit is in compliance with all minimum building standards and life safety codes, or have a certified real estate inspector provide such certification. 
(e)	In addition to other authority granted by this article, the building official has all rights and authority granted by Article 18.05 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. Inspections shall comply with all federal, state, and local laws, regulations, and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 16-663, § 2, 6-15-16) 
Sec. 10-155. - Prohibitions. 
(a)	A person commits an offense if the person misstates or omits any material information contained in the rental registration license application. 
(b)	A person commits an offense if the rental unit owner authorizes a tenant to reside in a rental unit within the city without a current and valid rental registration license for such unit. 
(c)	A person commits an offense if the person fails to update any material information on the rental registration license application within 30 days of the change and upon renewal. 
(Ord. No. 16-663, § 2, 6-15-16) 
Sec. 10-156. - Right to enter and inspect. 
    During regular business hours or in an emergency, the building official, the building official's representative, or any duly authorized city representative, upon the showing of proper credentials and the discharge of his duties, may enter any building or rental unit within a building. If a owner or tenant refuses to permit access to such property, then the building official may apply for a search warrant or court order in an appropriate court to permit an administrative search of the rental unit. 
(Ord. No. 16-663, § 2, 6-15-16) 
Chapters 11-13 - RESERVED 
Chapter 14 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

ARTICLE II. - REGULATION OF BASIC CABLE SERVICE RATES 

Sec. 14-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Basic cable rates means the monthly charges for a cable subscription to the basic service tier and associated equipment and installation. 
    Basic service tier means a separately available service tier to which subscription is required for access to any other tier of service, including as a minimum, but not limited to, all must-carry signals, all public, educational or governmental channels and all domestic television signals other than superstations. 
    Cable Act of 1992 means The Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992. 
    Cable operator means any person or group of persons: 
(1)	Who provides cable service over a cable system within the city under a franchise issued by the city and who directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such a cable system; or 
(2)	Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Federal Communications Commission Rate Regulations means the regulations prescribed by the Federal Communications Commission on or about April 1, 1993 in the Report and Order In the Matter of Implementation of Sections of Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992; Rate Regulation, MM Docket 92-266, FCC 93-177 (May 3, 1993), as amended by the Thirteenth Order on Reconsideration (September 22, 1995). 
    PEG channel means the channel capacity designated for public, educational or governmental use, and facilities and equipment for the use of that channel capacity. 
(Ord. No. 97-385, § 1, 9-3-97) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-32. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any cable system operator that does not comply with the requirements of this article or that does not comply with a rate decision or refund order adopted by the council shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished according to section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 97-385, § 5, 9-3-97) 
Sec. 14-33. - Authority to regulate. 
    The city is authorized to regulate the basic service rates of any cable operator operating within the city pursuant to the Cable Act of 1992, the Federal Communications Commission Rate Regulations, and the filing of the Certification of Franchising Authority to Regulate Basic Cable Service Rates and Initial Finding of Lack of Effective Competition. The city shall have and may exercise all authority provided in the Cable Act of 1992, the Federal Communications Commission Rate Regulations and state law. 
(Ord. No. 97-385, § 2, 9-3-97) 
Sec. 14-34. - Procedures for review of basic cable rates. 
(a)	In the initial and any subsequent regulation of basic cable rates of any cable operator operating within the city, the city will follow the requirements of the Cable Act of 1992 and Federal Communications Commission Rate Regulations, as such act or regulations may be hereafter amended. This subsection shall supersede and control over any conflicting, inconsistent or different provision in a cable franchise ordinance enacted by the city. 
(b)	The city will provide a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties during the regularly scheduled city council meetings that will occur during the review time frames described in section 76.933 of the Federal Communications Commission Rate Regulations. 
(c)	The city may request additional information from a cable operator during the rate regulation process described in section 76.933 of the Federal Communications Commission Rate Regulations, and the operator shall have 15 days after receipt of such information requests to respond to the city's requests. 
(Ord. No. 97-385, § 3, 9-3-97) 
Sec. 14-35. - Notice of increase to subscribers. 
    The cable operator shall provide written notice to subscribers of any increase in the price to be charged for basic cable rates at least 30 days before any proposed increase is effective. 
(Ord. No. 97-385, § 4, 9-3-97) 
Chapters 15-17 - RESERVED 
Chapter 18 - COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-519, § 1, adopted Dec. 7, 2005, repealed the former Ch. 18, §§ 18-1, 18-2, 18-21-18-27, and enacted a new Ch. 18 as set out herein. The former Ch. 18 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 80-144, §§ 1-7, adopted May 7, 1980; Ord. No. 87-267, §§ 1, 2, adopted Aug. 19, 1987; Ord. No. 89-300, § 1, adopted Nov. 15, 1989. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; law enforcement, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Appointment; term. 
    The judge of the municipal court shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. The term of office for such judge shall be for a period of two years, which shall correspond with the term of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 05-519, § 1, 12-7-05) 
Sec. 18-2. - Alternate judge; term. 
    One or more alternate judges of the municipal court may be appointed in the same manner that the judge is appointed. The term of office for alternate judge(s) shall correspond with the term of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 05-519, § 1, 12-7-05) 
Sec. 18-3. - Clerk; appointment; term. 
    The clerk of the municipal court shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. The term of office for the clerk shall correspond with the term of the mayor. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the mayor and city council may appoint the city secretary as acting clerk of the municipal court, in which case the clerk shall serve at the will and pleasure of the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 05-519, § 1, 12-7-05) 
Sec. 18-4. - Reappointment; holding over. 
    A municipal court judge who is not reappointed by the 91st day following the expiration of a term of office shall, absent action by the city council, continue to serve for another term of office beginning on the date the previous term of office expired. 
(Ord. No. 05-519, § 1, 12-7-05) 
Sec. 18-5. - Filling vacancies. 
    Vacancies in the office of judge, alternate judge, or clerk of the municipal court shall be filled by the mayor and city council for the unexpired term only. 
(Ord. No. 05-519, § 1, 12-7-05) 
Sec. 18-6. - Qualifications. 
(a)	No person shall be appointed as judge or alternate judge of the municipal court, or shall be allowed to continue in the office of judge or alternate judge of the municipal court, unless such person is a licensed attorney, in good standing with the State Bar of Texas, and shall have practiced law in the state for not less than two years prior to any such appointment. No such appointee shall hold any other office in, or be otherwise employed by, the City of Taylor Lake Village. 
(b)	The judge and each alternate judge shall take the requisite oath of office required by the Constitution and state law to be taken by other city officials. 
(Ord. No. 05-519, § 1, 12-7-05) 
Sec. 18-8. - Compensation. 
    The judge and each alternate judge of the municipal court shall receive a salary from the city in such amounts as shall be determined from time to time by the city council. No such salary shall be reduced during a term of office, nor shall any salary shall be based, directly or indirectly, on the frequency or amount of fines, fees, or costs collected during the term of office. 
(Ord. No. 05-519, § 1, 12-7-05) 
Secs. 18-9-18-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FEES AND SPECIAL EXPENSES 

Sec. 18-21. - Fees and special expenses. 
(a)	Failure to appear. Any person who fails to appear pursuant to a complaint or citation for an offense described by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 706.002(a), shall be required to pay an administrative fee of $30.00 for each complaint or citation reported to the Texas Department of Public Safety as authorized by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code Ch. 706. The fee shall not be required if the person is acquitted of the charges for with he or she failed to appear. The person shall pay the fee when: 
(1)	The court enters judgment on the underlying offense reported to the Texas Department of Public Safety; 
(2)	The underlying offense is dismissed; or 
(3)	Bond or other security is posted to reinstate the charge for which the warrant was issued. 
(b)	Failure to pay judgment. Any person who fails to pay or satisfy a judgment ordering the payment of a fine and cost in the manner the court orders shall be required to pay an administrative fee of $30.00. 
(c)	Court fee/jury fee. A person convicted of any offense, other than an offense relating to a pedestrian or the parking of a motor vehicle, shall pay as a court cost, in addition to all other costs, a fee of $4.00 to be used to reimburse counties for the cost of juror services as provided by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 61.0015. The clerk of the court shall remit the fees collected under this article to the state comptroller in the manner provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 133, subch. B. 
(d)	Effective date. This section applies only to an offense committed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(Ord. No. 05-519, § 1, 12-7-05) 
Sec. 18-22. - Court technology fee/fund. 
(a)	There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund (the "technology fund"), pursuant to Article 102.0172, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(b)	The city authorizes the assessment and collection of a municipal court technology fee (the "fee") in the amount of $4.00 against all defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
(1)	A sentence is imposed on the person; 
(2)	The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision; or 
(3)	The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(c)	The municipal court clerk is hereby authorized and required to collect the fee and to pay same to the technology fund. 
(d)	The technology fund shall be used only for the purposes of financing the purchase or maintenance of items used to provide certain technological enhancements for the municipal court of the city. Technological enhancement items shall include any and all of the following items, as set forth in Article 102.0172(d) of the Code of Criminal Procedure: 
(1)	Computer systems; 
(2)	Computer networks; 
(3)	Computer hardware; 
(4)	Computer software; 
(5)	Imaging systems; 
(6)	Electronic kiosks; 
(7)	Electronic ticket writers; 
(8)	Docket management systems; and 
(9)	Paying the cost for continuing education and training for justice court judges and clerks regarding technological enhancements. 
(e)	The technology fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-519, § 1, 12-7-05) 
Sec. 18-23. - Court building security fee/fund 
(a)	There is hereby created and established a municipal court building security fund (the "building security fund"), pursuant to Article 102.017, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(b)	The City authorizes the assessment and collection of a municipal court building security fee (the "fee") in the amount of $3.00 against all defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
(1)	A sentence is imposed on the person; 
(2)	The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision; or 
(3)	The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(c)	The municipal court clerk shall collect the fee and to pay same to the treasury of the city. All fees so collected and paid over to the treasury of the city shall be segregated in the building security fund. 
(d)	The building security fund shall be used only for the purposes of financing the purchase of items used to provide security services for the building or buildings housing the municipal court of the city. Security services items shall include any and all of the following items, as set forth in Article 102.017(d) of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure: 
(1)	The purchase or repair of X-ray machines and conveying systems; 
(2)	Handheld metal detectors; 
(3)	Walkthrough metal detectors; 
(4)	Identification cards and systems; 
(5)	Electronic locking and surveillance equipment; 
(6)	Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables, or contract security personnel during times when they are providing appropriate security services; 
(7)	Signage; 
(8)	Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems; 
(9)	Locks, chains, alarms, or similar security devices; 
(10)	The purchase or repair of bullet-proof glass; and 
(11)	Continuing education on security issues for court personnel and security personnel; and 
(12)	Financing of security personnel. 
(e)	The building security fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-519, § 1, 12-7-05) 
Chapters 19-21 - RESERVED 
Chapter 22 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; emergency services, ch. 26; law enforcement, ch. 38. 

Sec. 22-1. - Organization. 
    There exists the office of emergency management director of the City of Taylor Lake Village, which shall e held by the mayor in accordance with state law. 
(1)	An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director; 
(2)	The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management with the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter. He/she may delegate authority for execution shall remain with the director. 
(3)	The operational emergency management organization of the City of Taylor Lake Village shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. 
(Ord. No. 98-398, § 1, 7-1-98; Ord. No. 05-512, § 1, 10-5-05; Ord. No. 09-579, § 1, 10-21-09) 
Sec. 22-2. - Emergency management director; powers and duties. 
    The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)	Surveying actual or potential hazards which threat life and property within the city and identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. 
(2)	Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the City of Taylor Lake Village, and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan. 
(3)	Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary. 
(4)	Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations, or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this chapter. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to brings its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant to the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary. 
(5)	Direction and control of the operations of the Taylor Lake Village Emergency Management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(6)	Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(7)	Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations. 
(8)	Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment, or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(9)	Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(10)	Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions, which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
(11)	Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(12)	Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplied, and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided herein. 
(13)	Other requirements as specifies in the Texas Disaster Act (V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 418). 
(Ord. No. 98-398, § 2, 7-1-98; Ord. No. 05-512, § 2, 10-5-05; Ord. No. 09-579, § 2, 10-21-09) 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-71 et seq. 
Sec. 22-4. - Interjurisdictional program. 
    The mayor is herby authorized to join with the county judge of the County of Harris County and the mayors of the other cities in said County, the formation of an interjurisdictional emergency management program for the County of Harris; and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of an interjurisdictional emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect the City of Taylor Lake Village. 
(Ord. No. 98-398, § 4, 7-1-98; Ord. No. 05-512, § 4, 10-5-05; Ord. No. 09-579, § 4, 10-21-09) 
Sec. 22-5. - Override. 
    At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 98-398, § 5, 7-1-98; Ord. No. 05-512, § 5, 10-5-05; Ord. No. 09-579, § 5, 10-21-09) 
Sec. 22-6. - Liability. 
    This ordinance is an exercise by the City of Taylor Lake Village, its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and the City of Taylor Lake Village, the agents and representatives of said city, any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, and any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall to the extent permitted by Texas and federal law as amended, be protected from liability for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. 
(Ord. No. 98-398, § 6, 7-1-98; Ord. No. 05-512, § 6, 10-5-05; Ord. No. 09-579, § 6, 10-21-09) 
Sec. 22-7. - Commitment of funds. 
    No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior ad specific approval of the city council unless during a declared disaster during a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property. 
(Ord. No. 98-398, § 7, 7-1-98; Ord. No. 05-512, § 7, 10-5-05; Ord. No. 09-579, § 7, 10-21-09) 
Sec. 22-8. - Offenses; penalties. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)	It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry, or display any emblem, insignia, or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the City of Taylor Lake Village, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(c)	Convictions for violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or such maximum amount as is set by V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.173(b), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 98-398, § 8, 7-1-98; Ord. No. 05-512, § 8, 10-5-05; Ord. No. 09-579, § 8, 10-21-09) 
Sec. 22-9. - Limitations. 
    This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statue or with any military or naval order, rule, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 98-398, § 10, 7-1-98; Ord. No. 05-512, § 10, 10-5-05; Ord. No. 09-579, § 10, 10-21-09) 
Chapters 23-25 - RESERVED 
Chapter 26 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Emergency management, ch. 22. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Law enforcement, ch. 38. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system means, individually or collectively, a burglar alarm protection service, fire alarm protection service, burglar alarm system or fire alarm system; not to include simple smoke alarm systems not connected to alarm service organizations or that cannot be heard outside of the building. 
    Burglar alarm protection service means any service whereby the person providing such service employs electronic or mechanical means to detect the unlawful entry or attempted unlawful entry into premises within the city, the report of which is then transmitted to the police department of the city or is in any manner connected with the communication system of the police department of the city. 
    Burglar alarm system means a local protective signaling system so designed and operated that both the equipment for detecting unlawful entry and the equipment for sounding a warning thereof by bell, horn, siren or other means are located on the particular premises being protected, and the warning sound is designed to be heard or capable of being heard outside the premises at a distance of 50 feet from such premises. 
    False alarm means the activation of any alarm system which was not the result of an emergency or threat of emergency of the kind for which the burglar alarm protection service, fire alarm protection service, burglar alarm system or fire alarm system was designed to give notice. 
    Fire alarm protection service means any service whereby the person providing such service employs electronic or mechanical means to detect the presence of fire on any premises in the city, the report of which is then transmitted to the police department or fire department of the city, or is in any manner connected with the fire alarm communication system of the police department or fire department of the city. 
    Fire alarm system means a local protective signaling system so designed and operated that both the equipment for detecting fire and the equipment for sounding a warning thereof by bell, horn, siren or other means are located on the particular premises being protected, and the warning sound is designed to be heard or capable of being heard outside the premises at a distance of 50 feet from such premises. 
(Ord. No. 89-286, § 2, 2-1-89) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-32. - Response by police and fire department; charges for false alarms. 
    The police department and/or fire department of the city will respond to proper notification of activation of an alarm system without charge except: Fees as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city secretary shall be charged for each response by the police department and/or fire department to notification of activation of an alarm system in excess of three fire alarms and five burglar alarms from the same site of an alarm system within the previous 12-month period; provided, however, that no fee will be charged for a response to notification of the activation of an alarm system if the registration certificate holder shows that the activation was not a false alarm, and any response by the police department and/or fire department to notification of the activation of an alarm system will not be included in determining the fees referred to in this section if the registration certificate holder shows that such was not a false alarm. For purposes of determining the fees set out in this section, the burden shall be on the owner of the alarm system to prove that the activation of the alarm system was not a false alarm. 
(Ord. No. 89-286, § 12, 2-1-89; Ord. No. 01-441, § 12, 6-20-01) 
Sec. 26-33. - Shutoff requirements. 
(a)	Shutoff devices required. It shall be unlawful for any person to install, cause to be installed or permit the installation of any burglar alarm system or fire alarm system within the city which is not equipped with a shutoff device. For the purposes of this section a shutoff device shall mean an automatic device which causes the audible signal of the alarm to shut off and discontinue after a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes from the time of the commencement of the emission of such audible signal. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, cause to be operated, or permit the operation of a burglar alarm system or fire alarm system within the city which is not equipped with a shutoff device designed and adjusted to discontinue the emission of the audible signal of such alarm within 15 minutes from the time of the commencement of the emission of such audible signal. 
(b)	Installation of automatic dialing devices. It shall be unlawful for any person to install, cause to be installed or permit the installation of any alarm system within the city equipped with an automatic dialing device unless such device is equipped with a means to automatically disconnect and discontinue the transmittal of the prerecorded message after the message has been communicated to the police department or fire department. For the purposes of this section, an automatic dialing device is any device connected to any alarm system which automatically sends a prerecorded message indicating the activation of the alarm system to the police department or fire department. 
(c)	Operation of automatic dialing device. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, cause to be operated or permit the operation of an alarm system within the city equipped with an automatic dialing device unless such device is equipped with a means to automatically disconnect and discontinue the transmittal of the prerecorded message after such message has been communicated to the police department or fire department. 
(d)	Sprinkler system exception. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the provisions of subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section shall not apply to any fire alarm system or fire alarm protection service, or the erection, operation or maintenance thereof, if such system or service activates, operates or deactivates a sprinkler system. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "sprinkler system" shall mean a sprinkler system for fire protection purposes and is an integrated system of underground and overhead piping designed in accordance with fire protection engineering standards. The installation includes a water supply, such as a gravity tank, fire pump, reservoir or pressure tank and/or connection by underground piping to a city main. The portion of the sprinkler system above the ground is a network of specially sized or hydraulically designed piping installed in a building, structure or area, generally overhead, and to which sprinklers are connected in a systematic pattern. The system includes a controlling valve and a device for activating an alarm when the system is in operation. The system is usually activated by heat from a fire and discharges water over the fire area. 
(Ord. No. 89-286, § 13, 2-1-89) 
Sec. 26-34. - Activation of alarm system for purposes other than emergency prohibited; exception. 
    No person shall intentionally activate an alarm system for any purpose other than an emergency or threat of emergency of the kind for which the alarm system was designed to give notice; provided, however, that it shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the alarm system was activated solely for the purpose of testing the alarm system, and the person who tested the alarm system took reasonable precautions to avoid any request being made to the police department or fire department to respond to such alarm. This section shall not apply to conduct which is in violation of V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.06. 
(Ord. No. 89-286, § 14, 2-1-89) 
Sec. 26-35. - Confidential information. 
    All information received by the city as required by this article shall be deemed confidential and not a matter of public record. No such information shall be released to any person other than necessary city administrative, police and fire personnel, unless specifically authorized, in writing, by the person in control of the property about which such information is related. 
(Ord. No. 89-286, § 15, 2-1-89) 
Sec. 26-36. - Compliance with article provisions. 
    Each holder of a registration certificate, and each person having control over property on which an alarm system is installed, has an affirmative duty to comply with all provisions of this article. It shall not be a defense to prosecution of such a person that he was acting without culpable mental state. 
(Ord. No. 89-286, § 16, 2-1-89) 
Secs. 26-37-26-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 26-56. - Application for registration of burglar or fire alarm system. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to install, cause to be installed, or permit the installation of a burglar alarm system or fire alarm system within the city without filing a registration of such system with the city secretary. Applications for registration shall be available at the city office, and each application shall comply with section 26-59; provided, however, that if the burglar alarm system or fire alarm system is used in conjunction or in combination with a burglar alarm protection service or fire alarm protection service, then, in such event, the application shall also comply with section 26-60. 
(Ord. No. 89-286, § 3, 2-1-89) 
Sec. 26-58. - Operation of system or protection service without registration. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit the operation of a burglar alarm system, fire alarm system, burglar alarm protection service or fire alarm protection service on property over which such person has control, unless such person has registered such burglar alarm system, fire alarm system, burglar alarm protection service or fire alarm protection service. 
(Ord. No. 89-286, § 5, 2-1-89) 
Sec. 26-59. - Contents of application for registry of burglar or fire alarm systems. 
    Application for registration of a burglar alarm system or fire alarm system shall be made by a person having control over the property on which the burglar alarm system or fire alarm system is to be installed and operated or is being operated. Applications shall be filed with the city secretary and shall contain the following: 
(1)	The street address of the property on which the alarm system is installed; 
(2)	The name and telephone number of the occupant of the premises on which the alarm system is installed; 
(3)	If an occupant is not the owner, the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property on which the alarm system is installed; 
(4)	The name, address and telephone number of two persons to be notified if the alarm system is activated. The names of the persons shall be given only if they are able and have agreed to: 
a.	Receive notification at any time; 
b.	Come to the site of the alarm system within one hour after receiving a request from a member of the police department; and 
c.	Grant access to the site of the alarm system and to deactivate the alarm if such becomes necessary; or 
(5)	The name, address and telephone number of the person to be notified to render service or repairs during any hour of the day or night that the alarm system sounds. 
(Ord. No. 89-286, § 6, 2-1-89) 
Sec. 26-60. - Contents of application for registry of burglar or fire alarm protection service. 
    Applications for registration of a burglar alarm protection service and any included burglar alarm system, or fire alarm protection service and any included fire alarm system shall be made by a person having control over the property on which the alarm system is to be installed and operated or is being operated. Applications shall be filed with the city secretary and shall contain the following: 
(1)	The street address of the property on which the alarm system is installed; 
(2)	The name and telephone number of the occupant of the premises on which the alarm system is installed; 
(3)	If an occupant is not the owner, the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property on which the alarm system is installed; 
(4)	The name, address and telephone number of the person providing the burglar alarm protection service or fire alarm protection service; 
(5)	If a burglar alarm protection service includes a burglar alarm system or if a fire alarm protection service includes a fire alarm system, the information specified in subsection 26-59(4) and (5). 
(Ord. No. 89-286, § 7, 2-1-89) 
Sec. 26-61. - Validity period; renewal. 
    Each registration issued in accordance with this article shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date it is issued. The registration shall be renewed in accordance with sections 26-59 and 26-60. 
(Ord. No. 89-286, § 8, 2-1-89) 
Sec. 26-62. - Fees. 
    The fee for registration, pursuant to this article, shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 89-286, § 9, 2-1-89) 
Sec. 26-63. - Personal to applicant; transferral. 
    Each registration pursuant to this article shall be personal to the applicant and is not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 89-286, § 10, 2-1-89) 
Sec. 26-64. - Issuance of certificate; display; inspection. 
    Copies of registration certificates shall be issued by the city secretary at the time a valid application is made. The holder of the registration certificate shall keep such certificate at the location of the premises being protected and shall produce such permit for inspection upon the request of any member of the police department or fire department. 
(Ord. No. 89-286, § 11, 2-1-89) 
Chapters 27-29 - RESERVED 
Chapter 30 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 6; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; substandard buildings, § 10-66 et seq.; floods, ch. 34; natural resources, ch. 42; planning and zoning, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 58; subdivisions, ch. 66; waterways, ch. 78; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Deposit of refuse in Taylor Bayou or Taylor Lake. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in Taylor Bayou or Taylor Lake the carcass of any dead animal, tin cans, discarded buckets or pails, garbage, paper, ashes, earth or refuse of any character, or any other articles which might pollute the water, obstruct the flow or interfere with navigation. 
(Ord. No. 18, § 1, 12-22-62) 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 58. 
Secs. 30-2-30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - JUNK VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 

Sec. 30-31. - Definitions. 
    Any word not specifically defined in this section shall have the same meaning as that word has under Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9A, § 5.01. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antique auto means a passenger car or truck that is at least 35 years old. 
    Collector means the owner of one or more antique or special interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires, trades or disposes of special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order to restore, preserve and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
    Demolisher means a person or entity whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into processed scrap or scrap metal or to otherwise wreck or dismantle a motor vehicle. 
    Junk vehicle means any motor vehicle, as defined in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d-11, § 1, as amended, which is: 
(1)	Inoperative and which does not have lawfully affixed thereto either an unexpired license plate or plates or a valid motor vehicle safety inspection certificate and which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled or discarded; or 
(2)	Has remained inoperable for more than 72 consecutive hours if on public property and 30 consecutive days if on private property. 
    Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been altered or modified from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists. 
(Ord. No. 89-299, § 1, 9-14-89; Ord. No. 01-443, § 1, 5-17-00) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-32. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person who maintains a nuisance shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-9. In addition, upon conviction, the court shall order removal and abatement of the nuisance, which order may be enforced by any means authorized by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 89-299, § 6, 9-14-89) 
Sec. 30-33. - Declared public nuisance. 
    A junked vehicle that is located in any place where it is visible from a public place or public right-of-way or is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce the value of private property, invites vandalism, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors and is detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight which is adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city, and such vehicles are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 89-299, § 2, 9-14-89; Ord. No. 09-567, § 1.A, 1-7-09) 
Sec. 30-34. - Administration; authority to enforce article provisions. 
    Whenever it shall be determined by the chief of police or any full-time, salaried, city officer acting under his direction, that a junked vehicle or part thereof, is located in a place where it is visible from a public place or public right-of-way, or constitutes a public nuisance by definition under section 30-33: 
(1)	For a nuisance on private property, the chief of police shall give not less than ten days' notice stating the nature of the public nuisance on private property, that it must be removed and abated within ten days, and that a request for a hearing must be made before expiration of the ten-day period. The notice shall be mailed, by certified mail, with a five-day return requested, to the owner or occupant of the private premises on which the public nuisance exists. If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States post office, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten days after the date of the return. In addition, notice shall be given to the last registered owner of such vehicle, if determinable. 
(2)	For a nuisance on public property, the chief of police shall give not less than ten days' notice, stating the nature of the public nuisance on public property or on a public right-of-way, that the nuisance must be removed and abated within ten days, and that a request for a hearing must be made before the expiration of the ten-day period. The notice shall be mailed, by certified mail, with a five-day return requested, to the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the public nuisance exists and to the last known registered owner, if determinable. If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States post office, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten days after the date of the return. 
(3)	When a public hearing is requested, as provided in this section, by the owner or occupant of the premises whereupon such public nuisance exists or the owner of such vehicle, it shall be held before the mayor at the city hall, at a time to be set by such official, but not less than ten days after services of notice to abate the nuisance. Following the hearing, if a public nuisance is found by the mayor to exist, he shall enter an order requiring the removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, and shall state a time for such removal to be accomplished, which in no event shall exceed ten days from the date of hearing. The order shall include a description of the vehicle, or part thereof, and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site thereof. After removal of any junked vehicle under this article, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable. 
(4)	When the junked vehicle, or part thereof, remains on the property after ordered removed, as provided by this article, the mayor may cause the vehicle to be removed and sold for the best price obtainable to a scrap yard or demolisher. All sums so raised shall be turned over to the city secretary for deposit in general fund of the city. 
(5)	If the nuisance is not removed and abated and a hearing is not requested within the ten-day period provided in subsections (1) or (2) of this section, then a nuisance complaint shall be filed in the appropriate court. 
(Ord. No. 89-299, § 3, 9-14-89; Ord. No. 09-567, § 1.B, 1-7-09) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 30-35. - Notice to the department of highways and public transportation. 
    Within five days after the date of the removal, notice shall be given to the department of highways and public transportation, identifying the vehicle, or part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 89-299, § 5, 9-14-89) 
Sec. 30-36. - Conflict with state law provisions concerning abandoned motor vehicles. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to conflict with procedures set forth for dealing with abandoned motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 89-299, § 7, 9-14-89) 
Sec. 30-37. - Exceptions to article provisions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)	A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public property; 
(2)	A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property if the vehicle and outdoor storage area are maintained in a manner so that they do not constitute a health hazard or fire hazard and also must be screened form ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery or other appropriate means. 
(Ord. No. 89-299, § 8, 9-14-89; Ord. No. 09-567, § 1.C, 1-7-09) 
Secs. 30-38-30-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE CONTROL 

Sec. 30-66. - Prohibited acts-Generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety or welfare of others within the limits of the city, unless the making and continuing of the noise is necessary for the protection or preservation of property or of the health, safety, life or limb of some person. 
(Ord. No. 79-126, § 1, 10-3-79) 
Sec. 30-67. - Same-Enumeration. 
    The acts enumerated in this article are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)	Sirens, whistles or gongs on vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or to use upon any vehicle other than police or fire department vehicles or other emergency vehicles, any gong or siren similar to that used on ambulances or vehicles of the police and fire department. 
(2)	Mufflers on engines. No person shall operate a gasoline engine or any similar engine of any kind unless such engine shall be equipped with an exhaust muffler in effective working condition, which muffler shall be used whenever the engine is in operation so that there will be no excessive or unusual noise or the engine shall be so constructed or designed that the noise is deadened as if such engine were equipped with a muffler. No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon any street unless such motor vehicle is equipped with a muffler at all times in good working order sufficient to prevent excessive or unusual noise. 
(3)	Noisy vehicles generally. It shall be unlawful to use any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle out of repair or so loud or in such a manner as to create any loud or noisy grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(4)	Playing of radios, phonographs, other sound producing or reproducing devices generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, television set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, or at any time with louder volume that is necessary for convenient hearing for persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. 
(5)	Building operations and lawn maintenance at night. It shall be unlawful for any person in conducting any building operations or lawn maintenance between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. to operate or use offensive lawn equipment or any piledriver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other apparatus, the use of which is at the time loud or unusually noisy, except in case of emergency. On Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, the hours shall be extended to between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(6)	Noise near school, church, court or hospital. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same is in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institutions, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, is hereby prohibited, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital, church or court street. 
(7)	Barking dogs. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, have in his possession or harbor any dog or other animal or fowl which by frequent howling, yelping, barking or otherwise causes annoyance or disturbance to persons in the neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 79-126, § 1, 10-3-79; Ord. No. 12-620, § 1, 5-2-2012) 
Secs. 30-68-30-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NUISANCES 

Sec. 30-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Nuisance means whatever is dangerous to life or health, and whatever renders the ground, the water, the air or any food or drink unhealthy and a hazard to life or health. 
(Ord. No. 79-125, § 1, 9-19-79) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-102. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished according to the provisions of section 1-9. If the owner or occupant of any lot or premises shall be a corporation and shall violate any provision of this article, the president, vice-president, secretary or treasurer of such corporation, or any manager, agent or employee of such corporation, shall also be severally liable for any penalty. 
(Ord. No. 79-125, § 5, 9-19-79; Ord. No. 84-225, § 1, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 30-103. - Enumeration. 
    The following, without limiting the definitions in section 30-101, are specifically declared to be public nuisances, and as such are liable to be abated, and the person guilty of causing, permitting or suffering any such nuisance then upon his premises or in any building occupied or controlled by him or in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or gutter immediately adjacent to such premises shall be deemed in violation of this article: 
(1)	The accumulation of stagnant water; 
(2)	The accumulation of carrion, filth or other impure or unwholesome matter; 
(3)	Weeds which have grown to a height of more than 12 inches, or any other rubbish, brush or other unsightly, objectionable or unsanitary matter. 
(4)	Inoperable or damaged boats and related debris, including but not limited to, boats or related marine material which are placed in the waterways located within the city limits, and which may become partially or wholly submerged, thereby constituting a danger to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(5)	Plant growth that encroaches on or over any sidewalk, beyond any curb line, or over the edge of the pavement. Every owner, tenant, or occupant of the premises abutting or adjoining any public right of way shall edge, trim or remove any grass, trees, shrubbery, or plant growth so that such vegetation does not encroach on or over any sidewalk, beyond any curb line, or over the edge of the pavement. 
(6)	Plant material or vegetation allowed to overhang or encroach onto the sidewalk, curb, or street in such a manner as to create a hazard to pedestrians or bicyclists or to look unsightly. It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant, or occupant of any premises to allow or permit any plant material or vegetation to overhang or encroach onto the sidewalk, curb, or street on or immediately adjacent to such premises in such a manner as to create a hazard to pedestrians or bicyclists, or to look unsightly. 
(Ord. No. 79-125, § 2, 9-19-79; Ord. No. 03-469, § 1, 2-19-03; Ord. No. 16-666, § 1, 10-15-16) 
Sec. 30-104. - Abatement by city. 
    If any person who owns any lot or building within the city does not abate a nuisance as described in this article within seven days after notice to such person, as provided in section 30-105, the city may do or cause to be done that which will abate the nuisance, and may pay the expense therefore, and charge such expenses incurred in doing such work or having such work done or improvements made to the person who owns such lot or building. If such work is done or improvements made at the expense of the city, such expense shall be assessed on the real property upon which such expense was incurred as provided in section 30-106. 
(Ord. No. 81-173, § 1(A), 9-2-81; Ord. No. 00-426, § 1, 5-17-00) 
Sec. 30-105. - Dissemination of notice. 
(a)	The notice required in section 30-104 shall be given: 
(1)	Personally to the owner in writing; 
(2)	By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or 
(3)	If personal service cannot be obtained: 
a.	By publication at least once; 
b.	By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violating relates; or 
c.	By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings. 
(b)	If the city mails a notice to a property owner in accordance with subsection (a)(2) above, and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice shall not be affected, and the notice shall be considered as delivered. 
(c)	In a notice provided under this section, the city may inform the owner by regular mail and a posting on the property that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within the one-year period and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change then the city, without notice, may take any action permitted, and assess the expenses therefore, as provided by section 30-104. 
(Ord. No. 79-125, § 3, 9-19-79; Ord. No. 81-173, § 1(B), 9-2-81; Ord. No. 00-426, § 2, 5-17-00) 
Sec. 30-106. - Collection of expenses. 
    The mayor or city health officer shall file a statement of expenses giving the amount of such expense, the date on which such work was done, and a description of the premises upon which such work was done or improvements made with the county clerk. The city shall have a privileged lien on such lot or real estate upon which such work was done, or improvements made, to secure the expenditures so made, in accordance with Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4436, as amended, which lien shall be second only to tax liens or liens for street improvements, and such amount shall bear ten percent interest from the date the statement is filed. For any such expense and interest suit may be instituted, and recovery and foreclosure of such lien may be had in the name of the city. The statement of expenses, so made, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or improvements. 
(Ord. No. 79-125, § 4, 9-19-79) 
Secs. 30-107-30-124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PRESERVATION OF TREES 

Sec. 30-125. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms, and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed thereto: 
    Clear cutting shall mean removing more than 50 percent of existing protected trees. 
    Critical root zone of a tree shall mean the area within a circle centered on the trunk location, the diameter of said circle being one-half of the sum of the longest and shortest drip line diameters. 
    Damage shall mean any action that will, in reasonable probability, result in the death of a protected tree, either immediately or within a period of three years. Without limiting this definition, some examples are: severing the main trunk or main limbs or roots, girdling, poisoning, carving, mutilating, touching with live wires; or within the critical root zone: crushing or exposing the roots or digging or drilling any hole or trench larger than three cubic feet, or covering with three inches or more of soil or compacting the soil. 
    Diameter of a tree shall mean the trunk of a tree measured at a point on the tree four and one-half feet above the surrounding ground level. 
    Height shall mean the height of a tree as measured from the trunk at ground level to the highest branches of the tree. 
    Person shall mean any individual, entity, corporation, organization, unincorporated organization, partnership, or any other form of entity. 
    Protected tree shall mean a long-lived, branching, woody plant, usually with one main stem or trunk, and having a diameter of at least eight inches. For the purpose of this article, privets and ligustrums are not considered protected trees. 
    Replacement tree shall mean a long-lived, branching, woody plant, usually with one main stem or trunk, and having a diameter of at least two inches or be 13 feet in height. See section 30-129 for a list of recommended replacement trees. Trees not on the list must be approved by a certified arborist and be indigenous with the area. 
    Structure shall mean that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any place of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
    Subject site shall mean any lot, tract, or parcel of land upon which an applicable tree subject to a permit hereunder is located. 
    Tree disposition and replacement plan, or tree survey, shall mean a plan submitted to the building official when land is cleared, elevated, or redeveloped. 
(Ord. No. 09-584, § 3, 12-2-09; Ord. No. 13-635, § 3, 9-11-13) 
Sec. 30-126. - Enforcement. 
    This article shall be administered as a part of the building permit process. There shall be no fee associated with the tree permit. 
(Ord. No. 09-584, § 3, 12-2-09; Ord. No. 13-635, § 3, 9-11-13) 
Sec. 30-127. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or to cause damage to a protected tree within the city for new construction, clear cutting, or redevelopment without having first obtained a tree destruction permit from the city. 
(1)	Criteria for issuance of a tree destruction permit. 
a.	An application for a tree destruction permit shall be filed by the owner of the subject site on which an affected tree is located. 
(Ord. No. 09-584, § 3, 12-2-09; Ord. No. 13-635, § 3, 9-11-13) 
Sec. 30-128. - Criteria for tree replacement. 
(a)	A condition for the issuance of each tree destruction permit under this article may include the planting and maintenance of a replacement tree(s) on the subject site or on a site within the community that has been approved by the building official. No tree destruction permit shall be issued incidental to construction, alteration, remodeling, or destruction of any building or structure requiring a building permit, or any subdivision improvement requiring a building permit, unless the applicant therefore has submitted to the building official, designated by the city, and received approval therefor in accordance with this article, a tree disposition and replacement plan, together with a plan for the protection and preservation of each tree impacted by the proposed activity. 
(b)	The scale on the tree disposition and replacement plan shall be no smaller than one inch equaling 20 feet. Trees proposed to be retained are to be represented by a solid circle on the tree survey. Trees proposed to be removed are to be shown by a hatched circle on the tree survey with diameters listed on the plan. Proposed replacement tree(s) shall be shown by a dashed circle with species, diameters and heights listed on the plan. Tree loss protective measures described in section 30-130 shall be taken for all trees subject to danger or loss. 
(Ord. No. 09-584, § 3, 12-2-09; Ord. No. 13-635, § 3, 9-11-13) 
Sec. 30-129. - Replacement trees. 
(a)	Each protected tree considered damaged or permitted for removal requires replacement that is less than 10 inches in diameter may be replaced with a single tree a minimum of two inches in diameter or 13 feet in height. 
(b)	Each protected tree considered damaged or permitted for removal requires replacement that is ten inches or greater in diameter shall be replaced with two trees which are a minimum of two inches in diameter or 13 feet in height. 
(c)	No replacement tree shall be approved by the building official unless it complies with the minimum standards continued herein. 
Recommended Species 
Pecan - Carya illinoensis 
Cedar elm - Ulmus crassifolia 
American elm - Ulmus americana 
Chinese pistache - Pistacia chinensis 
Green ash - Fraxinus pennsylvanica 
Red maple - Acer rubrum 
Winged elm - Ulmus alata 
River birch - Betula nigra 
Southern magnolia - Magnolia grandiflora 
Sweetgum - Liquidambar styraciflua 
Eastern red cedar - Juniperus virginiana 
Bald cypress - Taxodium distichum 
Loblolly pine - Pinus taeda 
American sycamore - Platanus occidentalis 
Bur oak - Quercus macrocarpa 
Cherrybark oak - Quercus falcate var. pagodafolia 
Laurel oak - Quercus laurifolia 
Live oak - Quercus virginiana 
Mexican white oak - Quercus polymorpha 
Nuttal oak - Quercus nuttallii 
Overcup oak - Quercus lyrata 
Post oak - Quercus stellata 
Shumard oak - Quercus shumardii 
Swamp chestnut oak - Quercus michauxii 
Water oak - Quercus nigra 
Willow oak - Quercus phellos 
Sawtooth oak - Quercus acutissima 
Chinkapin oak - Quercus muehelenbergii 
(d)	Time limit for planting replacement trees . Planting of replacement tree(s) shall take place within 12 months. 
(Ord. No. 09-584, § 3, 12-2-09; Ord. No. 13-635, § 3, 9-11-13) 
Sec. 30-130. - Required tree protection. 
    A tree protection plan for trees with a drip line diameter greater than ten feet shall consist of placing an orange net fence around the tree in a manner agreeable to a licensed arborist sufficient to protect the tree roots from damage by activities during construction. 
(Ord. No. 09-584, § 3, 12-2-09; Ord. No. 13-635, § 3, 9-11-13) 
Sec. 30-131. - Appeals. 
    Any person who is aggrieved by a decision of the Taylor Lake Village Tree Advocate or building official hereunder may appeal such decision to the board of adjustments, by filing an appeal with the city secretary, not less than ten days following entry of the decision appealed. Upon such appeal, the building official shall forthwith submit all applicable records and findings to the city secretary as part of the record of such application. The board of adjustments may affirm or deny the decision of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 09-584, § 3, 12-2-09; Ord. No. 13-635, § 3, 9-11-13) 
Sec. 30-132. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accumulation hazard means any accumulation or collection of water which is not a water feature that results, whether intentionally or unintentionally, in stagnant water that appears to be remain in place for more than ten days. For example, bottles, drums, planters, flower pots, cans, tires, buckets, barrels, bird baths, jars or other receptacles which collect water and are allowed to remain filled with water for long periods of time shall constitute an accumulation hazard. 
    Fountain means a structure which includes apparatus for moving water or which is designed to allow water movement. Fountains with standing water which is green or black shall be presumed to be nonoperational and a public nuisance. 
    Pond means any accumulation or collection of water which acts as a habitat for fish or other aquatic animals, even if this is not its main purpose, with a depth of two feet or less. 
    Stagnant water means any accumulation or collection of water within the city in which mosquitoes breed, or are likely to breed, including but not limited to swimming pools, ponds, water gardens and fountains, unless such collection of water is treated using water treatment methods, as defined in this article. Collections of water which are green or black in color are presumed to be stagnant water and shall be treated as a public nuisance in violation of this article. 
    Swimming pool means any accumulation or collection of water with a depth of more than two feet. 
    Water feature means a pond, water garden, swimming pool, fountain or other intentionally created or maintained collection of water and not located entirely and continuously in an air conditioned space. 
    Water garden means any accumulation or collection of water which is not a pond, whether seasonal or permanent, with a depth of two feet or less, generally used for to grow water plants or for aesthetic purposes. 
(Ord. No. 16-664, § 2, 6-15-16) 
Sec. 30-133. - Criteria for water treatment. 
    Water features must be treated using one of the following methods and must be treated frequently, such that any collection of water within the city is not green, black, or otherwise likely to promote the breeding of mosquitoes: 
(1)	Screening with wire netting of at least 16 meshes to the inch each way, or with any other material which will effectually prevent the ingress or egress of mosquitoes. 
(2)	Complete emptying every seven days of unscreened containers, together with thorough drying and cleaning of the containers. 
(3)	Using a larvicide approved by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
(4)	Keeping clean and sufficiently free from vegetative growth and other obstructions, stocking with mosquito eating fish, or providing aeration and circulation of water. 
(5)	Proper disposal, by removal or destruction, of tin cans, tin boxes, broken or empty bottles, containers and similar articles likely to hold water wherein mosquitoes can breed. 
(Ord. No. 16-664, § 2, 6-15-16) 
Sec. 30-134. - Prohibitions. 
    The following shall be prohibited by this article and shall constitute a public nuisance: 
(1)	Accumulation hazards, as defined by section 30-132; 
(2)	Fountains which are not maintained such that water moves continuously at least once each day; 
(3)	Water features which have not been treated or have not been sufficiently treated, as prescribed by section 30-132; 
(4)	Swimming pools which are not compliant with the currently adopted versions of the International Pool and Spa Code and the International Property Maintenance Code, as prescribed in section 10-31; and 
(5)	Ponds or water gardens with a depth of more than two feet. 
(Ord. No. 16-664, § 2, 6-15-16) 
Sec. 30-135. - Enforcement. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished according to the provisions of section 1-9. If the owner or occupant of any lot or premises shall be a corporation and shall violate any provision of this article, the president, vice-president, secretary or treasurer of such corporation, or any manager, agent or employee of such corporation, shall also be severally liable for any penalty. 
(Ord. No. 16-664, § 2, 6-15-16) 
Sec. 30-136. - Abatement by the city. 
    If any person who owns any lot or building within the city does not abate a nuisance as described in this section within seven days after notice to such person, as provided in section 30-137, the city may do or cause to be done that which will abate the nuisance, and may pay the expense therefore, and charge such expenses incurred in doing such work or having such work done or improvements made to the person who owns such lot or building. If such work is done or improvements made at the expense of the city, such expense shall be assessed on the real property upon which such expense was incurred as provided in section 30-106. 
(Ord. No. 16-664, § 2, 6-15-16) 
Sec. 30-137. - Dissemination of notice. 
(a)	The notice required in section 30-136 shall be given: 
(1)	Personally to the owner in writing; 
(2)	By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or 
(3)	If personal service cannot be obtained: 
a.	By publication at least once; 
b.	By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violating relates; or 
c.	By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings. 
(b)	If the city mails a notice to a property owner in accordance with subsection (a)(2) above, and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice shall not be affected, and the notice shall be considered as delivered. 
(c)	In a notice provided under this section, the city may inform the owner by regular mail and a posting on the property that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within the one-year period and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change then the city, without notice, may take any action permitted, and assess the expenses therefore, as provided by section 30-136. 
(Ord. No. 16-664, § 2, 6-15-16) 
Sec. 30-138. - Collection of expenses. 
    The mayor or city health officer shall file a statement of expenses giving the amount of such expense, the date on which such work was done, and a description of the premises upon which such work was done or improvements made with the county clerk. The city shall have a privileged lien on such lot or real estate upon which such work was done, or improvements made, to secure the expenditures so made, in accordance with V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.007, as amended, which lien shall be second only to tax liens or liens for street improvements, and such amount shall bear ten percent interest from the date the statement is filed. Suit may be instituted for any such expense and interest, and recovery and foreclosure of such lien may be had in the name of the city. The statement of expenses, so made, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or improvements. 
(Ord. No. 16-664, § 2, 6-15-16) 
Chapters 31-33 - RESERVED 
Chapter 34 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; environment, ch. 30; natural resources, ch. 42; planning and zoning, ch. 54; subdivisions, ch. 66; subdivision design standards for federal flood insurance program, § 66-107; subdivision design standards for drainage, § 66-115; waterways, ch. 78; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-31. - Statutory authorization. 
    The legislature of the state has, in V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.311 et seq., as amended, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. 
(Ord. No. 96-377, § 1(A), 9-18-96) 
Sec. 34-32. - Findings of fact. 
(a)	The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)	These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 96-377, § 1(B), 9-18-96) 
Sec. 34-33. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private loss due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Protect human life and health; 
(2)	Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)	Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)	Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)	Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)	Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)	Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 96-377, § 1(C), 9-18-96) 
Sec. 34-34. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods: 
(1)	Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
(5)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 96-377, § 1(D), 9-18-96) 
Sec. 34-35. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform that originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flow, active processes of erosion, sediment transport and deposition and unpredictable flow paths. 
    Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable, and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), zone A usually is refined into zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any manmade change in or to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, the construction or alteration of buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means a building which does not contain a basement and which is built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in zones V1-30, VE or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor, elevated above ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, an elevated building shall also include a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of zones V1-30, VE or V, an elevated building shall also include a building otherwise meeting the definition of the term "elevated building" even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls meet the standards of section 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Existing construction means, for the purpose of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the flood insurance rate map or before January 1, 1975, for flood insurance rate maps effective before that date. Existing construction may also be referred to as existing structures. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading, or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the city. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the city. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report, identified as such, provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within the city subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. (See definition of Flood or flooding .) 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means regulations contained in zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments that reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and/or their contents. 
    Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include longterm storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on the inventory of historic places by a state historic preservation program which has been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)	Individually listed on an inventory of historic places by the county or the city pursuant to a historic preservation program that has been certified either: 
a.	By a state program approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior. 
    Levee means a manmade improvement, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices, to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system that consists of levees and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including the basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, suitable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, however, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial flood insurance rate map or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new construction shall mean structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by the city and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the city. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is built on a single chassis; 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections, designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and designed primarily for use not as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), shall include substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above the ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This includes structures that have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)	Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or 
(2)	Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure. 
    Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this article when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. (For full requirements, see section 60.65 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 96-377, § 2, 9-18-96) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-36. - Lands to which this article applies. 
    This article shall apply to all areas within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-377, § 3(A), 9-18-96; Ord. No. 97-386, § 1, 9-3-97) 
Sec. 34-37. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for Harris County, Texas," dated January 6, 2017, with accompanying digital and paper flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs and DFIRMs), and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-377, § 3(B), 9-18-96; Ord. No. 07-534, § 1, 6-6-07; Ord. No. 16-671, § 1, 12-14-16) 
Sec. 34-38. - Establishment of development permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commence new construction, substantial improvements or any other development within the jurisdiction of the city without having first received a development permit therefor issued in accordance with this article, to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-377, § 3(C), 9-18-96; Ord. No. 97-386, § 1, 9-3-97) 
Sec. 34-39. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 96-377, § 3(D), 9-18-96) 
Sec. 34-40. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 96-377, § 3(E), 9-18-96) 
Sec. 34-41. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements, liberally construed in favor of the city council and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 96-377, § 3(F), 9-18-96) 
Sec. 34-42. - Warning and disclaimer or liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur, and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not infer that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made under this article. 
(Ord. No. 96-377, § 3(G), 9-18-96) 
Sec. 34-43. - Determining mean sea level. 
    When, under the terms of this article, a requirement is based upon an elevation which relates to mean sea level, the computation thereof shall be performed utilizing benchmarks which account for subsidence. In accordance therewith, all surveys which establish construction elevations including, but not limited to, those required under section 34-88, shall utilize FEMA RM 1074, FEMA RM 1117 or Survey Point 750. Adjustments to each such benchmark shall be as follows: 
(1)	For FEMA RM 1074, 1.671 feet elevation shall be added to compensate for the subsidence of such reference marker. 
(2)	For FEMA RM 1117, 0.199 feet elevation shall be added to compensate for the subsidence of such reference marker. 
(3)	For Survey Point 750, 1.578 feet elevation shall be added to compensate for the subsidence of the Survey Point ("X" cut in inlet Lakeway and Shoreline, Project Benchmark). 
(Ord. No. 97-386, § 2, 9-3-97) 
Secs. 34-44-34-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 34-61. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
    The mayor of the city is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 96-377, § 4(A), 9-18-96) 
Sec. 34-62. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)	Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
(2)	Review permit applications to determine whether a proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)	Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by this article. 
(4)	Review permits for proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies (including section 505 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)	Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)	Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)	Ensure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)	When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 34-37, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 3 of this article. 
(9)	When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, require that no new construction, substantial improvement or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(Ord. No. 96-377, § 4(B), 9-18-96) 
Sec. 34-63. - Permit procedures. 
(a)	Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him and shall include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information shall be required. 
(1)	Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including the basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)	Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)	A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 34-88(2); 
(4)	Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 34-62(1). 
(b)	Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors: 
(1)	The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)	The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)	The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)	The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)	The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)	The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)	The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)	The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)	The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(10)	The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area; 
(11)	The impact to adjacent and neighboring properties, as it relates to drainage and flood damage potential, reasonably expected as a result of the proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 96-377, § 4(C), 9-18-96) 
Sec. 34-64. - Variance procedures. 
(a)	The appeal board shall be appointed by the city council to hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. In the absence of a separately appointed board for these appeals, the board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals under this article. 
(b)	The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)	The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)	Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article. 
(f)	Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, provided the relevant factors in section 34-63(b) have been fully considered. As the lot site increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance shall be increased proportionately. 
(g)	Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article (section 34-33). 
(h)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if an increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)	Prerequisites for granting variances are as follows: 
(1)	Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)	Variances shall only be issued upon showing a good and sufficient cause; a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(k)	Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that the criteria outlined in subsections (a)-(i) of this section are met, and the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and creates no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 96-377, § 4(D), 9-18-96; Ord. No. 15-650, § 1, 5-20-15) 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 34-86. - Division provisions required for all new construction and substantial improvements. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard, the provisions of this division shall be required for all new construction and substantial improvements. 
(Ord. No. 96-377, § 5, 9-18-96) 
Sec. 34-87. - General standards. 
(a)	All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
(b)	All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(c)	All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage. 
(d)	All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(e)	All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(f)	All new and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwater. 
(g)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 96-377, § 5(A), 9-18-96) 
Sec. 34-88. - Specific standards. 
    The following specific standards shall apply to all new construction and substantial improvements within the jurisdiction of the city: 
(1)	Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including the basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation to or above 14 feet above mean sea level, whichever is higher. Utility and sanitary facilities such as plumbing openings, electrical transformers, electrical outlets, breaker boxes, water tanks, air conditioning equipment, etc., shall be elevated to or above the base flood elevation or above 14 feet above mean sea level, whichever is higher. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection, as proposed in subsection 34-63(a)(1) is satisfied. Any new construction or substantial improvement below the base flood elevation or below 14 feet above mean sea level, whichever is higher, shall be of materials specified in and consistent with the requirements and criteria of FEMA Technical Bulletin 2, "Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas in accordance with the National Flood Insurance Program," originally published in August 2008 and revised in October 2010. This requirement shall not extend to treated wood materials used for flood louvers, shutters and the non-structural trim around door frames or columns, fiberglass doors, vinyl windows; or decks and stairs; 
(2)	Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including the basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or to or above 14 feet above mean sea level, whichever is higher, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level or below 14 feet above mean sea level, whichever is higher, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this section. A record of such certification that includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)	Enclosures. New construction or substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.	A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided; 
b.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
c.	Openings shall not be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices unless they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)	Manufactured homes. 
a.	All manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this subsection, manufactured homes shall be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, the use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.	Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map on sites outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation, and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
c.	Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites within an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the provisions of this subsection (4) shall be elevated so that either: 
1.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or 
2.	The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
(5)	Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map shall either be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or meet the permit requirements of section 34-63(a), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 96-377, § 5(B), 9-18-96; Ord. No. 03-466, § 1, 1-15-03; Ord. No. 09-577, § 1, 9-26-09; Ord. No. 10-598, § 1, 7-21-2010; Ord. No. 11-615, § 1, 10-5-2011) 
Sec. 34-89. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)	All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall comply with sections 34-32, 34-33 and 34-34. 
(b)	All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet development permit requirements of section 34-38, section 34-63, and the provisions of this division. 
(c)	Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, if not otherwise required pursuant to section 34-37 or section 34-62(8). 
(d)	All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)	All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 96-377, § 5(C), 9-18-96) 
Sec. 34-90. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-37, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including the basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's flood insurance rate map (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)	All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall: 
a.	Have the lowest floor (including the basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's flood insurance rate map (at least two feet if no depth number is specified) or; 
b.	Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
(3)	A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this division, as proposed in section 34-63(a)(1), are satisfied. 
(4)	Within zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 96-377, § 5(D), 9-18-96) 
Sec. 34-91. - Floodways. 
    Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-37 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)	Encroachments shall be prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the city or adjacent areas during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)	If subsection (1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 96-377, § 5(E), 9-18-96) 
Chapters 35-37 - RESERVED 
Chapter 38 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; court, ch. 18; emergency management, ch. 22; burglar alarm systems, § 26-31 et seq.; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-71 et seq. 

Sec. 38-31. - Police officers-Appointing authority. 
    The city council shall be authorized to provide for the appointment of municipal police officers for the city. 
(Ord. No. 49, § I, 8-17-70) 
Sec. 38-32. - Same-Required qualifications. 
    All police officers appointed in accordance with this article shall possess such qualifications as required for police officers under the laws and statutes of the state, and any other applicable laws or regulations, at the time they are appointed. 
(Ord. No. 49, § III, 8-17-70) 
Secs. 38-33-38-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVE POLICE FORCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Officers and employees, § 2-71 et seq. 

Sec. 38-56. - Establishment authorized. 
    There is hereby authorized the establishment of a reserve police force for the city. 
(Ord. No. 80-149, § 1, 5-7-80) 
Sec. 38-57. - Appointment of members. 
    Members of the reserve police force shall be appointed by the chief of police and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 80-149, § 2, 5-7-80) 
Sec. 38-58. - Supplementary function. 
    Reserve police officers shall act only in a supplementary capacity to the regular police force. Reserve police officers may be called into service by the chief of police when he, in his discretion, considers it necessary to have additional officers to preserve the peace and enforce the law. When called into service, a reserve police officer shall serve as a peace officer during the actual discharge of official duties. 
(Ord. No. 80-149, § 3, 5-7-80) 
Sec. 38-59. - Carrying of weapons. 
    No person appointed to the reserve police force may carry a weapon or otherwise act as a peace officer unless he has been approved by the city council and has fulfilled the minimum training standards described in section 38-60. After approval and fulfillment of the minimum training standards, he may carry a weapon only when authorized by the chief of police, and when discharging official duties as a duly constituted peace officer. 
(Ord. No. 80-149, § 4, 5-7-80) 
Sec. 38-60. - Minimum training standards. 
    A reserve police officer must fulfill the minimum training standards established for all reserve law enforcement officers by the commission of law enforcement standards and education. Reserve police officers shall further possess and maintain the minimum physical, mental, educational and moral standards established for all reserve law enforcement officers by the commission of law enforcement officers standards and education. 
(Ord. No. 80-149, § 5, 5-7-80) 
Sec. 38-61. - Compensation. 
    Reserve police officers shall serve without compensation. However, the city shall provide a uniform allowance for members of the reserve police force. 
(Ord. No. 80-149, § 6, 5-7-80) 
Secs. 38-62-38-85. - Reserved. 
Sec. 38-86. - Disposal of personal property held for 30 days. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized, in the manner set out in this article, to dispose of all unclaimed or abandoned personal property in the city's possession which remains unclaimed or abandoned for a period of 30 days by the owner, and which is not held as evidence to be used in any pending investigation or case, and has not been ordered destroyed or returned to the person entitled to possession of such property by a court of competent jurisdiction; provided, however, that this article shall not apply to the disposal of cash, automobiles, firearms, liquor, drugs, narcotics or any other controlled substance. The disposal of particular items, property or classes of property which is governed by specific statutes, including the disposition of property alleged to have been stolen, as governed by Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 47-01 et seq., shall not be affected by the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 87-272, § 1, 11-4-87) 
Sec. 38-87. - Notice to owner; six months to claim property. 
(a)	The city shall mail a notice by certified mail to the last known address of the owner of such personal property, at the end of the 30-day period referenced in section 38-86. Such notice shall describe the property held; state that if the owner does not claim such property within six months from the date such notice is mailed that it will be sold by bid and the proceeds of the sale, after deducting the reasonable expenses of keeping and selling such property, will be placed in the city treasury; and the notice shall be signed by the mayor or his designee. 
(b)	If the owner or address of the owner of such property is unknown, then the notice to the owner shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. Such published notice shall contain the same information as a notice by mail, and shall contain the name or title of the city official to whom inquiries or a response may be directed. 
(Ord. No. 87-272, § 2, 11-4-87) 
Sec. 38-88. - Sale. 
(a)	The sale of any personal property hereunder shall be preceded by a notice published once at least 21 days prior to the date of such sale in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, stating: 
(1)	The description of the property; 
(2)	The name of the owner, if known; 
(3)	The date, place and time that such sale will occur; 
(4)	Provide that written bids will be accepted; and 
(5)	The name or title of the city official to whom inquiries and bids may be directed. 
Bids shall be opened as provided in the notice and read aloud. If any bids are considered insufficient, then the property need not then be sold, such bid or bids may be declined, and the property reoffered for sale in the manner provided in this section. 
(b)	If no bids are received, such property may be disposed of as provided in section 38-89. 
(Ord. No. 87-272, § 3, 11-4-87) 
Sec. 38-89. - Disposal without a sale. 
    The mayor or his designee is hereby authorized to dispose of property which has been offered for sale and for which no bids have been received and otherwise unsaleable clothing, food and other items of personal property to charitable organizations, or to destroy such property if it is not useable. 
(Ord. No. 87-272, § 4, 11-4-87) 
Sec. 38-90. - Perishables. 
    Perishable food or other perishable property will not be subject to the 30-day and six-month holding requirements, or the advertising for sale requirements of this article; provided, however, that all other provisions of this article shall be complied with. 
(Ord. No. 87-272, § 5, 11-4-87) 
Sec. 38-91. - Receipt. 
    A receipt for all property disposed of under the provisions of this article shall be retained, and if the property is sold the proceeds from such sales and such receipts shall be promptly delivered and accounted for to the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 87-272, § 6, 11-4-87) 
Sec. 38-92. - Claim to proceeds. 
    The owner of any property sold under the provisions of this article shall have the right, subject to providing the city with satisfactory proof of ownership, to file a written claim to the proceeds of such sale with the city council. If the claim is allowed by the city council, the city treasurer shall remit to the owner such funds as were paid into the city treasury as proceeds of the sale. 
(Ord. No. 87-272, § 7, 11-4-87) 
Chapters 39-41 - RESERVED 
Chapter 42 - NATURAL RESOURCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; environment, ch. 30; floods, ch. 34; planning and zoning, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; waterways, ch. 78; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OIL AND GAS WELLS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-31. - Purpose of article. 
    The fact that there are at the present time no adequate provisions or city ordinances with reference to the drilling for and/or production of oil, gas or liquid hydrocarbons within the city limits, it appears development may soon reach within the city limits; the fact that drilling and operating oil and gas wells within the city limits is directly related to the lives, property, health, safety and convenience of the people of this city; and the fact that the drilling and operation of oil and gas wells within the city limits makes regulation thereof necessary and desirable in order to protect lives, property, the public welfare and the general welfare of the city, each singularly and collectively constitute the reasons, need and purposes for which this article is adopted and enacted. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 2, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-32. - Definitions. 
    All technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used in this article and not specifically defined in this section shall have the meaning customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Permittee means the person to whom is issued a permit for the drilling and operation of a well under this article, and his administrators, executors, heirs, successors and assigns. 
    Well means any holes, bores, any sand, formation, strata or depth, which are drilled, bored, sunk, dug or put down for the purpose of either exploring for or ascertaining the existence of any oil, gas, liquid hydrocarbons, or any of them, or for the purpose of producing and recovering any oil, gas, liquid hydrocarbons, or any of them. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 3, 1-25-65) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-33. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to violate or neglect to comply with any provision of this article, irrespective of whether or not the verbiage of each section of this article contains the specific language that such violation or neglect is unlawful and is an offense. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, or any of the provisions of a drilling and operating permit issued pursuant hereto, or any condition of the bond filed by the permittee pursuant to this article, or who shall neglect to comply with the terms of this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. The violation of each separate provision of this article, and of the permit, and of the bond, shall be considered a separate offense. Each day's violation of each separate provision of this article shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 32, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-34. - Streets and alleys. 
    It shall be unlawful to drill any well and no well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location which is within any of the streets or alleys of the city. No street or alley shall be blocked or incumbered or closed in any drilling or production operation, except by special permit by order of the city council, and then only temporarily. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 5, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-35. - Drilling well location. 
    No well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location which is nearer than 1,000 feet of any residence, building or structure without the applicant having first secured the written permission of the owners of such structures. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 6, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-36. - Appointment of oil and gas inspector. 
    The city council may at any time appoint an oil and gas inspector, and his compensation shall be set by the city council. Such inspector can be removed at the will of the city council. If, and when, appointed, it shall be the duty of the oil and gas inspector to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 12, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-37. - Premises to be kept clean and sanitary. 
    The premises shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free from rubbish of every character, to the satisfaction of the health officer and the city, at all times drilling operations or reworking operations are being conducted, and as long thereafter as oil and/or gas is being produced therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 23, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-38. - Fencing. 
    Any person who completes any well as a producer shall have the obligation to enclose such well, together with its surface facilities, by a screen fence sufficiently high and properly built, and approved by the city council, to protect the beauty and aesthetical value of the surrounding properties. This section applies to wells drilled in Taylor Lake as well as wells drilled on land. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 26, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-39. - Signs. 
    Printed signs reading: "DANGEROUS, NO SMOKING ALLOWED," or similar words, shall be posted in conspicuous places on each producing drilling unit. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 27, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-40. - Abandonment and plugging. 
    Whenever any well is abandoned, it shall be the obligation of the permittee and the operator of the well to set a cast iron bridge plug in the top of all the remaining completion and protection casing sections and a 100-foot cement plug pumped below and above each such bridge plug; and to set a cast iron bridge plug as low as possible in the surface casing and a 100-foot cement plug pumped below and above such bridge plug. No surface string or conductor string of casing may be pulled and removed from a well. The production string of casing may be removed from a point 100 feet or more above the shoe of the protection string. The protection string of casing may be removed from a point 100 feet or more above the shoe of the surface string of casing. Whenever any such well is abandoned and plugged, it shall be the further obligation of the permittee and the operator of the well to cut the surface casing off at least six feet below the surface of the ground, to place at least a 25-foot cement plug in the top of the casing, and to weld the top of the casing completely shut with the resulting hole being completely filled to the surface of the ground and duly tamped. Any additional provisions or precautionary measures prescribed by the state or the state railroad commission in connection with abandonment and plugging of a well shall be complied with by the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 29, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-41. - Disposal of salt water. 
    The permittee shall make adequate provisions for the disposal of all salt water or other impurities which he may bring to the surface. Such disposal shall be made in such manner as to not contaminate the water supply, present or prospective, or to injure surface vegetation or the waters of Taylor Lake and Taylor Bayou. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 30, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-42. - Violation of laws or regulations. 
    Any violation of the laws of the state or any rules, regulations or requirements of any state or federal regulatory body having jurisdiction in reference to drilling, completing, equipping, operating, producing, maintaining or abandoning an oil or gas well or related appurtenances, equipment or facilities, fire protection, blowout protection, safety protection, or convenience of persons or property, shall also be a violation of this article, and shall be punishable as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 31, 1-25-65) 
Secs. 42-43-42-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 42-61. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person acting either for himself or acting as agent, employee, independent contractor or servant of any other person, to commence to drill, to drill or to operate, any well within the city limits, or to work upon or assist in any way in the pro-section or operation of any such well, without a permit for the drilling and operation of such well having first been issued by the authority of the city council in accordance with the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 4, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-62. - Application and filing fee. 
    Every application for a permit to drill and operate a well upon a drilling unit shall be in writing, signed by the applicant or by some person duly authorized to sign the application on his behalf, and it shall be filed with the city secretary and be accompanied with a filing fee in an amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city secretary, in cash, as a fee to the city. No application shall request a permit to drill and operate but one well to each reservoir on a drilling unit, and the application shall contain full information, including the following: 
(1)	The date (year, month and day) of the application. 
(2)	Name of the applicant. 
(3)	Address of the applicant. 
(4)	Proposed site of the well accompanied by a plat of the drilling unit showing the description of the lots, blocks or tracts owned or controlled by the applicant. 
(5)	Name of the fee owner. 
(6)	Name of the lease owner. 
(7)	Brief description of the land. 
(8)	The application shall have attached to it a certified or photostatic copy of the deed, oil and gas lease, or drilling contract with the owners of land covering the lot, block or tracts in such drilling unit over which the applicant has control, together with abstracts of title or certificate of title satisfactory to the city council, to the end that the application will show what proportion and what parts of the drilling unit the applicant owns in fee, or holds under lease, or drilling contract from the owners, and the applicant must own in fee or hold under lease or drilling contract from the owners over 50 percent of the acreage within a drilling unit before a permit may be issued. 
(9)	Type of derrick to be used. 
(10)	Whether the well shall be drilled as an oil or gas well. 
(11)	The proposed depth of the well. 
(12)	Motive power of the rig that is to be used. 
(13)	Within 30 days after the completion of a well within the city, the operator shall submit to the city council copies of the state railroad commission forms 2 and 3, and electric log. This data shall be classified as secret by the city council for a period of six months. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 7, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-63. - Notice of filing of application. 
(a)	At least ten days prior to the date of hearing on the application, a copy of notice in the form prescribed in this section shall be sent by registered mail to each owner and lessee of lots, blocks and tracts in the drilling unit not owned by, or under lease to, the applicant, addressed to the last known address of such land/or lease owners, if known to the applicant; and a copy of such notice shall likewise be published at the cost of the applicant in every issue of an official paper of the city for ten days prior to the date of such hearing. 
(b)	If the official paper is published weekly, the publication shall be made in one issue of such paper before the date of hearing. Such notice shall state the lot and block number on which the applicant is asking for a permit to drill and the date and place of hearing and shall be in words and figures as follows: 
"Notice is hereby given that ____________ acting under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE DRILLING COMPLETION AND OPERATION OF OIL WELLS WITHIN THE LIMITS OF THE CITY OF TAYLOR LAKE VILLAGE, TEXAS, AND PROVIDING FOR THE PUBLIC SAFETY IN CONNECTION THEREWITH, being Ordinance No. ____________ , did, on the ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ , file with the City Secretary of the City of Taylor Lake Village an application for a permit to drill a well for oil and/or gas upon Lot No. ____________ , Block No. ____________ , City of Taylor Lake Village, in a drilling unit of ____________ acres described as follows: 
(Description) 
A hearing upon such application will be held in the office of the City Secretary of the City of Taylor Lake Village, Texas, at ____________ on the ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ , at ____________ .M. 
/s/   
      Applicant."   (c)	Proof of notice shall be made by the applicant by filing with the city secretary an affidavit of the printer or publisher of the paper in which the notice is published containing a copy of the notice, and stating the issue in which, and period of time during which the notice was published, and an affidavit of the applicant showing the date and persons to whom, and the addresses to which the notice was mailed by the applicant, and proof that such addresses are the last addresses of the persons involved known to the applicant. 
(d)	At the time fixed in such notice a hearing on such application shall be held in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 8, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-64. - Issuance or refusal. 
(a)	The city council within 30 days after the filing of the application for a permit to drill and operate a well shall determine whether or not the application complies in all respects with the provisions of this article, and if it does, the city council shall issue a permit for the drilling and operation of the well applied for conditioned upon the applicant filing, before commencement of drilling operations thereunder, the surety bond or surety instrument prescribed in section 42-66. The city council shall have the power, and reserves the authority, to refuse any application for a permit when by reason of location of the proposed well and the character and value of the permanent improvements already erected on the drilling unit in question or adjacent thereto, and the use to which the land and surroundings are adapted for civic purposes, or for sanitary reasons, the drilling of an oil or gas well will be a serious disadvantage to either the health, safety, morals or welfare of the city and its inhabitants. Each permit issued under this article shall: 
(1)	By reference have incorporated therein all the provisions of this article with the same force and effect as if this article were copied verbatim in such permit; 
(2)	Specify the well location with particularity to lot number, block number, name of addition or subdivision, or other available correct legal description; 
(3)	Contain and specify that the terms of such permit shall be for a period of six months from the date of the permit, and as long thereafter as the permittee is engaged in continuous drilling or reworking operations or oil or gas is produced in commercial quantities from the well drilled pursuant to such permit; provided, however, that if at any time after discovery of oil or gas the production thereof in commercial quantities shall cease, the term shall not terminate if the permittee commences additional reworking operations within six months thereafter, and if they result in the production of oil or gas, so long thereafter as oil or gas is produced in commercial quantities from such well; 
(4)	Contain and specify such conditions as are by this article authorized; 
(5)	Specify the total depth to which the well may be drilled; and 
(6)	Contain and specify that no actual drilling operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall file and have approved an indemnity bond in the designated principal amount and conditioned as specified in section 42-66. 
(b)	Such permit, in duplicate originals, shall be signed by the city secretary, and prior to delivery to the permittee shall be signed by the permittee (with one original to be retained by the city and one by the permittee); and when so signed shall constitute the permittee's drilling and operating license and the contractual obligation of the permittee to comply with the terms of such permit, and such bond, and this article. 
(c)	If the permit for the well is refused, or if the applicant notified the city council in writing that he does not elect to accept the permit as tendered and wishes to withdraw his application, or if the bond or surety instrument of the applicant is not approved and the applicant notifies the city council in writing that he wishes to withdraw his application, then upon the happening of any of such events the cash deposit provided for to be filed with the application shall be returned to the applicant, except there shall be retained therefrom by the city an amount established in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city secretary as a processing fee. 
(d)	Except in an emergency in which event an operator may proceed without notice, any operator desiring to rework a well shall give the city council written notice of his intent prior to the commencement of operations. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 9, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-65. - Termination. 
    When a permit shall have been issued, the permit shall terminate and become inoperative without any action on the part of the city unless within six months from the date of issuance actual drilling of the well designated therein shall have commenced. The cessation for a like period of the drilling and/or reworking operations, or the cessation of the production of oil or gas from the well after production, shall have commenced shall operate to terminate and cancel the permit, and the well shall be considered as abandoned for all purposes of this article, and it shall be unlawful thereafter to continue the operation or drilling of such well without the issuance of another permit. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 10, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-66. - Permittee's bond. 
    If a permit is issued by the city council under the terms of this article for the drilling and operation of a well, no actual drilling operations shall be commenced until a surety bond, duly executed by the permittee, as principal, and by a reliable surety company authorized to do business in the state, as surety, in the amount and upon the conditions prescribed in this section shall be filed with and approved in writing by the city secretary, or until an instrument executed by the surety as hereinafter prescribed is filed with and approved (in writing) by the city secretary which makes the drilling and operation of such well subject to the terms and conditions of two surety bonds (totaling $500,000.00 in the aggregate) previously filed by the permittee under this article. Such bond filed by the applicant shall be in the sum of not less than $250,000.00, and shall run to the city, for the benefit of the city and all persons concerned, conditioned that the permittee will comply with the terms and conditions of this article in the drilling and operation of the well; that the permittee will promptly restore the streets and sidewalks and other public property of the city which may be disturbed or damaged in the operations to their former conditions, as near as practicable; that the permittee will promptly clear all premises of all litter, trash, waste and other substances used, allowed or occurring in the drilling or producing operations, and will grade, level and restore such property to the same surface condition, as near as practicable, as existed when operations for the drilling of the well were first commenced; and that the permittee will pay to the owners of any buildings, improvements, goods or chattels located on the property any extra cost of insurance of such property imposed by reason of the granting of the permit, or the operations carried on thereunder, and that the permittee will promptly pay and discharge any liability imposed by law for damages on account of injury to property, either public or private, or bodily injury, including death, received or suffered by any person whomsoever and resulting from the drilling operations, production and maintenance of the well, equipment, facilities or appurtenances thereto; and that the permittee will indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all liability growing out of or attributable to the granting of such permit. Any such bond filed by a permittee under this article shall become effective on or before the date filed with the city secretary and remain in force and effect until the expiration of the term of the permit issued; subject, however, to the right of the surety company to cancel same after 30 days' written notice of such intention has been given to the city secretary, but the privilege of cancellation shall not affect any liability which may have arisen under this article up to the time the bond is actually cancelled. The permittee, in the event of cancellation of the surety bond above provided for, shall automatically suspend his right to operate under his permit until such time as the permittee shall furnish another bond as required by this article. Each bond shall accrue to the benefit of any person with reference to the conditions above stated and may be sued upon by him. If in accordance with the provisions of this section a permittee has filed with the city two $250,000.00 surety bonds to cover the drilling and operation of wells under this article, such permittee may drill and operate an additional well under this article without filing any additional surety bond as specified above, provided the permittee files with the city secretary an instrument (and obtains written approval thereof by the city secretary) duly executed by the surety company named as surety, in each of the permittee's bonds on file with the city, agreeing that such bonds are in full force and effect in the aggregate sum of $500,000.00, and that the terms and conditions of each bond shall thereafter likewise apply to the drilling and operation of the additional well named therein. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 11, 1-25-65) 
Secs. 42-67-42-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 42-81. - Derrick and rig. 
    It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to use or operate in connection with the drilling or reworking of any well within the city limits, any wooden derrick or any steam-powered rig, and all engines shall be equipped with adequate mufflers approved by the city council; or to permit any derricks to remain on the premises or drilling site for a period longer than 30 days after completion or abandonment of the well. At all times from the start of erection of a derrick, or a mast, or a gin-pole, until the well is abandoned and plugged, or completed as a producer and enclosed with a fence as provided in section 42-38, the permittee shall keep a watchman on duty on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 13, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-82. - Pits. 
    Only portable slush tanks for mud or water shall be permitted in connection with the drilling and reworking operation. Such tanks and their contents shall be removed from the premises and the drilling site within ten days after completion of the well. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 14, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-83. - Casing. 
    The productive string shall be a new pipe and shall have a mill test of 2,100 pounds for wells 6,000 feet or less in depth. The surface casing shall be new pipe and shall have a mill test of 1,100 pounds. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 15, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-84. - Setting and cementing casing. 
    No well shall be drilled within the city limits without properly setting surface casing to a minimum depth of 2,000 feet. No well shall be drilled within the city limits without cementing the surface casing by the pump and plug method with sufficient cement to completely fill all of the annular space behind such casing to the surface of the ground; and without cementing the production string by the pump and plug method with sufficient cement to completely fill all the annular space behind the production string to at least 600 feet above the highest oil and/or gas bearing horizon, and if a protection string of casing is used without cementing, the protection string by the pump and plug method with sufficient cement to completely fill all the annular space behind the protection string to at least 600 feet above the highest oil and/or gas bearing horizon. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 16, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-85. - Valves and blowout preventers. 
    No well shall be drilled within the city limits without properly equipping the surface casing when set with at least two ram type blowout preventers, one of which shall be equipped with blind rams and the other with pipe rams. On each well drilled, a valve cock or kelley cock shall be installed on the kelley used. Each blowout preventer shall be tested at least once every 24-hour period, and all control equipment shall be in good working condition and order at all times. Drilling fluid return lines shall be equipped with flow valves where the return line is connected below the top blowout preventer. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 17, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-86. - Drilling fluid. 
    All operators shall be required to drill with fluid of sufficient weight to exceed the formation pressure anticipated. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 18, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-87. - Drill stem tests. 
    It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person in connection with the drilling and reworking operations of any well within the city limits to take and to complete any drill stem test or tests except during daylight hours and then only if the well effluent during the test is produced through an adequate oil and gas separator to storage tanks, and the effluent remaining in the drill pipe at the time the tool is closed is flushed to the surface by circulating drilling fluid down the annulus and up the drill pipe. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 19, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-88. - Tubing. 
    All tubing used in any well within the city limits drilling to a depth of 6,000 feet or less shall be J-55. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 20, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-89. - Bradenhead. 
    Each well drilled within the city limits shall be equipped with a bradenhead with a test pressure of not less than 6,000 pounds per square inch. Bradenheads shall not be welded. The bradenhead installed on the surface casing shall be equipped with fittings having a test pressure rating of not less than 6,000 pounds per square inch. The bradenhead pressure shall be checked at least once each calendar month; and, if pressure is found to exist, proper remedial measures shall be immediately taken to eliminate the source and the existence of the pressure. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 21, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-90. - Christmas tree and well head connections. 
    The Christmas tree and all well head connections on each well drilled within the city limits shall be as follows: On all wells completed at a depth above 4,000 feet the Christmas tree and well head connections shall have at least a minimum working pressure of 2,000 pounds per square inch and a minimum test pressure of at least 4,000 pounds per square inch; and on all wells completed to a depth of from 4,001 to 7,000 feet the Christmas tree and well head connections shall have at least a minimum working pressure of 3,000 pounds per square inch and a minimum test pressure of at least 6,000 pounds per square inch; and on all wells completed below a depth of 7,000 feet the Christmas tree and well head connections shall be at least a minimum working pressure of 5,000 pounds per square inch and a minimum test pressure of at least 10,000 pounds per square inch. If the surface shut-in pressure of any well in the city limits exceeds 2,000 pounds per square inch, the flow string of the Christmas tree shall be equipped with an automatic closing safety valve in addition to the regular control valves. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 22, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-91. - Mufflers required. 
    Motive power for all operations after completion of drilling operations shall be electric or properly muffled gas or gasoline engines. Such mufflers shall be approved by the city inspector. All pumping wells shall be equipped with electric motors. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 24, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-92. - Storage tanks. 
    All crude oil and distillate storage tanks shall be located outside the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 25, 1-25-65) 
Sec. 42-93. - Venting and flaring of gas. 
    No person engaged in drilling or operating any well shall permit gas to escape or be vented into the air within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 31, § 28, 1-25-65) 
Secs. 42-94-42-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-111. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Every person, association, organization or corporation and the local manager or agent of every such person, association, organization or corporation failing or refusing to obtain a permit as required by section 42-131, or violating any other portion of this article shall, upon conviction in the corporation court of the city be fined according to the provisions of section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 29, § 4, 11-9-64) 
Secs. 42-112-42-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 42-131. - Required. 
    All persons, associations, organizations and corporations using or maintaining pipelines, pipe and other fixtures in any of the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks or other public places within the corporate limits of the city shall not build, make, construct or install any main pipeline extensions within the corporate limits of the city without first having obtained a permit from the city council. A main pipeline extension is defined as any pipeline extension which runs in, or parallel to, any street, parkway, easement or other public property within the corporate limits of the city. This definition, however, shall not be construed to include connecting pipelines from the main line to the resident customer, such a pipeline being commonly known as a service line, and it shall not be necessary to obtain the special permit required by this article in order to lay such a service line. 
(Ord. No. 29, § 1, 11-9-64) 
Sec. 42-132. - Application. 
    Before the issuance of any such permit, the person, association, organization or corporation described in section 42-131 shall make application to the city council and furnish a plat or map showing the location of the proposed pipeline, the size, kind of product or intended use, depth to be installed and other related information. 
(Ord. No. 29, § 2, 11-9-64) 
Sec. 42-133. - Conditions required for granting. 
    No application for a permit shall be granted except on condition that the applicant agrees to replace the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks or other public places, through which such pipelines are laid, in as good condition as they were previous to the laying of such lines, and shall pay to the city any and all damages for failure to do so, and such applicant shall further agree to indemnify the city against any damages to any persons by reason of the laying of such pipelines and the use and maintenance thereof. The applicant shall further agree to lower or relocate such pipelines at its expense, within 60 days of written notice by the city to the applicant at the address shown in the application, if future street construction or other city improvement projects should require that such pipeline be lowered or relocated. 
(Ord. No. 29, § 3, 11-9-64) 
Chapters 43-45 - RESERVED 
Chapter 46 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Court, ch. 18; law enforcement, ch. 38; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Smoking in buildings owned or leased by city. 
(a)	Declared unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to be in possession of a burning tobacco product or to smoke a tobacco product in a building owned or leased by the city, within the corporate boundaries of such city. 
(b)	Defenses to prosecution; fine. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the building in which the offense takes place does not have prominently displayed therein a reasonably sized notice that the use of tobacco is prohibited by city ordinance in such building and that an offense is punishable by a fine not to exceed that established in section 1-9. It is a defense to prosecution under this section for a person charged with smoking or being in possession of a burning tobacco product that the building in which the offense takes place is not equipped with facilities for extinguishment of smoking materials in a readily accessible location. 
(Ord. No. 94-347, §§ 1-3, 4-6-94) 
Sec. 46-2. - Defacing, destroying or removing city property. 
    It is hereby unlawful to deface, destroy, or remove city property without proper authority. 
(Ord. No. 27, § 1, 7-27-64) 
Sec. 46-3. - Discharge of firearms. 
    Any person who discharges any gun, pistol or firearm of any kind, or who discharges an air rifle or air pistol of any description, by whatever name known that by means of compressed air, compressed gas, springs or any other means is capable of discharging shots, pellets or any solid object at a velocity in excess of 300 feet per second in the city, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 10, § 1, 9-17-62) 
Sec. 46-4. - New billboard construction; conversion of existing billboards into changeable electronic variable message signs (CEVMS); prohibited. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Changeable electronic variable message sign (CEVMS) shall mean a sign which permits light to be turned on or off intermittently or which is operated in a way whereby light is turned on or off intermittently, including any illuminated sign on which such illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times with such sign is in use, including LED (light emitting diode) or digital sign, and which varies in intensity or color. A CEVMS sign does not include a sign located within the right-of -way that functions as a traffic control device and that is described and identified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) approved by the Federal Highway Administrator as the National Standard. 
    Off-premise sign shall mean any sign, commonly known as a billboard, that advertises a business, person, activity, goods, products or services not located on the premises where the sign is installed and maintained, or that directs person to a location other than the premises where the sign is installed and maintained. 
    On-premise sign shall mean any sing identifying or advertising the business, person, activity goods, products or series sold or offered for sale on the premises where the sign is installed and maintained when such premises is used for business purposes. 
    Sign code application area shall mean the corporate limits of the city and the area of its extraterritorial jurisdiction as defined by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 42.021. 
(b)	Prohibitions. 
(1)	Prohibition of new off-premise signs. From and after the effective date, no new construction permit shall be issued for the erection of an off-premise sign, including but not limited to a new off-premise CEVMS or the conversion of an existing non-CEVMS off-premise sign to a CEVMS, within the sign code application area. 
(2)	Prohibition of changeable electronic variable message signs. From and after the effective date [of Ordinance No. 08-550], no CEVMS shall be allowed within the sign code application area. This applies to both on-premise and off-premises signs. 
(Ord. No. 08-550, 5-7-08) 
Secs. 46-5-46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CURFEW OF MINORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-588, §§ 2-7, adopted Jan. 6, 2010, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 46-31-46-36, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 94-350, § 2, adopted May 4, 1994; Ord. No. 01-442, §§ 2-6, adopted June 20, 2001; Ord. No. 01-442, §§ 2-6, adopted June 20, 2001. 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 

Sec. 46-31. - Purpose. 
    It is the express purpose of this article to 
(1)	Deter criminal conduct involving juveniles; 
(2)	Reduce the number of juvenile crime victims; 
(3)	Reduce injury from accidents involving juveniles; 
(4)	Reduce the additional time police officers are required; to be in the field due to juvenile crime; 
(5)	Provide additional and more effective means and; options for dealing with gang-related violence and; crime; 
(6)	Reduce juvenile peer pressure to stay out late; 
(7)	Reduce juvenile peer pressure to participate in violent; or criminal activities, and; 
(8)	Assist parents in the control of their children. 
(Ord. No. 10-588, § 2, 1-6-10) 
Sec. 46-32. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article the following words or terms shall have the meanings ascribed thereto: 
    Curfew hours shall mean: 
(1)	On any day of the week 12:00 midnight until 6:00 a.m.; and 
(2)	On any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday from 9:00 a.m. until 2:30 p.m.; provided however, the hours defined in this subsection shall not be considered as curfew hours for minors not subject to compulsory school attendance pursuant to V.T.C.A., Education Code § 21.032, nor shall the hours defined in this subsection be considered as curfew hours on days or during periods in which the school where the applicable minor is enrolled is closed or classes for which the applicable minor is enrolled have been cancelled under the order and direction of officials authorized to issue such orders and directives. 
    Emergency shall mean an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. This term shall include, but not be limited to, a fire, natural disaster, automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
    Establishment shall mean any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
    Guardian shall mean a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
    Minor shall mean any person under 17 years of age. 
    Operator shall mean any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
    Parent shall mean a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of a minor, or a person at least 18 years of age who is authorized by the parent or guardian of a minor to have the care and custody of such minor. 
    Police department shall mean the Lakeview Police Department or any successor police department of the City of Taylor Lake Village. 
    Public place shall mean any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and shall include, but not be limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, restaurants, theaters, game rooms, shops, shopping centers, or any other place that offers for sale services or merchandise. 
    Remain shall mean to linger or stay, or fail to leave premises, when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises. 
    Serious bodily injury shall mean bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(Ord. No. 10-588, § 3, 1-6-10) 
Sec. 46-33. - Offenses. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any minor to knowingly remain, walk, run, or stand, or operate or ride about in any motor vehicle or bicycle, in or upon any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for the parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control allow, a minor to remain in or upon any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment to knowingly allow a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(Ord. No. 10-588, § 4, 1-6-10) 
Sec. 46-34. - Defenses. 
(a)	It shall be a defense to prosecution under section 46-33 that the minor was: 
(1)	Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
(2)	On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian; 
(3)	In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)	Engaged in lawful employment activity, or going directly to the employment activity or returning directly to the minor's residence form the employment activity; 
(5)	Involved in an emergency; 
(6)	On an errand made necessary by an illness, injury, or emergency; 
(7)	On the sidewalk abutting the minor's permanent residence or abutting the residence of a next door neighbor of the minor's permanent residence if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence thereon; 
(8)	Attending a school, religious, or government-sponsored or other civic activity supervised by adults and sponsored by an educational, religious, or governmental institution, civic organization, or other similar entity, or traveling directly to or returning from any such school, religious, governmental, or civic activity; 
(9)	Engaged, participating in, or traveling to or from any event, function, or activity for which the application of section 46-33 would contravene the minor's right's protected by the United States Constitution including, but not limited to, First Amendment rights such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, or the right of assembly; or 
(10)	Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Family Code ch. 31. 
(b)	It is a defense to prosecution under subsection 46-33(c) that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and the minor refused to leave. 
(c)	It is a defense to prosecution under section 46-33 that the minor has been directed by his or her parent or guardian to engage in a specific activity or to carry out expressed instructions, during the time that the minor is actually engaged in fulfilling those directions or responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 10-588, § 5, 1-6-10) 
Sec. 46-35. - Enforcement. 
    Before taking any enforcement action under this article, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the pubic place or establishment. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this article unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in section 46-34 is present. 
(Ord. No. 10-588, § 6, 1-6-10) 
Sec. 46-36. - Penalties. 
(a)	A person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $500.00. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	When required by V.T.C.A., Family Code § 51.08, as amended, the municipal court shall waive original jurisdiction over a minor who violates subsection 46-33(a) and shall refer the minor to juvenile court. 
(Ord. No. 10-588, § 7, 1-6-10) 
Secs. 46-37-46-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIREWORKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Adoption of standard fire prevention code, § 10-36. 

Sec. 46-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fireworks means any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or device prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include, but not be limited to, blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or toy guns in which explosives are used, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, dago bombs, sparklers or other devices of like construction, and any devices containing any explosive substance, except that the term "fireworks" shall not include paper caps containing not in excess of an average of 0.25 of a grain of explosive content per cap, and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices for use of such caps. 
    Person means any natural person, association of persons, partnership, corporation, agent or officer of a corporation, and shall also include all warehousemen, common and private carriers, bailees, trustees, receivers, executors and administrators. 
    Public display means the igniting and shooting of fireworks for public amusement. 
(Ord. No. 85-230, § 1, 4-3-85) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-62. - Prohibited acts. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, have in his possession with intent to sell, keep, use, discharge, cause to be discharged, ignite, detonate, fire or otherwise set in action any fireworks. 
(Ord. No. 85-230, § 2, 4-3-85) 
Sec. 46-63. - Exceptions. 
    The general prohibition set forth in section 46-62 shall not apply to the following: 
(1)	The sale, storage or use of safety flares commonly used by disabled vehicles on a highway, or other signaling devices used by boats; 
(2)	A public display of fireworks if conducted under and pursuant to the terms and conditions of section 46-64. 
(Ord. No. 85-230, § 3, 4-3-85) 
Sec. 46-64. - Public displays. 
    The public display of fireworks shall not be prohibited if a permit is acquired from the city council authorizing such display. A display permit shall be granted upon the payment of an application fee in an amount as shall be determined by the city council, and upon compliance with the following: 
(1)	Any adult person or any firm, copartnership, corporation or association planning to make a public display of fireworks shall first make written application for a display permit to the fire marshal at least 14 days in advance of the date of the proposed display. 
(2)	The fire marshal shall make an investigation as to whether the display as proposed by the applicant for a display permit shall be of such a character that it may be hazardous to property or dangerous to any person, and he shall, following such investigation, file his recommendation with the city council. The city council shall grant or deny the application, subject to the conditions prescribed in this section. If the application is approved, a permit shall be issued for the public display by the city council. Such permit shall be for a period of time designated on the permit, but shall not exceed 14 days, and the permit shall not be transferable. If the application is denied, the city secretary shall notify the applicant of the denial in writing. 
(3)	The applicant for a display permit under this section shall, at the time of making application, furnish proof that he carries compensation insurance for his employees as provided by the laws of the state, and he shall file with the fire marshal a certificate of insurance evidencing the carrying of public liability insurance in an amount not less than $100,000.00, issued by an insurance carrier authorized to transact business in the state, for the benefit of the person named therein as assured as evidence of ability to respond in damages in at least the amount of $100,000.00, such policy to be approved by the fire marshal. 
(4)	No public display of fireworks shall be of such a character and so located, discharged or fired as to be hazardous or dangerous to persons or property, and this determination shall be within the sound discretion of the fire marshal. 
(5)	The persons handling the display of fireworks under this section shall be competent, adult persons and experienced pyrotechnic operators approved by the fire marshal, and no person not approved by the fire marshal shall handle fireworks at the public display. The names of the experienced pyrotechnic operators shall be designated on the permit issued. 
(6)	For each public display of fireworks under this section, not less than two firefighters of the city shall be in attendance during the display. The expense of such firefighters at the display shall be borne by the applicant for the permit and shall be paid in advance at the time of the application for the permit. 
(7)	The material to be used for a public display authorized by this section shall not be stored within the city limits, but shall be brought in on the day of the public display and then shall be taken immediately to the place of display for further handling and storage. 
(Ord. No. 85-230, § 4, 4-3-85) 
Sec. 46-65. - Illegal fireworks as nuisance; seizure and destruction. 
    The presence of any fireworks within the jurisdiction of the city in violation of this article is hereby declared to be a common and public nuisance. The fire marshal is hereby authorized and directed to seize and cause to be safely destroyed any fireworks found in violation of this article, and any member of the fire prevention division of the fire department or any police officer of the city or any other duly constituted peace officer is empowered to stop the transportation of and detain any fireworks found being transported illegally or to close any building where any fireworks are found stored illegally until the fire marshal can be notified in order that such fireworks may be seized and destroyed in accordance with the terms of this section. Notwithstanding any penal provision of this article, the city attorney is authorized to file suit on behalf of the city or the fire marshal, or both, for such injunctive relief as may be necessary to prevent unlawful storage, transportation, keeping or use of fireworks within the jurisdiction of the city and to aid the fire marshal in the discharge of his duties and to particularly prevent any person from interfering with the seizure and destruction of such fireworks. However, it shall not be necessary to obtain any such injunctive relief as a prerequisite to such seizure and destruction. 
(Ord. No. 85-230, § 5, 4-3-85) 
Secs. 46-66-46-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - POSSESSION OF MARIJUANA 

Sec. 46-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Attempt to possess means it shall be an offense, if with specific intent to commit the offense of possession of marijuana of the weight of two ounces or less, or with specific intent to commit the offense of possession of any of the compounds, mixtures or preparations named in this article, a person does an act, amounting to more than mere preparation, that tends but fails to effect the commission of the offense intended. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 5, 3-16-77) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-92. - Usable quantities of less than two ounces. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly attempt to possess a usable quantity of marijuana of the weight of two ounces or less. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 1, 3-16-77) 
Sec. 46-94. - Application of sections 46-92 and 46-93. 
    The provisions of sections 46-92 and 46-93 shall not be applicable: 
(1)	As to the delivery of dangerous drugs to persons included in any of the classes named in this section, or to the agents or employees of such persons, for use in the usual course of their business or practice or in the performance of their official duties, as the case may be; or 
(2)	To the possession of dangerous drugs by such persons or their agents or employees for such use: 
a.	Pharmacy, drugstore, dispensary, apothecary shop, or prescription laboratory, duly registered with the state board of pharmacy; 
b.	A person licensed by the state board of medical examiners, state board of dental examiners, state board of chiropody examiners and state board of veterinary medical examiners to prescribe and administer dangerous drugs; 
c.	Persons who procure dangerous drugs for the purpose of lawful research, teaching or testing, and not for resale; 
d.	Hospitals which procure dangerous drugs for lawful administration by practitioners; 
e.	Officers or employees of federal, state or local government; 
f.	Manufacturers and wholesalers registered with the commissioner of health as required by chapter 373, Acts of the 57th Legislature, 1961, as amended (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4476-5); 
g.	Carriers and warehousemen. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 3, 3-16-77) 
Sec. 46-95. - Defense to prosecution denied. 
    It shall be no defense to prosecution under this article that the offense attempted was actually committed. 
(Ord. No. 88, § 4, 3-16-77) 
Secs. 46-96-46-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 46-121. - Permit required. 
    All food establishments in the city's corporate limits are required to procure and maintain a valid Harris County Food Establishment permit in accordance with the regulations of the State of Texas and Harris County, Texas. For purposes of this article, "food establishment" has the meaning found at 25 Texas Admin. Code § 229-162(40). 
(Ord. No. 13-634, § 3, 7-17-13) 
Sec. 46-122. - State rules. 
    The city adopts the Texas Board of Health's Food Establishment Rules, found at 25 Texas Admin. Code §§ 229.161-229.171, and §§ 229.173-229.175, and such regulations are applicable to all food establishments within the city limits of the City of Taylor Lake Village. 
(Ord. No. 13-634, § 4, 7-17-13) 
Sec. 46-123. - County rules. 
    The city adopts the requirements in the "Rules for Regulation of Food Establishments in the Unincorporated Areas of Harris County, Texas" promulgated by the Commissioners Court of Harris County, Texas on March 27, 2012 and makes such regulations applicable to all food establishments within the city limits of the City of Taylor Lake Village. 
(Ord. No. 13-634, § 5, 7-17-13) 
Chapters 47-49 - RESERVED 
Chapter 50 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commodities, goods or merchandise means personal property of any nature whatsoever. 
    Itinerant vendors means any individual, firm, organization or corporation, as well as their representatives, agents and employees, who engage in a business within the city of selling, or offering for sale, any goods or merchandise, or exhibiting the same for sale, or for the purpose of taking orders for the sale of goods or merchandise, who display, exhibit, sell or offer for sale such goods, merchandise or services upon or from a truck or other vehicle within the city. This term shall not include individuals connected with a noncommercial or nonprofit purpose or cause. 
    Noncommercial or nonprofit purpose or cause means a purpose or cause not created, existing or espoused for the generation of a profit or the remuneration of individuals including, but not limited to, the religious or charitable solicitation of contributions, seeking political support or contributions, the promotion of civic causes, the promotion of conservation of resources or animals, or advocating a philosophy or religion. 
    Peddler means any individual, form, organization or corporation, as well as their representatives, agents and employees, who engage in the business within the city of selling, offering for sale or exhibition for sale of any commodity or service, from house to house or from place to place and not from one established spot. Delivery of the commodity or service is made or to be made at the time of sale. Collection of the sales price at the time of the sale or later is immaterial. This term shall not include individuals connected with a noncommercial or nonprofit purpose or cause. 
    Services means the performance of labor for the benefit of another, or at another's command. 
    Solicitor or canvasser means any individual, firm, organization or corporation, as well as their representatives, agents and employees, who engage in the business within the city of taking orders for future delivery of commodities or services, or solicit subscriptions, orders, contributions, or any kind of support, for remuneration or gain, from house to house or from place to place. This term shall not include individuals connected with a noncommercial or nonprofit purpose or cause. 
(Ord. No. 97-381, § 1(A), 4-2-97) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-2. - Liability of corporate officers. 
    If business, fundraising or communication under the provisions of this chapter shall be conducted by a corporation, it shall be unlawful for any officer, agent or employee of such corporation to cause or permit a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-381, § 1(B), 4-2-97) 
Sec. 50-3. - Exemptions. 
(a)	A peddler, solicitor, canvasser or itinerant vendor conducting activities on the property of another by express, prior invitation of the owner thereof is exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)	A vendor selling or exhibiting for sale commodities, goods, merchandise or services to persons engaged in the business of buying, selling and dealing in the same within the city is exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)	Minors conducting fundraising activities, who represent an organization for the benefit of youths including, but not limited to, boy scouts, girl scouts, little league groups and school groups, are exempt from the coverage of this chapter. 
(d)	Persons conducting activities for or on behalf of a noncommercial or nonprofit purpose or cause are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-381, § 1(C), 4-2-97) 
Sec. 50-4. - Prohibited acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, canvasser or itinerant vendor to: 
(1)	Conduct such business or related activities within the city without a valid registration certificate as provided in article II of this chapter. 
(2)	Conduct such business or related activities within the city without a valid identification card as provided in article II of this chapter. 
(3)	Conduct such business or related activities without visibly displaying the identification card issued to that individual. 
(4)	Alter a registration certificate or identification card issued by the city. 
(5)	Conduct such business or related activities within the city after the expiration of the registration certificate issued by the city. 
(6)	Conduct such business or related activities within the city different than described in the registration statement required by this chapter. 
(7)	Provide false, inaccurate or misleading information in the registration statement. 
(8)	Use a vehicle in the conduct of such business or related activities not identified in the registration statement. 
(9)	Conduct a business selling, offering for sale, exhibiting for sale or taking of orders for delivery of any commodities, goods, merchandise or services not listed and described in the registration statement. 
(10)	Sell, assign or transfer, or attempt to sell, assign or transfer, a registration certificate or identification card. 
(11)	Conduct a business, authorized under a registration certificate issued pursuant to this chapter, on any public sidewalk, public street right-of-way or other public property within the city, without written authorization from the city. 
(12)	Conduct such business during hours other than those permitted by this chapter. 
(13)	Attempting to conduct such business on property where a no solicitors sign, or other sign bearing a similar message, exists, or where the owner or occupant of such property has requested or directed the solicitor, peddler, canvasser or itinerant vendor to leave the premises. 
(Ord. No. 97-381, § 1(D), 4-2-97) 
Sec. 50-5. - Inspection. 
    A representative of the city designated by the chief of police shall have the authority to request admission to inspect, at a reasonable time without advance notice, a business operating under a registration certificate issued pursuant to this chapter, to determine whether the permit holder's business and related activities are as represented in the registration statement. If such admission is denied, or if the chief of police deems it advisable, then the chief shall have the authority to obtain a warrant, in accordance with applicable law, for the purpose of allowing the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 97-381, § 1(E), 4-2-97) 
Sec. 50-6. - Hours. 
    Business conducted in accordance with this chapter shall be carried out during Central Standard Time from 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., and during Daylight Savings Time from 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 97-381, § 1(F), 4-2-97) 
Secs. 50-7-50-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 50-37. - Certificate. 
(a)	When all the prerequisites of this article have been complied with, the city secretary shall initiate appropriate action to process the application. The city secretary shall make an appropriate investigation of an applicant, any person listed by the applicant and any information provided. The city secretary shall issue a registration certificate to the applicant authorizing the sale, offer for sale, taking of orders for sale and exhibition of commodities, goods, merchandise and services within 15 working days after the applicant has fully complied with all applicable provisions of this article, subject to denial of a registration certificate or identification card as outlined in section 50-40. 
(b)	The registration certificate shall state the effective term, and the beginning and ending dates, not to exceed 180 days. Upon expiration, the registration certificate may be renewed upon full compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(c)	A registration certificate issued under this article shall be personal to the applicant and shall not be sold, assigned or transferred to any other person, firm, corporation or association. Any attempted sale, assignment or transfer of a registration certificate shall be grounds for revocation of the registration certificate. 
(Ord. No. 97-381, § 2(B), 4-2-97) 
Sec. 50-38. - Identification cards. 
(a)	In conjunction with the issuance of a registration certificate under this article, the city secretary shall issue identification cards for each individual whose name is listed in the registration statement. The identification card shall be laminated in clear plastic; shall have a metal clothing clip; shall contain the photograph of the holder; and it shall state the holder's name, driver's license number and state of issuance, and height, weight, sex, and hair color of the cardholder; the term of the permit; and the nature of the business and related activities. The card shall contain the following disclaimer of any endorsement by the city, to be placed in a conspicuous place upon such card: 
"THE CITY OF TAYLOR LAKE VILLAGE, TEXAS, DOES NOT ENDORSE THE PRODUCT, SERVICE OR ACTIVITY PROMOTED BY THIS CARDHOLDER." 
(b)	An identification card issued in accordance with this article shall be personal to the cardholder and shall not be sold, assigned or transferred to any other person. Any attempted sale, assignment or transfer of an identification card shall be grounds for revocation of the registration certificate and the identification cards issued under such certificate. 
(Ord. No. 97-381, § 2(C), 4-2-97) 
Sec. 50-39. - Display of identification card. 
    While conducting business covered by the registration certificate each identification card shall visibly display the identification card for identification by clipping the identification card to the clothing of the holder, so that the identification card is in plain view. 
(Ord. No. 97-381, § 2(D), 4-2-97) 
Sec. 50-40. - Denial of certificate or card to specified individuals. 
(a)	The issuance of a registration certificate may be denied if: 
(1)	Any violation of this chapter, or other city ordinances or laws relating to or governing the business or related activities to be conducted under the registration certificate applied for has been committed by any individual or individuals who would operate under such registration certificate; 
(2)	False, inaccurate or misleading information is contained in the registration statement; 
(3)	The applicant is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed or imposed against him; or 
(4)	The applicant fails to fully comply with applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(b)	Conviction of a related felony or misdemeanor, as described in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 6252-13c and 6252-13d, shall be grounds for: 
(1)	Denial of issuance to that individual of an identification card; 
(2)	Removal from the registration statement on file with the city of any such person so convicted; and/or 
(3)	Denial of the right to conduct business covered by such certificate by any such person so convicted. 
(c)	Notice of a denial of a registration certificate, or denial of an identification card, to any individual, shall be given in writing, specifically setting forth the reasons for such denial, and what action will be required before a registration certificate can be issued. Such notice shall be served in person, or by depositing such notice in the United States mail, addressed to the applicant's permanent business or home address listed on the registration statement. 
(Ord. No. 97-381, § 2(E), 4-2-97) 
Sec. 50-41. - Revocation of certificate. 
    The city may revoke a registration certificate if: 
(1)	Any violation of this chapter, or any violation of other city ordinances or laws relating to or governing the business or related activities covered by the registration certificate, is committed by any individual operating under the registration certificate during the original term or renewal thereof; 
(2)	False, inaccurate or misleading information is contained in the registration statement; or 
(3)	There is conviction of a related felony or misdemeanor, as described in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 6252-13c and 6252-13d. 
(Ord. No. 97-381, § 2(F), 4-2-97) 
Sec. 50-42. - Appeal of denial or revocation. 
    An applicant or other individual who has been denied a registration certificate or identification card, or who has had a registration certificate revoked, may appeal that action to the city council by submitting a letter to the city secretary's office within ten days of the action complained of. A hearing on the denial will be scheduled for the next regular city council meeting. The city council will render its decision on the appeal at the meeting during which the appeal is considered. 
(Ord. No. 97-381, § 2(G), 4-2-97) 
Sec. 50-43. - Registration fees. 
    Each application for a registration certificate shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable registration application fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 97-381, § 2(H), 4-2-97) 
Chapters 51-53 - RESERVED 
Chapter 54 - PLANNING AND ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; environment, ch. 30; floods, ch. 34; natural resources, ch. 42; subdivisions, ch. 66; waterways, ch. 78; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1-54-30. - Reserved. 
Sec. 54-31. - Created and established; composition. 
    There is hereby created and established for the city, a planning and zoning commission, which shall be composed of seven members. 
(Ord. No. 9, § 1, 9-17-62; Ord. No. 80-145, § 1, 5-7-80) 
Sec. 54-32. - Qualifications of members; terms; vacancies. 
    The members shall be resident citizens and qualified voters of the city, all of whom shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the city council, to serve for terms of two years. All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as provided for the original appointments. All expired terms shall be filled for terms as provided for the original appointments and in the same manner. 
(Ord. No. 9, § 1, 9-17-62; Ord. No. 80-145, § 1, 5-7-80) 
Sec. 54-33. - Removal of members. 
    Members of the planning and zoning commission may be removed by the mayor, with the consent of the city council, after a public hearing and for cause assigned in writing. 
(Ord. No. 9, § 1, 9-17-62; Ord. No. 80-145, § 1, 5-7-80) 
Sec. 54-34. - Compensation. 
    The members of the planning and zoning commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 9, § 1, 9-17-62; Ord. No. 80-145, § 1, 5-7-80) 
Sec. 54-36. - Regulations and bylaws. 
    It shall also have the power to make rules, regulations and bylaws for its own government, which shall conform as nearly as possible with those governing the city council, and such bylaws shall be subject to approval by such council. Such bylaws shall include, among other items, provisions for: 
(1)	Regular and special meetings, open to the public; 
(2)	Records of its proceedings, to be open for inspection by the public; 
(3)	Reporting to the city council and the public, from time to time and annually; and 
(4)	For the holding of public hearings on its recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 9, § 2, 9-17-62) 
Sec. 54-37. - Powers and duties. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall have the power and it shall be its duty to make and recommend for adoption a master plan, as a whole or in parts, for the future development and redevelopment of the municipality and its environs, and shall have power and it shall be its duty to prepare a comprehensive plan and ordinance for zoning the city in accordance with Chapter 283, Acts of the Regular Session of the Legislature, 1927, (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 1011a to 1011j). The planning and zoning commission shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance or state law. 
(Ord. No. 9, § 3, 9-17-62) 
Chapters 55-57 - RESERVED 
Chapter 58 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; sewage disposal, § 10-101 et seq.; environment, ch. 30; deposit of refuse in Taylor Bayou or Taylor Lake, § 30-1; natural resources, ch. 42. 

Sec. 58-1. - Tracking, spilling or depositing of mud or dirt on city streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to track, spill or deposit mud or dirt on the streets of the city. 
(Ord. No. 15, § 1, 12-4-62) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 
Sec. 58-3. - Failure to remove items enumerated in sections 58-1 and 58-2; penalty for violation. 
    Failure to remove dirt or mud deposited on the streets or failure to remove garbage, papers or trash shall be punishable as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 15, § 3, 12-4-62) 
Chapters 59-61 - RESERVED 
Chapter 62 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Ordinances creating, locating, opening, dedicating, paving, widening, vacating or closing specific streets, alleys and other public ways saved from repeal, § 1-10(1); ordinances releasing special easements saved from repeal, § 1-10(2); ordinances naming or changing the names of specific streets and other public ways saved from repeal, § 1-10(3); ordinances establishing the grades of specific streets and other public ways saved from repeal, § 1-10(4); ordinances creating or relating to specific sewer and paving districts and other specific local improvement districts saved from repeal, § 1-10(6); ordinances granting a specific public utility or any other person the right or privilege of constructing lines in the streets, alleys and other public areas, or of otherwise using such streets, alleys and places saved from repeal, § 1-10(15); ordinances accepting specific street improvements or other construction saved from repeal, § 1-10(20); buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; cable communications, ch. 14; natural resources, ch. 42; curfew of minors, § 46-31 et seq.; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 50; tracking, spilling or depositing of mud or dirt on city streets, § 58-1; subdivisions, ch. 66; subdivision design standards for public streets, § 66-98; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74; waterways, ch. 78; zoning, app. A. 

Sec. 62-1. - Street lighting standards adopted. 
(a)	The city council hereby adopts, for the purpose of establishing minimum standards and requirements for street lighting, the recommendations contained in the Illuminating Engineering Society Lighting Handbook, Fifth Edition (1972), a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part of this chapter for all purposes. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, or cause to be erected, any lights within public street right-of-way within the corporate limits of the city, unless such lights are erected in conformity with the minimum standards set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 80-164, §§ 1, 2, 10-1-80) 
Sec. 62-2. - Clogging of driveway drainpipes prohibited; declared public nuisance; abatement. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, occupant or any person in charge of any premises in the city to allow the driveway drainpipe in the borrow ditch adjacent to such property to become clogged with rubbish, grass or weeds to such an extent that such drainpipe will not carry off surface runoff waters or allow water to stand in such borrow ditches to such an extent as is reasonably calculated to create a health hazard or restrict the surface runoff waters which may cause flooding or damage to property of the citizens of the city, or either act is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance. 
(b)	Whenever a driveway drainpipe or borrow ditch is clogged and will not permit the runoff of surface water as prohibited by this section, the city council shall hear evidence and determine whether or not such clogged driveway drainpipe or borrow ditch is clogged, or both, to such an extent that surface runoff waters stand in the borrow ditch or such conditions are sufficient to constitute a nuisance; and if they so find, they shall pass a resolution declaring that the clogged driveway drainpipe and/or clogged borrow ditch adjacent to such premises constitutes a public nuisance, and shall order such condition corrected by the owner, occupant, lessee or person in charge of such premises, within ten days from the date such notice is given. 
(Ord. No. 55, §§ 1, 2, 12-21-71) 
Sec. 62-3. - Unlawful to obstruct drainage. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or association to cause or permit the deposit of any soil, sand, mulch, gravel, or other similar earthen matter upon any street or sidewalk within the city, or to cause or permit any such soil, sand, mulch, gravel, or other earthen matter to spill, leak, drain, blow, or otherwise be discharged from any vehicle being used to haul or transporting same over or across any such street or sidewalk within the city. It shall be a defense to prosecution hereunder that any such soil, sand, mulch, gravel, or other earthen matter was removed and cleaned from such street or sidewalk within eight hours of the occurrence which caused the depositing of same. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or association to place, deposit or throw, or permit to be placed, deposited or thrown, any trash, litter, or debris of any kind, or any yard waste, including grass and/or hedge clippings, upon any street, sidewalk, alley, storm sewer, drainage channel or ditch, or storm gutter, within the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-406, §§ 1, 2, 11-4-98) 
Sec. 62-4. - Use of city facilities. 
(a)	Purpose. It is the city's intent to protect, preserve, and promote the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, and welfare of its citizens, by providing for fair and equitable use of the city's facilities, including areas at Taylor Lake Village Recreational Facility and meeting rooms at city hall. 
(b)	Rules and regulations governing the city-owned recreational facility. The following rules and regulations are hereby established to minimize the exposure of the citizens and their property to large group gatherings and to promote sensitivity to those who live near and/or own property adjacent to sites used for such large group gatherings. In addition, promoters of such gatherings and renters of such gathering sites may underestimate or fail to consider the impact of their gathering on other users and the minimum standards required for sanitation and the health and welfare of such large group participants. 
(1)	Permit/reservation required. A permit is required for any organized use of the city recreational facility, by a group of more than 20 people. A reservation is required for exclusive use of any park facility by a group of any size. An application for the use of the city recreational facility must be submitted to the city secretary of the city prior to scheduling a date for any permitted or reservation based gathering at the city-owned recreational facility. 
(2)	Contents of application. Such permit application shall include the following information and/or attachments: 
a.	The name, address, and telephone number of the individual or organization making such application. 
b.	An organization's, proof of comprehensive general liability insurance policy with minimum limits of $100,000.00 for property damage, per occurrence. Such insurance policy shall be written by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Texas and acceptable to the city; 
c.	A signed statement assuming full responsibility for the proper use of the city's facilities and for payment for any damages to such facility or its surrounding property. 
d.	A signed statement that the individual or organization making application for a group gathering permit/reservation has received and read these rules and regulations. 
(3)	Conditions for use of city-owned recreational facility by large groups. 
a.	Each individual or organization using the city-owned recreational facility shall be responsible for clean-up and trash removal from the portion of the recreational facility used for any large group gathering. All trash must be collected and placed in the on-site trash receptacle provided for such purpose. 
b.	The hours for use of the city-owned recreational facility, except for baseball fields, shall be from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., including set-up and take-down of equipment and/or other facilities. 
c.	Domestic animals shall be allowed within the city-owned recreational facility; however, the city's animal control ordinances will be strictly enforced. 
d.	One adult chaperone shall be required for every ten people under the age of 17. 
e.	Large group gatherings of 100 persons or more shall be limited to one event per month. 
f.	Friday and Saturday nights and holidays may not be reserved on a regular basis. Usage is limited to one Friday and Saturday night or holiday per month per individual or organization. "Reservation" shall be defined as one continuous event of duration of not more than 12 hours. 
g.	Security is required for large groups gathering of 100 or more. Renter must use Lakeview Police Department off-duty officers. Please call the Lakeview Police Department to schedule security for your event. 
(4)	Fees. The fees for use, deposits, and security fees shall be as established from time to time by city council. 
(5)	Restriction on size of gathering. The total number of persons in the reserved area of the recreational facility property shall be limited to not more than 150 persons per event, due to size of the facilities, use of the facilities by other groups or individuals, and the city's and/or county's health code requirements. 
(6)	Cancellation policy. If an event or reservation for any city-owned recreational facility or area within the recreational facility is canceled, an administrative fee will be withheld. 
(7)	Parking and vehicle use. 
a.	Due to space limitations, the maximum number of vehicles allowed per large group gathering shall be 75. 
b.	All vehicles must be parked in designated parking locations and vehicles parked outside such designated parking locations will be towed. 
c.	The designated entrance to the city-owned recreational facility is on Kirby Boulevard. No entrance or parking shall be permitted via Timber Cove Subdivision. 
d.	Driving to the pavilion and other areas of the city-owned recreational facility is not permitted, except for escorted heavy equipment drop-off for city maintenance purposes. 
(8)	Camping. In addition to the following rules and regulations, a separate set of regulations shall apply to camping within the city-owned recreational facility: 
a.	Camping shall be allowed in designated areas only; 
b.	One camping event shall be allowed per month; 
c.	Not more than a total of 50 individuals or 25 tents shall be allowed; 
d.	Tents shall not be staked into tree roots or in close proximity to any residence or residential fences; 
e.	Campfires shall be contained to one designated area only; 
f.	Camping permits shall be issued for one night only; and 
g.	The city reserves the right to revoke any camping permit at any time for health, safety, welfare considerations or for the failure of any person to abide by the city's camping rules and regulations. 
(9)	Use of sports facilities. 
a.	A sports organization shall be limited to two reservations per week. 
b.	Each reservation shall be limited to a maximum of two hours to ensure availability to all groups. 
c.	Baseball fields shall not be used after 9:00 p.m. 
(10)	Prohibited activities. The following items and/or activities shall be prohibited within the city-owned recreational facility at all times: 
a.	Weapons; 
b.	Loud music; 
c.	Loudspeakers; 
d.	Fireworks or explosives; 
e.	Glass containers; 
f.	Off-road vehicles excluding golf carts; 
g.	Exceeding the ten-mile per hour maximum speed limit; 
h.	Dumping or littering around or in any body of water; 
i.	Campfires (unless by special permit); 
j.	Archery; 
k.	Destruction or misuse of any city-owned facility, structure, or property, including plants and trees; 
l.	Digging holes or erecting any structure; 
m.	Access from any recreational facility shoreline or pier for swimming; 
n.	Swimming in the recreational facility pond; 
o.	Rollerblading, skating boarding, or "trick" biking within the pavilion or upon any picnic table within the recreational facility; 
p.	For-profit activities are not allowed, except when a special permit is issued by the city and additional fees are paid; 
q.	Alcohol (unless by special permit). 
(c)	Rules and regulations governing use of city hall facilities. The following rules and regulations are hereby established regarding use of city hall facilities: 
(1)	Individuals or organizations must schedule with the city secretary prior to use of the facilities. 
(2)	Reservations for use of the facilities shall be made by calling or writing the office of the city secretary of the city; however, reservations shall not be scheduled for times and dates when city activities are scheduled in the adjacent council chambers. 
(3)	Cancellation of reservations shall be made not less than 24 hours prior to the time of the reservation. Failure to adhere to this rule shall result in forfeiting of facility privileges for one month after such noncancellation. 
(4)	Individuals or organizations shall be responsible for clean up of and trash removal from the facilities. Trash must be collected and placed in the trash receptacle provided for such purpose. 
(5)	A refundable security deposit shall be paid to the city at the time any reservation is made. The amount of such deposit shall be as established from time to time by city council. 
(6)	The hours for use of such facility shall be from 8:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and no reservations shall be taken for Sunday or any official city holiday. 
(7)	No weddings and/or social events shall be allowed to take place in such facility; 
(8)	The total number of persons scheduled to attend any function held within the city hall meeting room shall be limited to 50 per event and the city council chambers to 80 per event. 
(9)	One adult chaperone shall be required for every ten individuals 17 years old or younger. 
(10)	Meetings and gatherings must be held in a business-like manner. No amplification or loud noise shall be allowed. 
(11)	No animals, alcohol, drugs, weapons, loud music shall be allowed within city hall, including any reserved areas. 
(Ord. No. 02-462, §§ 1-3, 6-5-02; Ord. No. 10-593, § 1, 4-7-2010; Ord. No. 10-599, § 1, 7-21-2010; Ord. No. 16-662, § 1, 3-2-16) 
Chapters 63-65 - RESERVED 
Chapter 66 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Ordinances approving plats and dedication deeds saved from repeal, § 1-10(11); ordinances establishing subdivision regulations saved from repeal, § 1-10(17); buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; environment, ch. 30; floods, ch. 34; natural resources, ch. 42; planning and zoning, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; waterways, ch. 78; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Findings. 
    The facts and matters set forth in the preamble of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived are hereby found to be true and correct. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 1.01, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-2. - Application of chapter. 
    This chapter shall apply to all subdivisions of land within the city and its area of extraterritorial jurisdiction (as established by Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 970a, as amended). 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 1.02, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-3. - Conflict with county regulations. 
    This chapter shall not be applied in such a manner to amend or alter any rule, regulation, procedure or policy lawfully and officially adopted by the governing body of any county in which there exists territory contained within the area of extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. In the circumstance where any rule, regulation, procedure or policy lawfully and officially adopted by the governing body of any county is less restrictive than those contained in this chapter, then the standards of this chapter shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 1.03, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-4. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases and words, will have the meanings ascribed thereto. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the singular include the plural; and words used in the plural number include the singular number. Any office referred to in this section by title shall include the person employed or appointed for that position or his duly authorized deputy or representative. Terms, phrases or words not expressly defined in this section are to be considered in accordance with customary usage. 
    Block means an identified tract or parcel of land established within a subdivision surrounded by a street or a combination of streets and other physical features and which may be further subdivided into individual lots or reserves. 
    City engineer means the engineer employed by the city, or the engineers retained as consultants to the city, or their duly authorized representative. 
    Commission means the planning and zoning commission of the city. 
    Comprehensive plan means the general plan for growth and development of the city and its environs, including any elements of such plan, such as a land use plan, thoroughfare plan, utilities plan, drainage plan, schools and parks plan and others. 
    Easement means an area intended for restricted use on private property upon which any public utility shall have the right to remove and keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, trees, shrubs or other improvements or growths which in any way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance or operation of any of its respective utility or drainage systems within any of these easements. Any public utility shall at all times have the right of unobstructed ingress and egress to and from and upon the easements for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, patrolling, maintaining and adding to or removing all or part of its respective systems without the necessity at any time of procuring the permission of anyone. 
    Estate subdivision means a subdivision which contains lots, the smallest of which is not less than one acre. 
    Extraterritorial jurisdiction means all land situated as classified by Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 970a, as amended, in all directions from the corporate boundary of the city and its extensions, and which is not in conflict with the extraterritorial jurisdiction of another municipality. 
    Final plat means a complete and exact subdivision plan prepared in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and in a manner suitable for recording with the county clerk. 
    Lot means a physically undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public street or other approved facility and which is, or in the future may be, offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvements; which is designated as a distinct and separate tract; and which is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol on a duly approved subdivision plat which has been properly recorded. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, association, firm, corporation, governmental agency or political subdivision. 
    Preliminary plat means a map or drawing of a proposed subdivision prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, illustrating the features of the development for review and preliminary approval by the commission, but not suitable for recording with the county clerk. 
    Street, private means a private thoroughfare, not dedicated to public use, which provides vehicular access to adjacent private land. 
    Street, public means any public thoroughfare or right-of-way, dedicated for public use, which provides vehicular access to adjacent land. For the purposes of this chapter, public streets shall be classified as follows: 
Collector streets means streets which carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways. 
Major thoroughfares (or arterial streets) means principal traffic arteries more or less continuous across the city and which are intended to connect remote parts of the city and which are used primarily for fast or heavy volume traffic. 
Minor streets means streets which are used primarily for access to the abutting properties and which are intended to serve traffic within a limited area. 
    Subdivider and/or developer. The terms "subdivider" and "developer" are synonymous for the purposes of this chapter, and shall include any owner, or authorized agent thereof, proposing to divide or dividing land so as to constitute a subdivision according to the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
    Subdivision means the division of any lot, tract or parcel of land by plat, map or description into two or more parts, lots or sites for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, rental or lease, or division of ownership. Any dedication and the laying out (or realignment) of new streets, or other public or private accessways, with or without lotting, shall constitute a subdivision. Subdivision shall also include the resubdivision and replatting of land or lots which are part of a previously recorded subdivision. An addition is a subdivision as defined in this section. The term "subdivision" shall also include the division of land whether by plat or by metes and bounds description and when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 
    Title certificate means a certificate prepared and executed by a title company authorized to do business in the state or an attorney licensed in the state describing all encumbrances of record which affect the property, together with all deeds recorded from and after October 17, 1984. Such certificate shall include all property included within the platted area, and such certificate shall not have been executed more than 30 days prior to submission of the same to the commission. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 1.04, 10-17-84) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 66-5. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter within the corporate limits of the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Prosecution or conviction under this section shall never be a bar to any other remedy or relief for violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 4.07, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-6. - Plat approval required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to subdivide any tract, lot or parcel of land within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction unless and until a preliminary and final plat of such subdivision has been approved in accordance with the terms of this chapter. Unless and until a preliminary and final plat, plan or replat of a subdivision shall have been first approved in the manner provided in this chapter by the commission, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or cause to be constructed any street, utility facility, building, structure or other improvement on any lot, tract or parcel of land within such subdivision, except as specifically permitted in this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any official of the city to issue any permit for such improvements, or any aspect hereof, or to serve or connect such land, or any part thereof, with any public utility which may be owned, controlled or distributed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 1.05.01, 10-17-84; Ord. No. 84-227, § 1, 12-5-84) 
Sec. 66-7. - Improvements required. 
    All of the improvements required under this chapter, improvements specified in the comprehensive plan, and improvements which, in the judgment of the city engineer and commission, are necessary for the adequate provision of streets, drainage, utilities, municipal services and facilities to the subdivision and surrounding areas of the city, shall be constructed at the sole expense of the developer; provided, however, that if oversizing of utility or drainage facilities or off-site improvements are required as a part of the subdivision development, and are necessary for the adequate and efficient development of surrounding areas, the city may provide for reimbursement to the subdivider of such costs of such oversizing or off-site improvements. Any such reimbursements shall not be made until monies are received by the city. If oversized utility or drainage facilities or off-site improvements have been constructed pursuant to the development of a subdivision, and any such facilities directly benefit a subsequent subdivision, the developer of such subsequent subdivision may be required, as a condition of subdivision plat approval, to make payment to the city of the portion of the actual costs theretofore expended for such improvements which serve such subsequent subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 1.05.02, 10-17-84; Ord. No. 84-227, § 1, 12-5-84) 
Sec. 66-8. - Variance. 
    The rules and regulations provided in this chapter or incorporated hereby are the minimum standards and requirements of the city. A variance from any such rule or regulation may be granted by the commission upon a good and sufficient showing by the owner that: 
(1)	There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property in question; 
(2)	Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will deprive the applicant of a substantial property right; and 
(3)	If a variance is granted it will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or property rights in the vicinity. 
Each and every application for a variance shall be decided solely and entirely on its own merits, and the disposition of any prior or pending application for a variance shall not be allowed to enter into or affect any decision on the application in question. Pecuniary interests shall not be considered as a basis for the granting of a variance. No application for a variance will be considered unless submitted, in writing, no later than the date application for final plat approval is submitted. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 1.05.03, 10-17-84; Ord. No. 84-227, § 1, 12-5-84) 
Sec. 66-9. - Repair, maintenance, installation or provision of streets or utility services. 
    The city shall not repair, maintain, install or provide any streets or public utility services within a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved or filed of record, nor in which the standards contained in this chapter or referred to in this chapter have been complied with in full. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 1.05.04, 10-17-84; Ord. No. 84-227, § 1, 12-5-84) 
Sec. 66-10. - Exceptions to chapter provisions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the issuance of permits for construction on any lot which was in existence prior to December 7, 1979, nor to prohibit the repair, maintenance or installation of any street or public utility services for, to or abutting any lot, the last recorded conveyance of which prior to February 21, 1979, was by metes and bounds, and/or any subdivision, or lot therein, recorded or unrecorded, which subdivision was in existence prior to December 7, 1979. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 1.05.05, 10-17-84; Ord. No. 84-227, § 1, 12-5-84) 
Secs. 66-11-66-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATTING PROCEDURES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 66-36. - Preliminary conference. 
    Prior to the official filing of a preliminary plat, the subdivider, his planner or other appropriate representative should consult with city staff for comments and advice on the procedures, specifications, and standards required by the city as conditions for subdivision plat approval. If requested in writing, the commission will place, for discussion purposes only, an item on its agenda regarding the proposed subdivision in order to assist a subdivider on matters affecting such proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 2.01, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-37. - Plat drawing, reproductions and filing. 
    The original plat drawing for an approved final plat must be submitted to the commission on a suitable permanent translucent material that the commission shall, by written rule, from time to time, designate including, but not limited to, tracing linen, plastic film or positive photographic film with lines, lettering and signatures in black ink or image. The names of all persons signing any such plat must also be lettered under the signature. Two paper prints from the original plat drawing (white paper with blue or black lines) and one sepia transparency must also be provided. Filing of such final plats shall be made by the city and will be filed upon the posting of a performance bond guaranteeing completion of the improvements required as a condition of plat approval or acceptance of such improvements by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 2.06, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-38. - Title report. 
    A current title report, statement or opinion, title policy or certificate, or letter from a title company authorized to do business in the state, or an attorney licensed as such in the state, must be provided, certifying that within 30 days prior to the time the final plat is furnished to the commission a search of the appropriate records was performed covering the land proposed to be platted, and providing the following information concerning the title to such land: 
(1)	Date of records exam. The date of the examination of the records. 
(2)	Legal description. A legal description of the property lying within the proposed subdivision, including a metes and bounds description of the boundaries of the land. 
(3)	Name of record owner of fee simple title. The name of the record owner of fee simple title as of the date of the examination of the records, together with the recording information of the instruments whereby such owner acquired fee simple title. 
(4)	Names of lienholders. The names of all lienholders together with the recording information and date of the instruments by which such lienholders acquired their interests. 
(5)	Description of type, boundaries of easements and fee strips. A description of the type and boundaries of all easements and fee strips not owned by the subdivider of the property in question, together with the recording information and date of the instruments whereby the owner of such easements or fee strips acquired their title. 
(6)	Certification of tax payment. An original tax certificate from each of the city, county, school, utility or other governmental entities in which the land being platted is located showing no delinquent city, county or school taxes are due on the property being platted. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 2.07, 10-17-84; Ord. No. 10-601, § 1, 8-4-2010) 
Sec. 66-39. - Commission action. 
    The commission shall review each plat submitted to it on a preliminary basis and upon a final basis. The commission shall approve any plat if it is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other rules and regulations as may have been or may be adopted by the city council governing plats and/or the subdivision of land. Upon the receipt of a plat, the commission's authorized actions are as follows: 
(1)	Grant preliminary approval or preliminary approval with conditions. 
(2)	Defer preliminary action until the next regular meeting. 
(3)	Grant final approval, if in conformance and with the conditions of preliminary approval or final approval subject to additional conditions. 
(4)	Disapprove any plat, either preliminary or final, if the commission determines that it fails to comply with the policies, standards or requirements contained in this chapter, or other rules or regulations as may have been adopted by the city council governing plats and/or the subdivision of land. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 2.08, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-40. - Expiration of plat approval. 
    All plat approvals granted by the commission and the conditions therein, if any, are valid for a period of 12 months from the date on which the final approval was granted. The commission may, upon receipt of a written request from the subdivider or his authorized agent prior to the expiration date of the plat approval, extend this term of approval for any time period not to exceed an additional 12 months. The maximum term for approval of any plat granted by the commission, which has not been duly recorded, must not exceed a total of 24 months from the date on which approval was granted by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 2.09, 10-17-84) 
Secs. 66-41-66-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 

Sec. 66-56. - Application for approval. 
    Any person desiring approval of a preliminary plat shall first file, in triplicate, an application for preliminary plat approval. Forms for such applications shall be kept on file with the city secretary and shall be in a form approved by the city council. Consideration of a preliminary plat by the commission will not occur unless a fully completed and executed application has been filed in accordance with this chapter. 
(1)	Submittal date and time. All plats, maps, reproductions, fees, applications and related materials must be submitted to the city secretary not later than 1:00 p.m. 15 days prior to the next regular commission meeting. Materials received after 1:00 p.m. on the date specified in this section shall automatically be placed on the agenda of the second regular meeting of the commission following submittal. 
(2)	Copies required. The applicant must provide ten 24-inch by 36-inch paper prints from the original drawing of the plat reproduced on white paper with blue or black lines, each of which shall be folded to 81/2 inches by 14 inches. 
(3)	Filing fees. An application for preliminary plat approval must be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee tendered in the form of a cashier's check, made payable to the "City of Taylor Lake Village, Texas," in the amounts as shall be specified by the schedule of fees and charges of the city, as adopted, and from time to time amended by the city council, and on file with the city secretary. 
(4)	Encumbrances information. Initial plat submittals must be accompanied with a title opinion or a statement or certificate, either in separate writing or on the face of the plat, executed by the applicant or the person who prepared the plat, which certifies that all existing encumbrances, such as various types of easements, fee strips or significant topographical features, on the land being platted are fully shown and accurately identified on the face of the plat and further stating whether the plat being submitted includes all of the contiguous land which the subdivider owns directly or indirectly, or has a legal or beneficial interest in or whether the subdivider owns or has a legal interest in any adjacent property. If the subdivider owns or has a legal interest in any adjacent property, the extent of such ownership and a boundary description of the land involved must also be provided. 
(5)	Notice to utilities. Evidence of notice to all utility companies, which provide service to the area encompassed by the proposed subdivision, whether public or private, shall accompany each application for preliminary plat approval. Such notice shall contain a statement of the intent to subdivide, the intended use of the property within the subdivision, and shall have attached to such notice a copy of the preliminary plat which is filed with the city. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 2.02, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-57. - Form and content. 
    All preliminary plats submitted to the commission must be in the form and contain the information and/or language required in this section: 
(1)	Name. The proposed name of the subdivision or development, which must not be a duplicate of any subdivision or development of record within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(2)	Legal description. The legal description of the property proposed to be subdivided including the name of the county, survey and abstract number, together with reference to the nearest corner or street right-of-way intersection in the same general area. 
(3)	Acreage; lots, blocks and reserves. The total acreage and total number of lots, blocks and reserves. 
(4)	Name of owner. The name of the owner of the property or subdivider. If the subdivider is other than a natural person, the name of the principal officer or owner of the entity responsible for the subdivision must be provided. 
(5)	Preparer name. The name of the person who prepared the plat. 
(6)	Date of drawing. The date on which the plat was drawn. 
(7)	North point. The drawing of the subdivision must be oriented with north to the top of the drawing. 
(8)	Scale. The scale must be drawn numerically and a graphic scale must be provided. The scales acceptable for a preliminary plat shall be either one inch equals 100, 200, 300 or 400 feet, or for small projects (less than ten acres) one inch equals 20, 30, 40, 50 or 60 feet. 
(9)	Vicinity map. A scale vicinity map must be provided and made a part of the plat indicating the general location of the subdivision and its relationship with well known streets, railroads, watercourses and similar features in all directions from the subdivision to a distance not less than one mile. The scale of the vicinity may be one inch equals one mile and should be oriented with north to the top of the drawing and in the same direction as the detailed subdivision drawing. 
(10)	Boundaries. The plat boundaries must be drawn with heavy lines to indicate the subdivided area with overall survey dimensions and bearings. Lines outside the plat boundary should be drawn as dashed lines. 
(11)	Adjacent areas. The adjacent areas outside the plat boundaries must be identified indicating the name of adjacent subdivisions, churches, schools, parks, bayous and drainageways, acreage and all existing streets, easements, pipelines and other restricted uses. 
(12)	Topographical information. The location and approximate width of existing and proposed watercourses, ravines and drainage easements, topographical elevations and the boundaries of designated flood zones as provided in the then latest edition of the federal insurance rate map. All such information required herein shall be certified by a registered public surveyor or registered professional civil engineer. 
(13)	Tracts not designated as lots. The location and identification of all tracts not designated as lots within the boundaries of the plat. Such tracts, if not restricted for specific uses, shall be identified as unrestricted reserve. Restricted reserves shall be indicated on the plat and shall be designated as single-family, multifamily, commercial or residential. 
(14)	Location of streets, alleys and easements. The location of all streets, roads, alleys, and easements, either existing or proposed, within the plat boundaries or immediately adjacent thereto. 
(15)	Names of streets. The names of all existing and proposed streets located within the plat boundaries or immediately adjacent thereto. 
(16)	Location of lots, blocks and other features. The location of all lots, blocks, building setback lines and other features within the plat boundaries with approximate dimensions. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 2.03, 10-17-84) 
Secs. 66-58-66-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FINAL PLAT 

Sec. 66-76. - Application for approval. 
    Any person desiring approval of a final plat shall first file an application for final plat approval. Forms for such applications shall be kept on file with the city secretary and shall be in a form approved by the city council. Consideration of a final plat by the commission or city council will not occur unless a fully completed and executed application has been filed in accordance with this chapter. 
(1)	Time for filing. All plats, maps, reproductions, fees, applications and related materials must be submitted to the city secretary not later than 1:00 p.m. 15 days prior to the next regular commission meeting. Materials received after 1:00 p.m. on the date specified in this section shall automatically be placed on the agenda of the second regular meeting of the commission following submittal. 
(2)	Copies required. The applicant must provide ten 24-inch by 36-inch paper prints from the original drawing of the plat reproduced on white paper with blue or black lines, each of which shall be folded to 81/2 inches by 14 inches. 
(3)	Filing fees. An application for final plat approval must be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee tendered in the form of a cashier's check, made payable to the "City of Taylor Lake Village, Texas," in the amounts as shall be specified by the schedule of fees and charges of the city, as adopted, and from time to time amended by the city council, and on file with the city secretary. 
(4)	Certificates of availability of utilities. Each final plat shall be accompanied by a written certification from each entity, whether public or private, from which utility services are to be received, certifying the availability of the same, and that such entity agrees to provide its respective utility service to the subdivision. In addition, where applicable, each such entity providing utility services shall indicate approval or conformance of the construction plans to ensure compliance with such utility entity's construction standards. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 2.04, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-77. - Form and content. 
    All final plats shall incorporate all of the provisions relating to preliminary plats in section 66-57 and, where appropriate, reflect any conditions and requirements of final approval previously imposed by the commission, together with the following additional requirements: 
(1)	Drawing. The final plat must be drawn on linen tracing cloth or stable plastic film or positive photographic film with black lines and image and shall be suitable for the reproduction of direct positive prints and reproductions. 
(2)	Scale. Scale for a final plat drawing may be any of the following: one inch equals 100, 60, 50, 40, 30 or 20 feet. 
(3)	Engineering and survey data. All engineering and surveying data must be shown on the final plat sufficient to locate all of the features of the plat on the ground. This data must include, but not be limited to, full dimensions along all boundaries of the plat, street and alley rights-of-way, easements and drainageways, gullies, creeks and bayous, together with the location of the high bank of such drainageways and watercourses, lots, blocks, reserves, out tracts or any other tracts designated separately within the plat boundaries, fee strips, pipelines or any other physical or topographical features necessary to be accurately located by surveying methods. Such information must include line dimensions, bearings of deflecting angles, radii, central angles and degree of curvature, length of curves and tangent distances, all of which are to be shown in feet and decimal fractions thereof. 
(4)	Identification of intended uses. The intended use of all lots within the subdivision shall be identified on the plat. All tracts not designated as lots within the boundaries of the plat shall be identified as provided in section 66-57(13). 
(5)	Dedication statements and certificates. All dedication statements and certificates must be made a part of the final plat drawing and must conform in form and content to the form of statements and certificates set forth in Appendix A to the ordinance from which this chapter was derived, which is incorporated in this section by reference and made a part of this article for all purposes. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 2.05, 10-17-84) 
Secs. 66-78-66-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 66-96. - Compliance with article provisions required. 
    No preliminary or final plat shall be approved by the commission or city council, and no permit shall be issued for the construction of any improvement intended for public use, or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting or adjacent to such improvement, and no improvement intended for public use shall be accepted by the city, unless any such improvements shall comply with the following standards and specifications. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 3.01, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-97. - Comprehensive plan. 
    All improvements required by this chapter shall conform with the city's comprehensive plan, this chapter, or any other ordinance or regulation of the city applicable thereto. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 3.02, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-98. - Public streets; general arrangement and layout. 
    The public street system pattern proposed within any subdivision must comply with design standards of this article and shall provide: 
(1)	Provide for adequate vehicular access to all properties within the subdivision plat boundaries. 
(2)	Provide adequate street connections to adjacent properties to ensure adequate traffic circulation within the general area. 
(3)	Provide a local street system serving properties to be developed for residential purposes which discourages through traffic while maintaining sufficient access and traffic movement for convenient circulation within the subdivision and access by firefighters, police and other emergency services. 
(4)	Provide a sufficient number of continuous streets and major thoroughfares, particularly in those areas designated for the development of high density land uses, to accommodate the increased traffic demands generated by these land uses. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 3.03, 10-17-84) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 
Sec. 66-99. - Major thoroughfares. 
(a)	Location and alignment. The location and alignment of a designated major thoroughfare must be in conformance with the latest edition of the master thoroughfare plan of the city. Proposals which constitute a change in the location or alignment of any designated major thoroughfare or freeway illustrated on the plat must be approved by the city council after the holding of a public hearing thereon. 
(b)	Right-of-way; widening; transitions. The minimum width of the right-of-way to be dedicated for any designated major thoroughfare shall not be less than 100 feet. In those instances where the proposed subdivision is located adjacent to an existing major thoroughfare having a right-of-way less than 100 feet, sufficient additional right-of-way must be dedicated to accommodate the development of the major thoroughfare in question on the basis of a total right-of-way width of 100 feet. Where the construction of concrete pavement with curbs, gutters and storm sewers is not feasible and open ditch drainage is planned, the minimum right-of-way width required for the development of a designated major thoroughfare must be more than 100 feet and of sufficient width to accommodate the approved roadway pavement and attendant drainage facilities. 
(c)	Curves and intersections. Curves proposed for the right-of-way of designated major thoroughfares must have a centerline radius of 2,000 feet or more. Reverse curves should be separated by a tangent distance of not less than 100 feet. Intersections with other public and/or private streets should be at right angles but may vary not more than five degrees. Where acute angle intersections are approved, a radius of at least 25 feet in the right-of-way line at the acute corner must be provided. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 3.04, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-100. - Collector streets. 
(a)	Location and alignment. The location and alignment of collector streets must be in conformance with the master thoroughfare plan. Proposals which constitute a change in the location or alignment of any designated collector street illustrated on the plat must be approved by the city council after the holding of a public hearing thereon. 
(b)	Right-of-way width; widening. The width of the right-of-way to be dedicated for any collector street must be at least 80 feet. In those instances where a subdivision plat is located adjacent to an existing collector street, with a right-of-way width less than 80 feet, sufficient additional right-of-way must be dedicated within the subdivision plat boundary to accommodate the development of the street to a total right-of-way width of not less than 80 feet. Where the construction of concrete pavement with curbs, gutters and storm sewers is not feasible and open ditch drainage is planned, the minimum right-of-way width required for the development of a designated collector street must be more than 80 feet and of sufficient width to accommodate the approved roadway pavement and attendant drainage facilities. 
(c)	Curves and intersections. Curves proposed for the right-of-way of designated collector streets must have a centerline radius of 1,000 feet or more. Reverse curves should be separated by a tangent distance of not less than 75 feet. Intersections with other public and/or private streets should be at right angles but may vary not more than five degrees. Where acute angle intersections are approved, a radius of at least 25 feet in the right-of-way line at the acute corner must be provided. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 3.05, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-101. - Minor streets. 
(a)	Location and alignment. The location and alignment of minor public streets proposed to be dedicated and established within a subdivision or development plat shall be designed in conformance with the standards listed in section 66-98. 
(b)	Right-of-way width; widening. The width of the right-of-way to be dedicated for any minor street must be at least 60 feet. In those instances where a subdivision plat is located adjacent to an existing minor public street, with a right-of-way width less than 60 feet, sufficient additional right-of-way must be dedicated within the subdivision plat boundary to accommodate the development of the minor street to a total right-of-way width of not less than 60 feet. 
(c)	Requirements where storm sewers not installed and storm drainage within street right-of-way. A minimum right-of-way width of 80 feet will be required when storm sewers are not planned to be installed and storm drainage is proposed to be accommodated within the street right-of-way, where the street is designed to be extended into properties outside the plat boundaries, and where the adjacent properties are not proposed to be divided into lots designed and restricted for residential purposes. 
(d)	Curves and intersections. Curves along minor streets may have any centerline radius, except that the centerline radius on a reverse curve may not be less than 300 feet. Reverse curves should be separated by a tangent distance of not less than 50 feet. Intersections with designated major thoroughfares should be as per section 66-99. The angle of local street intersections may not vary more than ten degrees from perpendicular. Where acute angle intersections are approved, a radius of at least 25 feet in the right-of-way line at the acute corner must be provided. 
(e)	Cul-de-sac right-of-way radii. The radii of the right-of-way at the end of local streets terminated with a circular cul-de-sac turnaround must be 50 feet except in those instances where storm sewers are not planned to be installed and storm drainage is proposed to be accommodated within the street right-of-way. A right-of-way radius of 60 feet must then be provided. 
(f)	Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets will not be approved except in those instances where the street is terminated by a circular cul-de-sac turnaround or where the street is designated to be extended into adjacent property. Such streets will be signed "dead-end street" at the entrance to such street. 
(g)	Public street paving. All public streets as provided in this section shall be constructed in accordance with "City of Taylor Lake Village Minimum Construction Standards for Community Improvements." 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 3.07, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-102. - Street names. 
(a)	Public streets. All public streets contained in any subdivision plat must be named in conformance with the following considerations: 
(1)	New street names, other than extensions of existing names, must not be duplicates of any existing street name located within the city or its exclusive extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(2)	Existing street names must be used in those instances where a new street is a direct extension of an existing street or a logical extension (when the streets in question are not and cannot be physically continuous) thereof except in those instances where the existing street name is a duplicate street name. 
(3)	Street name suffixes such as court, circle and loop should be designated on streets which are cul-de-sacs or in a configuration of a loop street. Suffixes such as boulevard, parkway and drive should be confined to designated major thoroughfares or local streets designed to handle traffic volumes in excess of normal neighborhood traffic generation. Suffixes such as highway or freeway must be used only to designate highways or freeways falling under the jurisdiction of the state department of highways and public transportation. 
(4)	Street name prefixes such as north, south, east and west may be used to clarify the general location of the street; however, such prefixes must be consistent with the existing and established street naming and address numbering system of the general area in which the street is located. 
(5)	Alphabetical and numerical street names must not be designated on any subdivision plat or development plan except in those instances where such street is a direct extension of an existing street with such a name and is not a duplicate street name. 
(b)	Street name change. No street name once designated may be changed except by city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 3.08, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-103. - Block lengths. 
(a)	Measurement criteria. Block lengths are to be determined by the measurement along the face of a block (being the adjacent street right-of-way line) from one street intersection to another street intersection where such streets provide cross-traffic circulation (not cul-de-sac streets). In those instances where a loop street configuration is involved, the interior block formed by the loop streets is measured through the center of such block and between adjacent street right-of-way lines. Variations in the block lengths specified in this section may be considered by the city upon receipt of a request from the subdivider for a variance, in those situations where a block may be adjacent to a major topographical feature, such as a river, canal, bayou, gully or ravine; a major drainage ditch or lake; a major right-of-way or easement for high-voltage electrical transmission lines or underground pipelines; a public park or other public-owned and operated facilities such as dams, reservoirs, schools or golf courses; and privately owned golf courses and lakes when such golf courses and lakes are an integral part of the layout and subdivision design of the overall tract being developed. In no instance, however, will the commission grant a variance indicating that a block adjacent to the conditions and features mentioned above is to be more than 2,640 feet (one-half mile) in length, measured along the block face. 
(b)	Major thoroughfares. The maximum length for blocks adjacent to designated major thoroughfares must not be more than 1,800 feet. 
(c)	Collector streets. The maximum length for blocks adjacent to designated collector streets shall not be more than 1,600 feet. 
(d)	Minor streets. The maximum length for blocks adjacent to local streets must not be more than 1,400 feet, except under the following circumstances: 
(1)	Loop streets may have an internal block length of not more than 1,000 feet. 
(2)	Culs-de-sac may have a block length of not more than 800 feet, measured from the intersection with the right-of-way of a cross street along the centerline of the cul-de-sac street to the center of the circular turnaround at the end of the cul-de-sac. 
(3)	Stub streets or dead-ends may have a block length of not more than 800 feet unless terminated with a circular turnaround suitably modified to accommodate future extension of the street into adjacent property. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 3.09, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-104. - One-foot wide reserves to form buffer strips. 
    In those instances where any public street is established in a plat submitted to the city and where such public street forms a stub street into adjacent acreage, or where such public street lies along and parallel with the plat boundary and adjacent to acreage, a one-foot wide reserve must be established within the street right-of-way to form a buffer strip, dedicated to the public, between the public street right-of-way and the adjacent unsubdivided acreage to prevent access to this public street from the adjacent unsubdivided acreage unless and until the city has had an opportunity to review the development proposals for such adjacent acreage, and a plat of the adjacent property is duly recorded. The conditions associated with the establishment of a one-foot reserve on a plat are contained in the following notation which must be placed upon the face of any plat where a one-foot reserve is to be established: One-foot reserve dedicated to the public in fee as a buffer separation between the side or end of streets where such streets abut adjacent acreage tracts, the condition of such dedication being that when the adjacent property is subdivided in a recorded plat, the one-foot reserve shall thereupon become vested in the public for street right-of-way purposes, and the fee title thereto shall revert to and revest in the dedicator, his heirs, assigns or successors. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 3.10, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-105. - Partial or half streets. 
    Partial or half streets may be dedicated in those instances where the city concurs that it is necessary for the proper development of the land and in the public interest to locate a public street right-of-way centered on a property line. The city will not approve a partial or half street dedication within a subdivision dedicating less than a 50-foot right-of-way width on a designated major thoroughfare or less than a 30-foot right-of-way width on any other type public street. Appropriate notations and one-foot reserve must be placed upon the plat restricting access from any partial or half streets so dedicated to adjacent acreage tracts until the adjacent property is subdivided in a recorded plat, and the additional adjacent right-of-way is acquired providing the full right-of-way as specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 3.11, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-106. - Easements. 
(a)	Public utility easements. Public utility easements are those easements established within a plat which are designed to accommodate public owned or controlled utility facilities necessary to provide various types of utility services to the individual properties within the plat boundaries. Public utility easements may be used for, but not limited to, facilities necessary to provide water, electrical power, natural gas, telephone, telegraph and sanitary sewer services. Storm sewers or open drainageways must not be constructed within public utility easements unless specifically approved by the city engineer and where additional easement width is provided for conforming to the standards established in this section for drainage easements. 
(1)	Location. Public utility easements must be provided along the rear of all lots designed for the development of a structure containing residential dwelling units and in such other locations as determined to be necessary by the city engineer and the individual private utility companies involved. Public utility easements located along the outer boundaries of a plat must contain the full width required for such easement except in those instances where the adjacent property is within a portion of a previously approved plan and under the same ownership as the property being platted or where additional easement width is dedicated by separate instrument by the owner of such adjacent tract. In such cases one-half of the required easement width may be dedicated within the plat boundary, with the other half provided outside the plat boundary by separate instrument, or through notation on the plat certifying the ownership and dedication of the easement. 
(2)	Public utility easement widths; deadends. All public utility easements established within any subdivision plat must not be less than ten feet in width. In those instances where underground electrical facilities are to be installed within the public utility easement, such easement width must not be less than 16 feet in width. No dead-end public utility easements will be permitted by the city. 
(b)	Drainage easements. All drainage easements must be located and dedicated to accommodate the drainage requirements required for the proper development of the property within the subdivision boundaries and within its natural watershed and in conformance with the city's comprehensive plan and the requirements of the city engineer or other governmental agencies charged with the responsibility of storm drainage or flood control within the area in which the subdivision is located. A suitable note on the plat must restrict all properties within the subdivision ensuring that drainage easements within the plat boundaries shall be kept clear of fences, buildings, planting and other obstructions to the operations and maintenance of the drainage facility, and abutting property shall not be permitted to drain directly into this easement except by means of a drainage structure approved by the city engineer or other authorized public drainage or flood control official. 
(c)	Private easements; fee strips. 
(1)	Existing easements; fee strips. All easements or fee strips created prior to the subdivision of any tract of land must be shown on the subdivision plat of such land, with appropriate notations indicating the name of the holder of such easement or fee strip; the purpose of the easement and generally the facilities contained therein; the dimensions of the easement or fee strip tied to all adjacent lot lines, street rights-of-way and plat boundary lines; and the recording reference of the instruments creating and establishing the easement or fee strip. In those instances where easements have not been defined by accurate survey dimensions such as over and across type easements, the subdivider should request the holder of such easement to accurately define the limits and location of his easement through the property within the plat boundaries. If the holder of such undefined easement does not define the easement involved and certifies his refusal to define such easement to the city engineer, the subdivision plat must provide accurate information as to the centerline location of all existing pipelines or other utility facilities placed in conformance with the easement holder's rights, and building setback lines must be established 15 feet from and parallel with both sides of the centerline of all underground pipelines or pole lines involved. 
(2)	Establishment of special use easements. The establishment of special use utility easements may be provided on a subdivision plat when such easement is for the purpose of accommodating a utility facility owned, operated and maintained by a unit of government and is restricted to either water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers or drainage purposes and where it has been determined by the city engineer that these facilities cannot or should not be accommodated within a general purpose public utility easement or public street right-of-way. Easements proposed to be established for any private utility company or private organization providing utility services and restricted for their exclusive use cannot be shown on or established by a subdivision plat; however, such private utility facilities can be accommodated and placed within the general purpose public utility easements, public street and alleys established within the plat boundary. Nothing in this section, however, may prevent such private companies or the subdivider from granting and establishing special or exclusive use easements by separate instrument if such arrangements are deemed necessary to properly serve the properties within the plat boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 3.12, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-107. - Federal flood insurance program. 
    No subdivision of land shall be approved unless such subdivision complies in all respects with the city's flood damage prevention regulations in chapter 34. Each final plat shall have depicted thereon applicable boundaries of all flood zones as provided in the latest edition of the federal insurance rate maps. The following statement shall be placed upon the face of each final plat: "Based upon flooding experience within the city, the City of Taylor Lake Village prohibits the floor of any habitable area of a structure to be constructed at less than 14 feet above mean sea level. In addition, the City of Taylor Lake Village prohibits the use of any construction material other than masonry material (i.e., brick, cement, cement block) for any portion of a structure located below 14 feet above mean sea level. This prohibition extends to and includes veneer and other decorative portions of structures and is specifically not limited solely to supporting materials." 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 3.13, 10-17-84; Ord. No. 89-294, § 1, 8-16-89) 
Cross reference- Floods, ch. 34. 
Sec. 66-108. - Building setback requirements. 
    No plat of any subdivision shall be approved unless building setback lines are established therein in accordance with the city's comprehensive zoning ordinance in appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 3.14, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-109. - Reserve tracts. 
    Reserve tracts are those individual parcels of land created within a subdivision plat which are not divided into lots, but are established to accommodate some specific purpose such as a commercial center, a private recreational facility, school or church sites, or sites for utility facilities such as water wells and other activities and land uses for which division into lots is not suitable or appropriate. Since the use of reserve tracts may not be completely determined by the subdivider or developer at the time plats are prepared and submitted to the city, these reserve tracts are often established as unrestricted reserves which allows maximum flexibility in the determination of the ultimate use planned for such properties. 
(1)	Public street access. Reserves established on any subdivision plat must have frontage on and be immediately adjacent to at least one public street, with such frontage being not less than 60 feet in width. In those instances outside the city limits where the average depth of an unrestricted reserve is more than 300 feet, such reserve access to all adjacent public streets must be separated by a one-foot reserve placed within the adjacent street right-of-way which will become automatically removed upon the approval and recording of a suitable development plat of the property within such reserve. 
(2)	Identification and designation. All reserves must be labeled and identified on the plat, and a description of the use intended for such reserve must be noted. If the use of the reserve is not restricted for any specific use, the reserve must then be identified and noted as being unrestricted. All reserves are to be identified and designated by alphabetical letters, not numbers, along with an indication as to the total acreage of such reserves which must be shown within each reserve boundary. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 3.15, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-110. - Lots; general provisions. 
    The purpose of this section is to provide general overall guidelines for the establishment of individual lots within a subdivision. 
(1)	General lot design, arrangement and layout. The general lot design within any subdivision should be based upon the concept that such lots are created and established as undivided tracts of land and that purchasers of such lots can be assured that these tracts of land meet the following basic criteria: 
a.	The lot is of sufficient size and shape to accommodate easements for all public and private utility services and facilities to adequately serve any residential dwelling unit constructed thereon. 
b.	The lot is of sufficient size and shape and is so located that direct vehicular access is provided from a public street or through an approved permanent access easement and that the required number of vehicles can be parked on the lot without encroachment within any adjacent public street or alley rights-of-way. 
(2)	Lot shapes. Lots should be designed, so far as possible, with side lot lines being at right angles or radial to any adjacent street right-of-way line. Where all lots are either perpendicular and at right angles or radial to adjacent street rights-of-way, a suitable notation may be placed upon the plat in lieu of lot line bearings. 
(3)	Key or flag lots. Key or flag lots shall not be permitted. 
(4)	Double-front lots. Double-front lots will not be approved except in those instances where lots are restricted for residential use and back upon an adjacent designated major thoroughfare or where special circumstances would warrant a variance to this subsection. 
(5)	Street access limitations. Rear and side vehicular driveway access from lots, restricted to the construction of residential dwelling units, to adjacent streets designated as major thoroughfares, freeways, highways or any other public street which carries a traffic volume where additional vehicular driveways would create a traffic hazard or impede the flow of traffic, will not be approved and such access restriction must be noted directly upon the plat and adjacent to the lots in question. 
(6)	Unsewered lots. Each lot created within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall have available thereto a sanitary sewer system operated by a governmental entity or an approved private utility company. Septic tanks shall not be permitted. 
(7)	Lot and block identification. All blocks established in any subdivision shall be designated by number with such numbers being consecutive within the whole subdivision plat. Lots established within such blocks shall also be numbered, with such numbers being consecutive within the block. Lot numbering may be cumulative throughout the subdivision if the numbering system continues from block to block in a uniform manner. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 3.16, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-111. - Minimum lot sizes; general provisions. 
    Lot sizes shall comply with minimum requirements set forth in the city's comprehensive zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 3.17, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-112. - Utilities. 
    Adequate provision for all utilities shall be provided to the entire subdivision. All distribution and service lines of electrical, telephone, television, and other wire-carrier type utilities shall be underground. Transformers, amplifiers or similar devices associated with the underground lines shall be located upon the ground or below ground level. Where the underground of such facilities is not a standard practice of the utility involved, the subdivider or developer shall make all arrangements for payments associated with the nonstandard installation. All utility installations shall comply with "City of Taylor Lake Village Minimum Construction Standards for Community Improvements." 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 3.18, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-113. - Sidewalks. 
    Paved sidewalks shall be provided along and adjacent to both sides of all streets. Such sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with "City of Taylor Lake Village Minimum Construction Standards for Community Improvements." 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 3.19, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-114. - Street lighting. 
    Street lighting shall be provided along all streets in accordance with "City of Taylor Lake Village Minimum Construction Standards for Community Improvements." Electrical distribution and service wires shall be constructed underground, and street lighting wires shall also be underground. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 3.20, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-115. - Drainage. 
    Drainage facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with "City of Taylor Lake Village Minimum Construction Standards for Community Improvements." 
(1)	Storm sewer. An enclosed underground storm sewer shall be provided in all areas where the quantity of the accumulated storm runoff does not exceed 200 c.f.s. 
(2)	Storm sewer or channel. In drainage courses where the accumulated storm runoff is more than 200 c.f.s. and less than 500 c.f.s., either an enclosed storm sewer or a concrete lined channel shall be constructed. 
(3)	Channel. In drainage courses where the accumulated storm runoff is more than 500 c.f.s., the drainage improvements shall be either an enclosed storm sewer, a concrete lined channel or an earthen channel. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 3.21, 10-17-84) 
Cross reference- Floods, ch. 34. 
Sec. 66-116. - Sanitary sewer. 
    Sanitary sewer facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with "City of Taylor Lake Village Minimum Construction Standards for Community Improvements." In no event shall septic tanks be permitted for any proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 3.22, 10-17-84) 
Cross reference- Sewage disposal generally, § 10-101 et seq. 
Sec. 66-117. - Water. 
    Facilities for the provision of potable water to all areas of the proposed subdivision shall be designed and constructed in accordance with "City of Taylor Lake Village Minimum Construction Standards for Community Improvements." 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 3.23, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-118. - Monuments and markers. 
(a)	Concrete monuments, six inches in diameter and 24 inches long, shall be placed on all boundary corners, block corners, curve points and angle points. A copper pin one-quarter of an inch in diameter, embedded three inches in the monument, shall be placed at the exact intersection point on the monument. The monuments shall be set at such an elevation that they will not be disturbed during construction, and the top of the monument shall not be less than 12 inches below the finish ground level. 
(b)	Lot markers shall be a five-eighths of an inch reinforcing bar, 18 inches long, or approved equal, and shall be placed at all lot corners flush with the ground, or below ground if necessary in order to avoid being disturbed. 
(c)	Where no benchmark is established or can be found within 300 feet of the boundary of the subdivision, such benchmark shall be established to sea level datum. The benchmark shall be established upon a permanent structure, or may be set as a monument, and shall be readily accessible and identifiable on the ground. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 3.24, 10-17-84) 
Secs. 66-120-66-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 66-147. - Construction plans. 
    Construction plans and profile sheets for all public improvements shall be submitted with the application for final plat approval. The approval of the final plat shall be contingent upon approval of construction plans by the city engineer and the commission. Construction plans and profile sheets shall be submitted in accordance with the provisions of the "City of Taylor Lake Village Minimum Construction Standards for Community Improvements." 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 4.02, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-148. - Inspection of construction. 
    The city engineer, or his duly authorized representatives, shall be required to fully inspect any and all phases of the construction of improvements for subdivisions. The subdivider, or his contractor, shall maintain daily contact with the city engineer, or his representative, during construction of improvements. No sanitary sewer, water or storm sewer pipe shall be covered without approval of the city engineer, or his representative. No flexible base material, subgrade material or stabilization shall be applied to the street subgrade without such approval. No concrete may be poured nor asphaltic surface applied to the base without such approval. The city engineer, or his representative, may at any time cause any construction, installation, maintenance or location of improvements to cease when, in his judgment, the requirements of this chapter or the standards and specifications as provided in this chapter have been violated, and may require such reconstruction or other work as may be necessary to correct any such violation. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 4.03, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-149. - Guarantee of performance. 
    No building permit, or any water, sewer, plumbing or electrical permit, shall be issued by the city to the owner or any other person with respect to any property in any subdivision until: 
(1)	Such time as the developer and/or owner of the property has complied with all provisions of this chapter and the final plat regarding installation of all required improvements; 
(2)	Until an escrow deposit sufficient to pay for the cost of such improvements, as determined by the city engineer, computed on a private commercial rate basis, has been made with the city secretary, accompanied by an agreement by the developer and/or owner authorizing the city to make such improvements at prevailing private commercial rates or have the improvements made by a private contractor and pay for the same out of the escrow deposit, should the developer and/or owner fail or refuse to install the required improvements within the time stated in such written agreement. In no case shall the city be obligated to make such improvements itself. Such deposit may be used by the owner and/or developer as progress payments as the work progresses in making certified requisitions to the city secretary supported by evidence of work done; or 
(3)	Until the developer and/or owner file a corporate surety bond with the city secretary in a sum equal to the cost of such improvements for the designated area guaranteeing the installation of such improvements within the time stated in the bond, which time shall be fixed by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 4.04, 10-17-84) 
Sec. 66-150. - Maintenance of dedicated improvements. 
    Disapproval of a plat shall be deemed a refusal to accept the offered dedications shown thereon. Approval of the plat shall not impose any duty upon the city concerning the maintenance of improvements of any dedicated rents indicated thereon until the city council, after inspection and recommendation by the city engineer, shall have accepted such improvements by resolution expressing such acceptance. The subdivider shall maintain all such improvements for a period of one year following the completion of the improvements. Such one year of required maintenance shall not begin until there is filed with the city a maintenance bond, executed by a surety company licensed to do business in the state and acceptable to the city council, in an amount equal to 100 percent of the cost of installation of such improvements, warranting that such improvements will render satisfactory operation for such one-year period. 
(Ord. No. 84-226, § 4.05, 10-17-84) 
Chapters 67-69 - RESERVED 
Chapter 70 - TAXATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Ordinances making the annual tax levy saved from repeal, § 1-10(10); administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 70-1. - Homestead exemption for elderly or disabled. 
(a)	Authority; amount. In accordance with V.T.C.A., Property Tax Code § 11.13, as amended, the city council does hereby exempt $10,000.00 of the assessed value of resident homestead within the city to adult individuals who are disabled or are 65 years of age or older from all ad valorem taxes hereafter valued by the city. 
(b)	Application. In order to have such exemption applied to a resident homestead, a taxpayer must timely file with the chief appraiser of the county appraisal district a proper application in accordance with V.T.C.A., Property Tax Code § 11.43. 
(Ord. No. 86-251, §§ 1, 2, 4-2-86; Ord. No. 03-477, §§ 1, 2, 5-21-03; Ord. No. 05-511, §§ 1, 2, 7-23-05) 
Chapter 71 - RESERVED 
Chapter 72 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- General provisions, ch. 1; administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; cable communications, ch. 14; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; planning and zoning, ch. 54; subdivisions, ch. 66. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 72-1-72-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 72-31. - Purpose. 
(a)	Protection of rights-of-way; neutrality. The purpose of this article is to establish a competitively neutral policy for the use, by telecommunications providers, of the city's public rights-of-way, and to enable the city to: 
(1)	Minimize congestion, inconvenience, visual impact, costs, and other adverse effects which would likely result from the unregulated placement of telecommunications facilities within public rights-of-way; 
(2)	Require, to the extent permitted by law, that telecommunications providers pay fair and reasonable compensation for the use of public rights-of-way, for private or commercial purposes; 
(3)	Promote competition among telecommunications providers and encourage the universal availability of telecommunications services to all residents and businesses of the city; 
(4)	Conserve the limited physical capacity of such public rights-of-way held in public trust by the city; 
(5)	Assure that telecommunications providers having facilities within the city comply with applicable ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city; and 
(6)	Assure that the city fairly and responsibly preserves and protects public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(b)	Services not regulated. It is not the policy or intention of this article to prohibit, regulate, license, or franchise the provision of any service within the city, and no provision of this article shall be so construed; any term or condition contained herein, or in any license ordinance adopted pursuant hereto, shall relate to the rights of a person to make use of the public rights-of-way, not in limitation of any right granted by the Texas Public Utility Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, or their successors. 
(c)	Existing franchise rights preserved. This article shall not apply to a telecommunications provider operating within the city on the effective date of the ordinance from which is article is derived pursuant to a valid existing franchise ordinance; provided, however, upon the termination of any such franchise the telecommunications provider to which it applies shall be subject to the provisions hereof in the same manner as any other telecommunications provider. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any telecommunications provider operating within the city on the effective date hereof pursuant to a valid franchise ordinance may, at such provider's option, apply for the issuance of a license hereunder and the early termination of such franchise. Such franchise shall be deemed terminated upon the effective date of such license. Nothing in this article shall be construed to diminish the right or ability of the city to require any other user of public rights-of-way to secure appropriate city authorization, including, without limitation, cable service providers. 
(Ord. No. 99-414, § 2, 5-19-99) 
Sec. 72-32. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article the following words, terms, and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed thereto, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Access line means a unit of measurement representing (1) each switched transmission path of the transmission media within the public right-of-way extended to the end-user customer's premises network interface within the city that allows delivery of services within the city; (2) each termination point or points of a non-switched telephone or other circuit consisting of transmission media connecting specific locations identified by, and provided to, the end-user for delivery of non-switched services within the city; or (3) each loop provided to any person as an unbundled network element, pursuant to an agreement under Section 252 of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, used for the provision of telecommunications services. Interoffice transport and other transmission media that do not terminate at an end-user customer's network interface device are not access lines that would be separately identified and counted for assessing monthly line fees. 
    Applicant means a person who files an application with the city, pursuant to section 72-34 hereof, to obtain a license to use or place network facilities within the city's public rights-of-way, whether by means of the person's own facilities or by purchase or lease of one or more network facilities from another provider of telecommunications services. 
    Cable Act means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. § 532, et seq., as amended. 
    Cable operator means a person providing or offering to provide "cable service" within the city as that term is defined in the Cable Act. 
    Cable service shall have the same meaning provided by the Cable Act. 
    City means the City of Taylor Lake Village, Texas, a general law municipal corporation. 
    City council means the governing body of the city. 
    City property means all real property owned by the city, other than public rights-of-way, as that term is defined herein, and all other properties held in a proprietary capacity by the city, which are not subject to right-of-way licensing as provided in this article. 
    Federal Communications Commission or FCC means the federal agency or its successor agency that is the regulatory authority over telecommunications providers. 
    licensee means a telecommunications provider that has been issued a license pursuant to a license ordinance. 
    License fee means the compensation payable to the city by a license for the use and occupancy of public rights-of-way. 
    License ordinance means an ordinance adopted pursuant to this article which grants to a telecommunications provider the authority and license to place, operate, and utilize its network facilities within the public rights-of-way of the city for the purpose of providing telecommunications services. 
    Network facilities means conduits, ducts, manholes, vaults, tanks, towers, wave guides, optic fiber, microwave dishes, transmitters, antennas and antenna structures, radio equipment, and any associated converters, electrical lines, communications lines, transmission lines, cables, wires, amplifiers, switches, utility equipment, or other such object, device, facility, or appurtenance, including attachments and encasements therefor, whether underground or overhead, which are designed, installed and constructed within the public rights-of-way for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying, switching, transmitting, or distributing communication signals, whether analog or digital, whether for voice, data, or other purposes, and whether by or through "wired" or "wireless" systems, to or from customers, subscribers or locations within the corporate limits of the city. Network facilities shall not include such facilities to the extent that they are solely used to provide cable services. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, association, partnership, joint venture, firm, limited liability partnership, joint venture, joint stock company or association, or other entity. 
    Public rights-of-way means the surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, easement, or similar property in which the city holds a property interest (fee title, easement or otherwise) or over which the city exercises any rights of management or control, and which, consistent with the purposes for which it was acquired or dedicated, may be used for the installation and maintenance of network facilities. 
    Private or commercial purpose means any purpose other than a public purpose. 
    Public Utility Commission of Texas or PUC means the Texas state agency having jurisdiction over telecommunications providers. 
    Telecommunications means the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the content of the information as sent and received. 
    Telecommunications provider or provider means mean a person who offers telecommunications services to customers through network facilities located in the public rights-of-way. 
    Telecommunications services means the provision of telecommunications provided through network facilities, excluding cable services, but which include, without limitation: 
(1)	Access lines provided to end users or to other telecommunications companies for the purpose of voice, data, or non-cable video transmission; 
(2)	Non-switched telephone circuits consisting of transmission media connecting specific locations identified by, and provided to, the end-user for delivery of non-switched services within the city; 
(3)	Switched access lines for the distribution of voice, data, and non-cable video transmission; and 
(4)	Any other telecommunication services authorized by state or federal law. 
    Wired telecommunications service means telecommunications services provided through network facilities which transmit and receive sounds, pictures, or signals of any kind by aid of wire, cable, or other like connection between the points of origin and reception of such transmission, and includes both one-way and two-way services. 
    Wireless telecommunications service means telecommunications services provided through network facilities which transmit and receive sounds, pictures, or signals of any kind by radio or microwave signals between the points of origin and reception of such transmission, and includes both one-way and two-way services. 
(Ord. No. 99-414, § 3, 5-19-99) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 72-34. - Public rights-of-way use license. 
(a)	Application required; contents. Any person proposing to place network facilities within public rights-of-way shall submit an application to the city. Applications may be filed in the office of the city secretary. An application shall describe in general terms all services the applicant will offer or provide, and shall outline the applicant's proposed network facilities, including a description of the physical characteristics of the network facilities proposed to be installed in the public rights-of-way. The city council may require the following information: 
(1)	The identity of the applicant and all affiliates of the applicant which may use in any manner the network facilities to provide telecommunications services within the city; 
(2)	A general description of the principal transmission medium that will be used by the applicant to offer or provide such telecommunications services; 
(3)	Preliminary engineering plans, specifications, and a network map of planned or projected new network facilities to be located within the city, all in sufficient detail to identify: 
a.	The location and route requested for the applicant's proposed network facilities; 
b.	The location of all known overhead and underground public utility, telecommunications, cable, water, sewer, drainage and other facilities in the public rights-of-way along the proposed route; and 
c.	The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities, or obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate; 
(4)	If the applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus space is available, and, if existing utility poles are to be utilized, evidence that their use is authorized; 
(5)	If the applicant is proposing to install underground network facilities, evidence of whether surplus duct or conduit space is available, and, if existing ducts or conduits are to be utilized, evidence that their use is authorized. 
(6)	A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates; 
(7)	A preliminary traffic control plan; 
(8)	Information to establish that the applicant will obtain all other governmental approvals and permits prior to construction and operation of the network facilities and prior to offering or providing the telecommunications services; 
(9)	Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service or other video programming service, such as an open video system, as defined in the Cable Act, together with sufficient information to determine whether such service is subject to cable franchising under the Cable Act; 
(10)	An accurate map showing the location of any existing network facilities in the city that the applicant intends to use or lease; 
(11)	The area or areas of the city the applicant desires to serve and a schedule for build-out to the entire city, if any; and 
(12)	Such other and further information relating to the use of the public rights-of-way that may be reasonably requested by the city council. 
(b)	Standards for approval. In making its determinations regarding adoption of license ordinances, the city council shall consider: 
(1)	The capacity of affected public rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant's proposed facilities; 
(2)	The capacity of affected public rights-of-way to accommodate other necessary public services, including potable water, sanitary sewer, drainage, natural gas, and electricity; 
(3)	The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel, or landscaping if the license ordinance is adopted; 
(4)	The effect, if any, on public health, safety, and welfare if the license ordinance is adopted; 
(5)	The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities; 
(6)	Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations, and policies; and 
(7)	The legal authority of an applicant. 
(c)	License ordinance. License ordinances adopted by city council shall be deemed to incorporate all provisions of this article. A license ordinance shall be deemed as authorization for the applicable licensee to use the public rights-of-way for the provision of telecommunications services. No network facility shall be located, or made use of, in any public right-of-way in a manner inconsistent with the provisions of this article and/or the license ordinance. No license ordinance shall be construed to grant access to "city property," as defined herein, unless specifically included therein. No licensee shall use a public right-of-way or allow any other person to use licensee's network facilities in a public right-of-way, except as provided in the applicable license ordinance. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a license ordinance shall not be required for a person engaging solely in the resale of a licensee's services or the provision of services by unbundled network elements obtained from a licensee, provided that the applicable license ordinance authorizes the network facilities involved and the person does not own or operate any network facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
(d)	Conditions of license. The issuance of any license pursuant to this section shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)	Interference with public use prohibited. All licensees shall lay, construct, erect, operate, lease, maintain, repair, and replace their network facilities in such a manner as to not unreasonably interfere with the use of public rights-of-way, public streets and sidewalks, or other public or private ways. 
(2)	Compliance with law. licensees are explicitly subject to the police powers of the city and the city's rights as a property owner under state and federal laws. All work done by licensees in connection with the construction, expansion, reconstruction, maintenance, or repair of its network facilities in public rights-of-way shall be subject to and governed by all applicable federal, state, and city rules, regulations, laws, and ordinances. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to all licensees and to any other person owning, operating, or in control of network facilities located within public rights-of-way. 
(3)	Construction regulations. 
a.	Excavations. All excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-say shall be performed in accordance with all applicable state, federal, and city regulations. 
b.	Interference with use of property. All construction within public rights-of-ways shall be undertaken so as to minimize interference with the use of public and private property and in accordance with any lawful direction given by the city under the police and regulatory powers of the city. 
c.	Construction permits. Before commencing any construction of network facilities within a public right-of-way, a licensee shall apply for and obtain a new construction permit. Provided, however, acquisition of construction permits shall not be required prior to construction necessitated by emergency conditions or for routine maintenance. The permit application shall include a written work description, including scale drawings with a plan and profile showing the network facilities' location (or proposed location), and the estimated depth of the network facilities (existing and proposed) in the immediate area of the proposed new construction. Such drawings and specifications shall be reviewed by the city engineer and, if disapproved, returned with comments setting forth the reasons for such disapproval. Approvals shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed. licensees shall not commence construction until the drawings and specifications have been approved. Upon completion of any such work, the licensee shall promptly restore the surface of the affected public right-of-way to a condition which equals or exceeds its condition prior to such construction. To such end, the licensee shall replace excavated areas with the same type of materials as those removed, unless alternate equivalent materials are approved by the city. Any excavated areas showing depressions within one year following such work shall be restored by the licensee. licensees may excavate public rights-of-way only for the purpose of, and to the extent reasonably required for, the construction, installation, expansion, repair, removal, or maintenance of its network facilities. Review and approval by the city of construction permits as provided herein shall not constitute any representation or warranty regarding the sufficiency of design or construction of the network facilities. 
d.	Emergency repairs. Notwithstanding the foregoing subsection c., during emergency situations where, in the good faith judgment of a licensee, failure to act immediately could jeopardize public health, safety, or general welfare, licensees may perform emergency repairs to facilities within public rights-of-way, including necessary excavation, without prior notification to the city. In such cases, the licensee shall notify the director of public works for the city before the close of business on the next business day following such emergency repairs, stating the nature of such repairs and the length of time estimated to complete same. The licensee shall apply for the required approvals as soon as reasonably practicable, and any work performed that is not consistent with then-applicable city standards shall be corrected upon notice thereof from the city. 
e.	Routine maintenance. Routing maintenance on network facilities located within public rights-of-way shall be conducted in a manner that is consistent with then-applicable city regulations governing such work, if any. 
f.	Obstructions of traffic. Any obstruction of vehicular or pedestrian traffic resulting from construction or repair activities of a licensee, other than for emergency repairs, shall require the prior approval of and a permit from the director of public works of the city. Any such work shall be performed in a manner calculated to cause the least inconvenience to the city and the public as is reasonably possible under the circumstances. When a licensee performs or causes to be performed any work over or across a public street or sidewalk, or so closely adjacent thereto as to create hazards for the public or itself, the licensee shall provide construction and maintenance signs and sufficient barricades and flag men at such sites as are reasonably necessary to protect the public and the licensee's equipment and workers. The application of such traffic control devices shall be consistent with the standards and provisions of the latest addition of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Appropriate warning lights shall be used at all construction and maintenance zones where one or more traffic lanes are being obstructed during nighttime conditions. 
g.	Closing of streets. If a licensee's work requires the obstruction of any street for a period longer than 30 minutes, the closure shall be performed in a manner approved by the director of public works. The licensee shall not wholly close any public street, but shall at all times maintain a route of travel along and within any roadway that is within a public right-of-way; provided that, in cases of an emergency, the director of public works may authorize the temporary closing of a public street or sidewalk to allow the licensee to complete such emergency repairs if, in the opinion of the director of public works, such closing is necessary to protect the safety of the general public. 
h.	As-built drawings. Within 120 days following completion of each segment of its network facilities, or within 120 days following any material alteration or modification thereto, each licensee shall supply the city with a complete set of "as-built" drawings for that segment, or for the material alteration or modification thereof, unless the licensee certifies to the city, in writing, that such construction was completed in accordance with the construction plans filed pursuant to subsection 72-34(d)(3), in which case such construction plans shall be marked accordingly by the city and filed as the "as-built" drawings. For the purposes hereof, a material alteration or modification of a network facility shall be deemed to have occurred if such alteration or modification would render the existing "as built" drawings inaccurate and/or misleading regarding the location of a structural component thereof. Such drawings shall be of sufficient scale and detail to allow the city to accurately determine the location of the licensee's network facilities. In lieu of "as-built" print documents, a licensee may, upon advance reasonable request, provide such drawings and maps by other mediums, including electronic mediums, provided the city has the capability to access such information. 
(4)	Conservation of public rights-of-way. To the extent the city may be authorized by state or federal law to do so, and to the extent reasonable under the circumstances then existing, the city may require a licensee to attach portions of their facilities to other facilities within the public rights-of-way owned and maintained by other persons. A licensee shall not be required to attach its facilities to the facilities of such other persons if it is shown that such licensee would be subjected thereby to increased risks of interruption to its service, to increased liability for accidents, or to unreasonable delays in construction or availability of service, or if the facilities of such other Person are not of the character, design, or construction required by, or are not being maintained in accordance with, current practice, or are not available to the licensee on reasonable terms, including, without limitation, reasonable fees. 
    Insofar as is practical to do so, licensees shall use existing network facilities in the provision of their services; provided, however, nothing contained herein shall be construed as limiting a telecommunications provider from expanding its facilities to accommodate future growth and development. licensees shall provide information to the city relating to the location and/or operation of their network facilities or services as may be reasonably necessary for municipal planning purposes. 
(5)	Relocation or removal of facilities. A licensee may be required to lower, place underground, relocate, or remove any network facility within any public right-of-way, without cost to the city, if reasonably necessary, as determined by the city council, to abate a condition actually or potentially dangerous to public health or safety, or as may be reasonably necessary to accommodate the construction, repair, maintenance, removal, or installation of any city or other governmental entity's publicly funded project within the city in, upon, or under public rights-of-way, including, without limitation, street construction and widening, water, sanitary sewer, storm drains, street lights, and traffic signal conduits, or any other public facilities in, upon, or under the public rights-of-way. In the alternative, where the city council determines it to be feasible, a licensee may be allowed to pay the additional costs incurred for the design and/or construction of any such public works project in a manner that would avoid the necessity of relocation or removal of the network facilities. A licensee shall be provided the opportunity to collaborate in advance with the city and/or propose alternatives in order to minimize cost, better schedule the work, and accommodate suitable refinements and/or joint work with others. 
    In the event of any such requirement for lowering, placing underground, relocating, or removing network facilities as herein provided, the licensee shall complete same as soon as is reasonably practicable following written notice thereof by the city. 
(6)	Timely completion. If a licensee fails to either (i) commence or thereafter diligently prosecute any repair, refilling, lowering, relocation, removal, or other work required by the city, or (ii) diligently complete any work that disturbs a public right-of-way, the city may cause the work to be done or completed at the expense of the licensee and may recover all such expense from the licensee, together with all costs and reasonable attorneys fees. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a licensee shall be entitled to notice and opportunity to cure during the cure period described and set forth in section 72-37(b), and shall not be liable for any costs under this section unless such licensee fails to timely complete during such cure period. 
(7)	Abandonment of obsolete network facilities. licensees shall remove aerial network facilities and/or network facilities in conduits when such network facilities are obsolete and no longer in service. When permanent structures in public rights-of-way are removed or abandoned, the city shall be notified in writing of such removal or abandonment. The director of public works may direct such remedial measures as the director may determine are necessary for public safety and the integrity of public rights-of-way. 
(8)	Bonding. A licensee shall comply with all applicable regulations of the city relating to the provision of bonds or other security which may be required in connection with work in public rights-of-way. 
(9)	Temporary rearrangement of aerial wires. Upon request, a licensee shall remove or raise or lower its aerial network facilities temporarily to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The expense of such temporary rearrangements shall be paid by the party or parties requesting same, excluding requests by the city or other governmental entities requiring such rearrangement for public project purposes. The licensee may require payment in advance. The licensee shall be given a reasonable amount of advance notice to provide for such rearrangement, but in no event shall such notice be required to exceed four business days. 
(10)	Tree trimming. A licensee is authorized to trim trees upon and overhanging public rights-of-way to the extent reasonably necessary to prevent the branches thereof from coming in contact with the licensee's network facilities. At the option of the city, a licensee may be required to conduct tree trimming under the supervision and direction of the city through the city official to whom such duty has been or may be delegated. 
(11)	Term. The term of each license granted pursuant hereto shall be as set forth in the license ordinance, but shall not exceed ten years. 
(Ord. No. 99-414, § 5, 5-19-99) 
Sec. 72-35. - Compensation; books and records. 
(a)	licensee fees for providers of wired telecommunications services. licensees using public rights-of-way for the provision of wired telecommunications services shall pay to the city a license fee that is calculated by applying a monthly charge for each access line owned, placed, operated, controlled or maintained by the licensee, during the month to which the licensee fee applies, for use by an end-user or for another provider that uses the licensee's services or network facilities for the provision of telecommunications services within the city. With regard to persons leasing, reselling, or otherwise using licensee's access lines, if the licensee does not have sufficient information to determine the appropriate access line type, and, thus, the appropriate fee rate to apply, then the higher line fee shall apply until such time as the person using the access lines provides to the licensee sufficient written information to determine the correct line fee. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a licensee shall not be liable for underpayment of license fees resulting from the licensee's reliance upon the written information provided by any such person using licensee's service or facilities for the provision of telecommunications services to end-user customers. The license fee payable to the city shall be the sum total of the monthly charges to be applied to access lines, on a calendar month basis, as follows: 
Access Line Type Monthly Charge 
(Per Access Line) Residential $ ____________ Nonresidential $ ____________ [OR] Monthly Charge (Per Access Line) $ ____________  
(1)	Payment due dates; calculation report; access lines. License fees shall be paid quarterly, with such payments due and payable on or before the 45th day following the end of the calendar quarter for which such payments apply. With every quarterly remittance, each licensee shall file a written report showing the number and type of access lines owned or placed and maintained by the licensee within the city that are activated for end-user customers and other telecommunications providers at month's end, for each of the three calendar months to which such remittance applies. Such report shall specifically identify access lines owned, placed, operated, controlled, or maintained by the licensee that are leased and/or used by persons who are not end-user customers. Such report shall show the number of access lines by category, to the extent known. The report shall be used solely for the purpose of verifying the number of the licensee's access lines serving premises within the city. 
(2)	Exclusions for certain economically disadvantaged customers. Lines terminating at customers' premises that are billed as "Lifeline," "Tel-Assistance," or other services similarly discounted for the purpose of advancing universal service to the economically disadvantaged, shall not be included in the count of access lines for which the license fee is calculated. 
(3)	Leased network facilities. Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this article to the contrary, a licensee shall not be required to include in its monthly count of access lines, and shall not be required to remit a license fee to the city based on, access lines that are resold, leased, or otherwise provided to another person for consideration if (i) the other person is operating pursuant to a valid license under this article, and (ii) the other person has furnished licensee with adequate proof that the person intends to include the leased access lines in its monthly count to the city, the person intends to remit to the city a license fee based on those leased access lines, and the city has approved the arrangement. 
(b)	License fees for providers of wireless telecommunications services. licensees using public rights-of-way for the provision of wireless telecommunications services shall pay to the city a license fee that is calculated by applying a monthly charge calculated in accordance with one of the following methods described in this section. 
(1)	Access line method. licensees may elect to pay a license fee that is calculated by applying a monthly charge for each access line to end-user customers within the city that use the licensee's services or network facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. A monthly charge shall be applied for each access line to an end-user customer having a billing address within the city. The license fee payable to the city shall be the sum total of the monthly charges to be applied to access lines, on a calendar month basis, as follows: 
Monthly Fee (Per Access Line) $ ____________ 
(2)	Gross revenue method. If the license fee provided for in subsection 72-35(c)(1) would result in a fee which exceeds four percent of the applicable licensee's gross revenues from subscribers within the city, such licensee may pay a license fee which equals four percent of the gross revenues received by such licensee from end-user customers within the city. For the purposes hereof, the term "gross revenues" shall mean the gross dollar amounts received by the licensee for wireless telecommunications services provided to end-user customers with billing addresses in the city, but excluding (i) the monthly charges collected pursuant to this section, (ii) local, state, or federal taxes collected by the licensee that have been billed to subscribers and separately stated on subscribers' bills, and (iii) uncollectible revenues. 
(3)	Facilities charge method. A licensee providing wireless telecommunications services within the city which does not occupy more than 500 linear feet, 200 square feet, or 100 cubic feet of the public rights-of-way for the location of its network facilities, may pay an annual license fee based on the actual network facilities located within such public rights-of-way. Such license fees shall be calculated in accordance with public right-of-way use fee schedules as may be adopted by the city council from time to time and in effect at the time the applicable license ordinance is adopted. 
(4)	Payment due dates; calculation report. License fees shall be paid quarterly, with such payments due and payable on or before the 45th day following the end of the calendar quarter for which such payments apply. With every quarterly remittance, each licensee shall file a written report showing the number of subscribers within the city that are served by the licensee, the gross revenues received by the licensee, or an inventory of network facilities in the city's public right-of-way, as applicable, for each of the three calendar months to which such remittance applies. Such report shall specifically identify any network facilities owned, operated, or maintained by the licensee that are leased and/or used by persons who are not end-users. Such report shall show the number of subscribers of such persons leasing or using such facilities, if any, to the extent known. The report shall be used solely for the purpose of verifying the license fee payable to the city, as herein provided. 
(5)	Exclusions for certain economically disadvantaged customers. Subscribers that are billed as "Lifeline," "Tel-Assistance," or for other services similarly discounted for the purpose of advancing universal service to the economically disadvantaged, shall not be included in the count of subscribers for which the license fee is calculated. 
(6)	Leased network facilities. Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this article to the contrary, a licensee shall not be required to include in its monthly count of subscribers, and shall not be required to remit a license fee to the city based on, subscribers that are served by network facilities resold, leased, or otherwise provided to another person for consideration if (i) the other person is operating pursuant to a valid license under this article, and (ii) the other person has furnished licensee with adequate proof that the person intends to include its subscribers in its monthly count to the city, the person intends to remit to the city a license fee based on those subscribers, and the city has approved the arrangement. 
(c)	License fees for providers not serving customers within the city. Providers using network facilities within public rights-of-way, but which serve no customers within the city, other than itself, shall pay an annual license fee based on the facilities located within such public rights-of-way. Such license fees shall be calculated in accordance with public right-of-way use fee schedules as may be adopted by the city council from time to time and in effect at the time the applicable license ordinance is adopted. This fee shall be due on or before July 15 of every year during the term of the license, prorated as applicable. A report shall be submitted with each annual payment showing the calculation of the payment, including necessary descriptions of the network facilities, as applicable. 
(d)	Reporting requirements. The forms required to be filed pursuant to subsections 72-35(a)(1), 72-35(b)(1) and 72-35(c) shall be accompanied by a written statement, executed by a duly authorized officer or representative of the licensee, certifying that the information contained in such report is true and correct, to the best of the officer or representative's knowledge and belief, after due inquiry. A copy of the completed forms and the accompanying certified statements shall be filed with the city secretary of the city. Such forms shall be deemed confidential to the extent permitted by law. Upon written request, licensees shall verify the information contained in such forms and, upon reasonable advance notice, all non-customer specific records and other documents required for verification shall be subject to inspection by the city, expressly excluding any records, documents, or other writings the disclosure of which is prohibited by state or federal law. 
(e)	Late payments; default. Payments received after their due date shall incur interest at the rate of ten percent per annum, compounded daily. Notwithstanding the foregoing, failure of a licensee to make a full payment within 30 days following the due date shall constitute an event of default. 
(f)	Circumvention of license fees prohibited. licensees shall not circumvent payment of license fees by bartering, by transferring rights, or by other means that result in undercounting the number of access lines, or subscribers, as applicable, as required herein. Capacity or services may be bartered if the imputed access lines, or subscribers, are reported in accordance with this article. 
(g)	Uncollectibles. A licensee shall not be obligated to pay the city for any access lines or subscribers for which revenues remain uncollectible. 
(h)	No release. No acceptance by the city of any payment by a licensee shall be construed as a release of, or an accord or satisfaction of, any claim that the city might have for further or additional sums payable under the terms of this article or a license ordinance, or for any other performance or obligation of the licensee. 
(i)	No other fees. License fees paid hereunder shall be in lieu of any permit, license, approval, inspection, or other similar fee or charge, including, but not limited to, all general business license fees customarily assessed by the city for the use of the public rights-of-way against persons operating businesses similar to that of licensees. Further, such license fees shall constitute full compensation to the city for all of a licensee's network facilities located within the public rights-of-way, including interoffice transport and other transmission media that do not terminate at an end-user customer's network interface device, even though those types of network facilities are not used in the calculation of a license fee. 
(j)	Records. licensees shall retain and maintain all records, accounts, and financial and operating reports necessary to establish compliance with the terms of this article, for a period of not less than five years. 
(Ord. No. 99-414, § 6, 5-19-99) 
Sec. 72-36. - Indemnification and insurance. 
(a)	Indemnity. Each license ordinance shall contain the following indemnity provision: 
The licensee shall promptly defend, indemnify, and hold the city harmless from and against all damages, costs, losses, or expenses (i) for the repair, replacement, or restoration of city's property, equipment, materials, structures, and facilities which are damaged, destroyed, or found to be defective solely as a result of the licensee's acts or omissions; and (ii) from and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action, and judgments for (a) damage to or loss of the property of any person (including, but not limited to, the licensee, its agents, officers, employees, and subcontractors, city, its agents, officers, and employees, and third parties); and/or (b) death, bodily injury, illness, disease, loss of services, or loss of income or wages to any person (including, but not limited to, the agents, officers, and employees of the licensee, licensee's subcontractors, city's officers, agents, and employees, and third parties), arising out of, incident to, concerning, or resulting from the negligent or willful acts or omissions of the licensee, its agents, employees, and/or subcontractors, in the performance of activities pursuant to this article. 
This indemnity provision is intended to include liability arising from the city's alleged negligence, but only to the extent such liability arises out of a claim or claims that the city was negligent in granting this license, in regulating the conduct of licensee under this license, or in failing to prevent licensee from acting in a negligent or wrongful manner. 
The indemnity provision set forth above is: 
(1) Solely for the benefit of the city and the licensee and is not intended to create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other person or entity; 
(2) To the extent permitted by law, any payments made to, or on behalf of, the city under the provisions of this section are subject to the rights granted to licensees under Texas Utilities Code §§ 54.204-54.206; and 
(3) Subject to the continued applicability of the provisions of Texas Utilities Code §§ 54.204-54.206, as set forth in (2) above, the provisions of the indemnity shall survive the expiration of this article. 
If the authority granted by this article is terminated or is not renewed, and the licensee does not remove its network facilities from the public rights-of-way, the licensee shall continue to indemnify and hold harmless the city pursuant to this section as long as its facilities are located in the public rights-of-way, and for said purpose, this section shall survive this license ordinance. 
(b)	Insurance. licensees shall procure and maintain, during the term of their licenses, the following insurance coverage, and the respective policies thereof shall cover all risks related to the licensee's use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way and all other risks associated with their license. 
(1)	Description of insurance coverage and limits. 
Coverage Limits of Liability Worker's Compensation: Minimum Statutory Limits Employer's Liability: Bodily Injury by Accident $1,000,000 (each accident) Bodily Injury by Disease $1,000,000 (policy limit) Bodily Injury by Disease $1,000,000 (each employee) Commercial General Liability: Including Broad Form Coverage, Contractual Liability, Bodily and Personal Injury, and Completed Operations: Combined single limits of $1,000,000 per occurrence and $1,000,000 aggregate Products and Completed Operations: $1,000,000 aggregate Automobile Liability Insurance for Automobiles used by the licensee in the Course of its Performance under the License Ordinance, including Employer's Non-Ownership and Hired Auto Coverage: $1,000,000 combined single limit per occurrence Excess Coverage $1,000,000 per occurrence/combined aggregate in excess of limits specified for Employer's Liability, Commercial General Liability, and Automobile Liability  
Note: Aggregate limits are for a 12-month policy period, unless otherwise indicated. 
(2)	Other insurance related requirements. 
a.	The city shall be named as an additional insured, by endorsement, on all applicable insurance policies; 
b.	Applicable insurance policies shall each be endorsed with a waiver of subrogation in favor of the city; 
c.	Insurers shall have a rating of B+ or better and a financial size of Class VI or better, according to the current year's Best's rating. Each insurer shall be responsible and reputable, must have financial capability consistent with the risks covered, and shall be subject to approval by the city council with regard to conformance with these requirements, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
d.	Deductible limits on insurance policies and/or self-insured retention exceeding $50,000.00 shall require approval by the city council; 
e.	Certificates of insurance shall state that the city shall be notified a minimum of 30 days prior to the insurers' action, in the event of cancellation, nonrenewal, or reduction in policy limits, regarding any policy required hereby; 
f.	Full limits of insurance required in subsection 72-36(b)(1) shall be available for claims arising out of a licensee's applicable license ordinance; 
g.	Certificates of insurance shall be provided by a licensee to the city prior to the installation, construction, or operation of any network facilities within public rights-of-way; provided, however, any licensee lawfully operating network facilities within public rights-of-way at the time of adoption of such licensee's applicable license ordinance shall provide such certificates of insurance within 30 days following the effective date of such license ordinance. Any failure of the city to request such documentation shall not be construed as a waiver of the insurance requirements specified herein; 
h.	The city shall be entitled, upon request and without incurring expense, to review the insurance policies (or certified copies thereof), including endorsements thereto, which relate to the insurance requirements specified herein, and, at its discretion, to require proof of payment for policy premiums; 
i.	The city shall not be responsible for paying the cost of insurance coverage required herein; 
j.	Notice of any actual or potential claim and/or litigation that would affect insurance coverage required herein shall be provided to the city in a timely manner. In the alternative, a policy may, by endorsement, establish a policy aggregate to establish compliance with the requirements set forth herein; 
k.	Each insurance policy required herein shall be primary insurance to any other insurance available to the city with respect to any claims arising hereunder; 
l.	A licensee shall either require its contractors to maintain the same insurance coverage and limits thereof as specified herein or such coverage on the licensee's contractors shall be provided by the licensee; and 
m.	A licensee may elect to self-insure to provide the insurance coverage required hereunder, subject to the restrictions set forth in this subsection, provided that the licensee submits to the city copies of its certificates of self-insurance from the Texas Department of Insurance and of its most recent audited financial statements, showing self-insurance reserves or other assets sufficient to pay judgments equal to the limits set forth above. A licensee shall also provide to the city documentation evidencing its process for reviewing and paying claims. The city shall be protected by a licensee's self-insurance to the same extent as an additional insured on a policy issued by an insurance company. If, during the term of a license granted hereunder, a licensee's self-insurance program ceases, or a licensee's assets or reserves are no longer sufficient to comply with the above coverage requirements, the licensee shall immediately notify the city of such lapse of coverage, and the licensee shall obtain commercial insurance in accordance with the above requirements within 30 days following such notice. 
(c)	No right of recovery. Insurers shall have no right of recovery against the city, it being the intention hereby that the insurance policies required herein shall protect licensees and the city, and shall be primary coverage for all losses covered by such policies. Such policies shall provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation or assignment against the city in connection with any damage covered thereby. Companies issuing such policies shall have no recourse against the city for payment of any premiums or assessments, same being at the sole risk of the licensees. 
(d)	Lapse of coverage an event of default. A licensee shall continuously and without interruption maintain in full force and effect the required insurance coverage and limits set forth in this section. Failure to maintain such insurance shall constitute an event of default and the city, at its option, may terminate any license granted pursuant hereto, in accordance with the provisions of section 72-37. 
(Ord. No. 99-414, § 7, 5-19-99) 
Sec. 72-37. - Default and termination. 
(a)	Events of default. The occurrence of any of the following shall constitute an event of default by a licensee: 
(1)	Failure of a licensee to comply with any material term, condition, or provision of this article or the license ordinance applicable to such licensee; 
(2)	Any intentional false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact by an applicant; 
(3)	A licensee's loss of or failure to obtain licenses, permits, and certifications lawfully required by any statute, ordinance, rule, or regulation of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the licensee's operations and to pay all fees associated therewith; 
(4)	An act or omission of a licensee constituting a knowing or intentional evasion of payment of any fee payable hereunder. 
(b)	Cure period. If a licensee continues to violate or fail to comply with a material term or provision of this article for a period of 30 days following notification in writing by the city to cure such specific alleged violation or failure to comply, then the city may follow the procedures set forth herein to declare that the licensee has terminated all rights and privileges consented to pursuant to this article and the licensee's license ordinance; provided, however, if a licensee is alleged to be in violation of any material provision of this article, other than the payment of a fee due hereunder, and if the licensee commences efforts to cure such alleged violation within 30 days following receipt of written notice thereof and shall thereafter prosecute such curative efforts with reasonable diligence until such curative efforts are completed, then such alleged violation shall cease to exist and no further action shall be taken at that time. 
(Ord. No. 99-414, § 8, 5-19-99) 
Sec. 72-38. - Transfer of authority. 
(a)	Prohibition. Any right, privilege, and license granted pursuant hereto may not be assigned, in whole or in part, without the prior consent of the city expressed by resolution or ordinance, and then only under such conditions as may therein be prescribed, except as otherwise provided in subsection (d). No such consent by the city shall be unreasonably withheld, conditioned, or delayed. No assignment in law or otherwise shall be effective until the assignee has filed with the city an instrument, duly executed, reciting the fact of such assignment, accepting the terms hereof and of the license ordinance, and agreeing to comply with all the provisions thereof. A mortgage or other pledge of assets in a bona fide lending transaction shall not be considered an assignment of a license for the purposes of this article. 
(b)	Process. Upon receipt of a request for consent to an assignment, the city shall diligently investigate the request in a timely manner and place the request on the city council agenda at the earliest practicable time. The city council shall proceed to act on the request within a reasonable period of time. 
(c)	Scope of review. In reviewing a request for assignment, the city may, to the extent permitted by law, inquire into the legal, technical, and financial qualifications of the prospective assignee, and the licensee shall assist the city in so inquiring. The city may condition said assignment upon such terms and conditions as it deems reasonably necessary, provided its approval and any such terms and conditions so attached shall be related to the legal, technical, and financial qualifications of the prospective assignee, as well as the licensee's compliance with the terms hereof. 
(d)	Assignments not requiring approval. Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this article to the contrary, the prior approval of the city shall not be required for any assignment to (i) any entity controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the licensee, as long as such entity has expertise in the operation of the network facilities; (ii) any entity with which the licensee or an affiliate of the licensee shares joint ownership of the network facilities; or (iii) any entity that is a holder of a then-current comprehensive telecommunications (as distinguished from cable services) franchise or license ordinance. Provided, however, no such assignment shall be effective until the licensee shall have given written notice thereof to the city. 
(e)	Release. Upon receiving the city's consent to an assignment, or, in the event of an assignment qualifying under subsection(d), upon giving notice under subsection (d), a licensee shall be relieved of all conditions, obligations, and liabilities arising or which might arise hereunder that are assumed by the assignee. 
(Ord. No. 99-414, § 9, 5-19-99) 
Sec. 72-39. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)	Work by others, construction by abutting owners, and alterations to conform with public improvements. 
(1)	The city reserves the right to lay and permit to be laid, sewer, gas, water, and other pipe lines or cables and conduits, and to do and permit to be done, any underground and overhead work, and any attachment, restructuring, or changes in aerial facilities that may be deemed necessary or proper by the city in, across, along, over, or under any public right-of-way occupied by providers, and to change any curb or sidewalk or the grade of any street. In permitting such work to be done, the city shall not be liable to providers for any damages not directly caused by the misconduct or gross negligence of the city; provided, however, nothing herein shall relieve any other person or entity, including any contractor, subcontractor, or agent from liability for damage to a licensee's facilities. 
(2)	If during a license term the city authorizes abutting landowners to occupy space over, under, or across the surface of any public right-of-way, such grant to an abutting landowner shall be subject to the rights herein granted to a licensee. In the event that the city shall close or abandon any public right-of-way, which contains any portion of a licensee's network facilities, any conveyance of land contained in such closed or abandoned public right-of-way shall be subject to the rights of a licensee hereunder and under the licensee's license ordinance. 
(3)	Providers shall be liable for the acts or omissions of any person used by such providers when such person is involved directly or indirectly in the construction and installation of such providers' network facilities to the same extent as if the acts or omissions of such person were the acts or omissions of the provider. 
(b)	Annexation and disannexation. Within 30 days following the date of passage of any action effecting the annexation of any property to, or the disannexation of any property from, the city's corporate boundaries, the city shall furnish licensees written notice of the action and an accurate map of the city's corporate boundaries showing, if available, street names and number details. For the purpose of compensating the city under this article, a licensee shall start including or excluding access lines or subscribers, as applicable, within the affected area in the licensee's count of access lines or subscribers, as applicable, on the effective date designated by the Comptroller of Public Accounts of the State of Texas for the imposition of state local sales and use taxes; but in no case less than 30 days following the date the licensee is notified by the city of the annexation or disannexation. 
(c)	Confidential records. Upon the notification by a licensee to the city of the confidential nature of any information, report, document, or writing, the city shall maintain the confidentiality of such information, report, document, or writing to the extent permitted by law. Upon receipt by the city of requests for the licensee's confidential information, report, document, or writing, the city shall notify the licensee of the request, in writing. Unless otherwise approved in writing by the applicable licensee, the city shall request an Attorney General's Opinion before disclosing any confidential information, report, document, or writing, and will furnish the licensee with copies of such requests. 
(d)	Abandonment of public rights-of-way. If the city conveys, closes, abandons, or releases its interest in or authority over any public right-of-way containing network facilities installed or operated pursuant to a license ordinance, any such conveyance, closure, abandonment, or release shall be subject to the rights of the licensee under the license ordinance. 
(e)	Right to audit. The city reserves the right to review and audit a licensee's books and records if the city deems it necessary to determine if appropriate amounts have been paid to the city hereunder. If any such audit discovers an underpayment due to the city that exceeds five percent of the total amount paid for any quarterly reporting period, then the licensee shall promptly reimburse the city for the actual and reasonable cost of such audit. Provider shall also pay the city all actual amounts of the underpayments as determined by the audit, plus interest as hereinabove provided. 
(f)	Force Majeure. Other than for the failure to pay amounts due and payable under this article, a licensee shall not be in default or be subject to sanction under any provision of this article when its performance is prevented by Force Majeure. Force Majeure shall mean an event caused by strike or other labor problem; embargo; epidemic; act of God; fire; flood; adverse weather conditions, or other major environmental disturbance; act of military authority; or war or civil disorder, provided that such causes are beyond the reasonable control and without the willful act, fault, failure, or negligence of the licensee. Performance is not excused under this section following the end of the applicable event of Force Majeure. 
(g)	Controlling law. This article, and any license issued hereunder, shall be governed by the laws of the State of Texas and venue for any action hereunder shall be in Harris County, Texas. 
(h)	Acceptance. A licensee shall, within 30 days following the effective date of any license ordinance adopted hereunder and applicable to such licensee, file with the city secretary an unqualified written statement executed in its name by an officer of the licensee, duly appointed and authorized to make such statement, as follows: 
" ____________ [licensee], having been granted a License by the City of Taylor Lake Village, Texas [City], as set forth in Ordinance No. ____________ (the "License Ordinance"), which Ordinance is adopted pursuant to and under the terms of City of Taylor Lake Village, Texas, Ordinance No. ____________ , same being AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE USE OF CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY BY PROVIDERS OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES (the "Regulatory Ordinance"), does hereby accept the terms of the License Ordinance and the Regulatory Ordinance, and promises to comply therewith, and with any amendments thereto which may be adopted from time-to-time, and to abide by the express provisions, terms, and conditions thereof, unless and until those provisions, terms, or conditions are duly amended or otherwise changed or modified by or as a result of a final order of a court or regulatory agency of competent jurisdiction. licensee's rights and obligations shall not be deemed to be contractual, but are governed by the ordinances of the City, and state and federal law, and are not modified, expanded, or waived by the execution and delivery of this acceptance. Notwithstanding any other provision contained herein to the contrary, licensee expressly reserves any and all rights to challenge the applicability, enforceability, and/or legality of one or more of the terms of the ordinances to the extent such term or terms are alleged to exceed the lawful regulatory authority of the City." 
(Ord. No. 99-414, § 10, 5-19-99) 
Sec. 72-40. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall use or occupy the public rights-of-way for the provision of telecommunications services without having been issued a license therefor pursuant to this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof shall be punished in accordance with section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 99-414, § 11, 5-19-99) 
Chapter 73 - RESERVED 
Chapter 74 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Ordinances consistent with this Code establishing traffic or parking regulations at specific locations saved from repeal, § 1-10(19); court, ch. 18; junk vehicles, § 30-31 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Applicability of state law provisions. 
    All provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, as amended, or as hereafter amended, and all other provisions of state law regulating the operation, maintenance and use of motor vehicles and the qualifications and licensing of operators of motor vehicles, shall be applicable within the city. Any amendments to the regulations established in this section by the city shall be by ordinance, and the city council shall be the body responsible for authorizing any installation of traffic control devices, or determining the need for additions or deletions of traffic control devices. 
(Ord. No. 94-346, § 1, 2-16-94) 
Sec. 74-2. - Definitions. 
    Except where specifically provided in this section to the contrary, the definitions contained in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, as amended, shall apply to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 94-346, § 2, 2-16-94) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-3. - Enforcement of chapter. 
    It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the traffic regulations provided in this chapter or established under this chapter, and to enforce all additional regulations which may be adopted by amendment hereto or by separate ordinance. Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, in the event of fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 94-346, § 3, 2-16-94) 
Sec. 74-4. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, or who shall commit an act declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in section 1-9; provided, however, that no penalty shall be imposed which is greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or similar offense under the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 94-346, § 16, 2-16-94) 
Secs. 74-5-74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 74-31. - Speed limits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. Based upon an engineering and traffic investigation, the city council finds and determines that the maximum speed limits for streets as set forth in section 74-96 shall be lawful, and any speed in excess of such maximum limits shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 94-346, § 4, 2-16-94) 
Sec. 74-32. - Stop signs. 
    Based upon an engineering and traffic investigation, the city council finds and determines that public safety and welfare require that nonmechanical stop signs be placed at the locations described in section 74-97. It shall be unlawful for any person operating or in control of any motor vehicle or bicycle to fail to bring such motor vehicle or bicycle to a complete stop at any stop sign within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 94-346, § 5, 2-16-94) 
Sec. 74-33. - Yield signs. 
    Based upon an engineering and traffic investigation, the city council finds and determines that public safety and welfare require that nonmechanical yield right-of-way signs are placed at the locations described in section 74-98. It shall be unlawful for any person operating or in control of any motor vehicle or bicycle to fail to yield the right-of-way at any yield right-of-way sign within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 94-346, § 6, 2-16-94) 
Sec. 74-34. - No parking. 
    Based upon an engineering and traffic investigation, the city council finds and determines that public safety and welfare require that no parking zones are established as set forth in section 74-99. It shall be unlawful for any person having registered in his name or owning or operating or having in charge any vehicle, knowingly to allow or suffer or permit the same to stop, stand or be parked upon any street within a no parking zone, as provided by this section, when signs are duly erected giving notice thereof. When any person is charged with having parked or left standing a vehicle on any street in the city at a place on such street where parking of vehicles is prohibited, or with parking such vehicle on a street in a manner which violates the designated manner of parking a vehicle, or with parking such vehicle for a length of time in excess of that allowed in the space where such vehicle was parked, proof that the vehicle was, at the date of the offense alleged, owned by the person charged with the offense 
shall constitute prima facie evidence that the vehicle was parked or left standing at the place charged by the owner. The owner shall have the right to introduce evidence to show that such vehicle was not parked by him as charged in the complaint. 
(Ord. No. 94-346, § 7, 2-16-94) 
Sec. 74-35. - Pedestrian crosswalks. 
    Based upon an engineering and traffic investigation, the city council finds and determines that public safety and welfare require that pedestrian crossings shall be established as set forth in section 74-100. It shall be unlawful for any person operating or in control of any motor vehicle or bicycle to fail to bring such motor vehicle or bicycle to a complete stop at any designated pedestrian crossing occupied by one or more pedestrians, within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 94-346, § 8, 2-16-94) 
Sec. 74-36. - Weaving. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating or in control of any motor vehicle to weave in and out of traffic to the extent that such weaving unreasonably interferes with the right-of-way of other vehicles on the right or left. 
(Ord. No. 94-346, § 9(A), 2-16-94) 
Sec. 74-37. - Cutting in. 
    When traffic is traveling in parallel lanes, it shall be unlawful for any person operating or in control of a motor vehicle or any other vehicle to cut from one lane of traffic to another so as to unreasonably interfere with the right-of-way of any other vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 94-346, § 9(B), 2-16-94) 
Sec. 74-38. - Prima facie evidence of weaving and cutting in. 
    In regard to sections 74-36 and 74-37, the fact that any adjacent vehicle, into the path of which the weave or cut is made, shall slacken its pace abruptly or shall swerve into any parallel lane or near to any obstruction in the street or object at the side thereof shall be prima facie evidence of unreasonable interference with the right-of-way of that vehicle by the driver of the vehicle weaving or cutting in. 
(Ord. No. 94-346, § 9(C), 2-16-94) 
Sec. 74-39. - Following too closely. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating or in control of any motor vehicle to follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicles and traffic upon and the conditions of the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 94-346, § 9(D), 2-16-94) 
Sec. 74-40. - Dig out or tire squeal. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating or in control of any motor vehicle within the city to dig out or produce tire squeal. For the purposes of this section, the term "dig out" means tire squeal. The term "tire squeal" means the sound produced by the friction of a motor vehicle tire turning against a dry pavement under sudden acceleration of the vehicle to which the tire is mounted; such tire then turning at a rate of revolution disproportionately greater than the length of distance then traveled on the pavement by the tire. Prima facie evidence of such disproportional revolution shall include skid marks or tire marks left by such tire upon the pavement or smoke produced by such revolution. 
(Ord. No. 94-346, § 9(E), 2-16-94) 
Sec. 74-41. - Failing to control vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating or in control of any motor vehicle to operate or control such vehicle in a manner that inflicts harm, injury or damage to the person or property of another. The inflicting of damage to stationary property of another person in situations involving only one moving motor vehicle shall be prima facie evidence of failure to control such moving motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 94-346, § 9(F), 2-16-94) 
Sec. 74-42. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter regulating speeds of vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles responding to calls, nor to police patrols, nor to physicians and/or ambulances responding to emergency calls. 
(Ord. No. 94-346, § 10, 2-16-94) 
Sec. 74-43. - Operation, parking or storage of vehicles in Timber Cove Park. 
(a)	Prohibited hours of operation. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle within Timber Cove Park between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(b)	Prohibited hours for parking or storing. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store, or permit or allow to be parked or stored, any motor vehicle owned or operated by such person, within Timber Cove Park, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(c)	Applicability of section provisions. The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply to police officers, fire department personnel or emergency medical service personnel while engaged in the performance of their official duties. 
(Ord. No. 97-387, §§ 2-4, 9-3-97) 
Sec. 74-44. - Parking of vehicles on residential property. 
    This section shall not affect or amend any regulation involving junked or abandoned vehicles, or nuisance abatement of state law or of this Code. In the event that a regulation under this section conflicts with another regulation, the more strict regulation shall apply. 
(1)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Driveway means a private road or path that connects a house, garage, or other building with the street. 
    Improved surface means a constructed pad, excluding a driveway, the surface of which is comprised of masonry constructed to a depth sufficient to distribute the weight of a vehicle or equipment over such area to preclude deterioration and deflection of the area due to vehicle or equipment load, adverse weather, or other conditions. Examples of materials with which an improved surface might be constructed include brick, concrete, stone, or other materials approved by the city engineer or designee. 
    Vehicle or equipment means and includes, but is not limited to, any motorized or non-motorized house trailer, mobile home, motor vehicle, truck, passenger motor vehicle, motor home, camper cabin, motorcycle, trailer, boat, three-wheeler, four-wheeler, farm machinery, lawnmower or similar equipment or any truck with more than two axles or any trailer, mobile home or motor home. 
(2)	Offense; parking in yard prohibited. 
a.	A person commits an offense if the person intentionally or knowingly parks a vehicle or equipment on any surface that is not a driveway or an improved surface within any front, rear, or side yard of a residence. It is presumed that the registered owner of the vehicle or equipment is the person who parked, caused, suffered or permitted the vehicle or equipment to be parked in violation of this subsection. 
b.	A person commits an offense if the person owns or occupies building used for residential purposes on a lot and the person intentionally or knowingly causes, suffers or permits the parking of a vehicle or equipment on any surface of the lot that is not a drive way or an improved surface. 
(3)	Administrative exceptions. The mayor or designee shall be authorized to provide for the issuance of dated temporary permits that allow, on a limited basis and for a limited period, such as during construction, the parking of vehicles or equipment in areas where such conduct is otherwise prohibited by this section. 
(4)	Enforcement. The provisions of this section may be enforced by any law enforcement officer or code enforcement official of the city. 
(Ord. No. 09-574, § 1, 7-1-09) 
Sec. 74-45. - Golf carts. 
(a)	In accordance with the state law, golf carts shall be permitted to be driven on public roads within the city limits of Taylor Lake Village and to cross Kirby Boulevard as long as they adhere to the regulations and minimum equipment requirements set by the State of Texas. 
(b)	Any person who shall fail to observe and comply with a duly posted traffic control device or sign erected or established pursuant to this section, or who shall in any manner violate any provision of this section, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount of not less than $1.00 nor more than $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 10-592, §§ 1, 2, 4-7-2010) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-592, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 7, 2010, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as § 74-45 was at the editor's discretion. 
Secs. 74-46-74-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 

Sec. 74-66. - Installation. 
    The mayor is authorized and directed to cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices when and as required by the traffic ordinances of the city to make effective such provisions and regulations as are contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 94-346, § 11, 2-16-94) 
Sec. 74-67. - Specifications. 
    All traffic control signs, signals and other devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the state commission on highways and public transportation. 
(Ord. No. 94-346, § 12, 2-16-94) 
Sec. 74-68. - Presumption of legality of devices. 
    Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in position approximately conforming to the requirements of this chapter, such devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of this chapter, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(Ord. No. 94-346, § 13, 2-16-94) 
Sec. 74-69. - Existing devices. 
    All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings heretofore placed or erected by the mayor or other officers of the city and now in use for the purposes of regulating, warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and confirmed to be official traffic control devices, provided such traffic control devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 94-346, § 14, 2-16-94) 
Secs. 74-70-74-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXHIBITS 

Sec. 74-96. - Maximum speed limits. 
    The provisions of section 74-31 shall be applicable to the following streets: 
(1)	Forty-five miles per hour on Kirby Road. 
(2)	Thirty-five miles per hour on Old Kirby Road. 
(3)	Thirty miles per hour on Timber Cove Drive southbound from Old Kirby Road to where the divided esplanade ends and northbound from 320 feet north of Shorewood to Old Kirby Road. 
Thirty miles per hour between 7:30-8:30 a.m. and 3:00-4:00 p.m. school days in school zone. 
(4)	Twenty miles per hour on all the following city streets: 
Appleford 
Baronridge Drive 
Bayou Grove Drive 
Bluebonnet Drive 
Bradshire Lane 
Cedar Lane Circle 
Cedar Lane 
Chadbury Lane 
Clovernook 
Coral Way Drive 
Cragmore Drive 
Crownwood Drive 
Devonport Lane 
Driftwood 
Elderwood Drive 
Elm Circle 
Falling Leaf Lane 
Forest Lake Drive 
Goldendale 
Harborcrest 
Highknoll 
Honey Oaks 
Kirby Oaks Drive 
Kirbywoods Drive 
Lake Country Drive 
Lake Grove Drive 
Lakeway Drive 
Laurel Grove 
Lakeshore Circle 
Lakeshore Drive 
Larkspur Lane 
Lake Villa Drive 
Laurel Grove 
Live Oak Lane 
Long Grove Drive 
Longledge Drive 
Lost Ridge Circle 
Manorfield Drive 
Meadowbank Drive 
Oak Circle 
Parkmead Drive 
Parkstead 
Pecan Circle 
Pine Circle 
Pine Shadows 
Pinewood Lane 
Plumtree 
Primrose Lane 
Ray Shell Court 
Rolling Green 
Rosebud Drive 
Rosevine Drive 
Shadowbend 
Shady Springs Drive 
Shore Line Drive 
Shorewood Drive 
Sleepy Hollow 
Spring Cress Lane 
Tangle Briar Drive 
Timber Cove Drive from 700 block to the 1000 block 
Timber Cove Drive northbound from 1000 block to 320 feet north of Shorewood 
Villacourt 
Whispering Oaks 
Willow Hill Drive 
Willowvale 
Woodbank Court 
Woodbank Drive 
Woodpark Drive 
Wyndwood Drive 
(Ord. No. 94-346, Exhibit A, 2-16-94; Ord. No. 06-526, § 1, 9-6-06) 
Sec. 74-97. - Stop signs. 
    The provisions of section 74-32 shall be applicable to the following streets: 
Stop On  While 
Proceeding     At Baronridge Drive North Honey Oaks Baronridge Drive South Honey Oaks Bayou Grove Drive East Forest Lake Drive Beacon Hill West Kirby Road Bradshire Lane East Forest Lake Drive Cedar Lane East Lakeshore Drive Cedar Lane West Lakeshore Drive Clovernook North Manorfield Drive Honey Oaks East Cragmore Drive Honey Oaks West Cragmore Drive Cragmore Drive North Honey Oaks Cragmore Drive South Honey Oaks Cragmore Drive South Manorfield Drive Crownwood Drive East Cragmore Drive Crownwood Drive West Cragmore Drive Crownwood Drive South Honey Oaks Devonport Lane South Honey Oaks Devonport Lane North Manorfield Drive Driftwood East Shorewood Drive Driftwood West Timber Cove Drive Elderwood Drive East Forest Lake Drive Elderwood Drive West Forest Lake Drive Forest Lake Drive North Manorfield Drive Forest Lake Drive North Willow Hill Drive Forest Lake Drive South Willow Hill Drive Forest Lake Drive North Shady Springs Drive Forest Lake Drive South Shady Springs Drive Highknoll West Baronridge Drive Honey Oaks West Baronridge Drive Kirby Oaks Drive East Kirby Road Kirbywoods Drive West Kirby Road Lake Country Drive North Old Kirby Road Lake Country Drive South Lost Ridge Circle Lake Grove Drive East Kirby Road Lake Villa Drive North Willow Hill Drive Lake Villa Drive South Willow Hill Drive Lakeshore Drive North Cedar Lane Lakeshore Drive South Cedar Lane Lakeway Drive Northwest Shore Line Drive Lakeway Drive Southeast Ray Shell Court Laurel Grove East Forest Lake Drive Live Oak Lane North Kirbywoods Drive Live Oak Lane South Kirbywoods Drive Long Grove Drive West Baronridge Drive Long Grove Drive East Forest Lake Drive Long Grove Drive West Forest Lake Drive Longledge Drive North Lake Grove Drive Manorfield West Baronridge Drive Meadowbank Drive West Cragmore Drive Meadowbank Drive East Longledge Drive Old Kirby Road West Kirby Road Parkmead Drive South Willow Hill Drive Pinewood Lane North Kirbywoods Drive Pinewood Lane South Kirbywoods Drive Plantation West Lakeshore Drive Plumtree West Woodbank Court Rolling Green East Forest Lake Drive Rosebud Drive South Bluebonnet Drive Rosebud Drive North Old Kirby Road Shadowbend East Tangle Briar Drive Shadowbend West Lake Country Drive Shady Springs Drive East Forest Lake Drive Shady Springs Drive West Forest Lake Drive Shore Line Drive Southwest Coral Way Drive Shorewood Drive West Lake Country Drive Shorewood Drive East/West Tangle Briar Drive Shorewood Drive East Timber Cove Drive Shorewood Drive West Timber Cove Drive Tangle Briar Drive North/South Shorewood Drive Timber Cove Drive North Old Kirby Road Villacourt South Honey Oaks Willow Hill Drive East Kirby Road Willow Hill Drive West Manorfield Drive Willow Hill Drive East Forest Lake Drive Willow Hill Drive West Forest Lake Drive Willowvale South Honey Oaks Woodbank Drive South Honey Oaks Woodpark Drive North Long Grove Drive Pinewood Lane North Kirbywoods Drive Pinewood Lane South Kirbywoods Drive Live Oak Lane North Kirbywoods Drive Live Oak Lane South Kirbywoods Drive  
(Ord. No. 94-346, Exhibit B, 2-16-94; Ord. No. 05-518, § 1, 12-7-05) 
Sec. 74-98. - Yield signs. 
    The provisions of section 74-33 shall be applicable to the following streets: 
Yield On  While 
Proceeding     At Appleford South Honey Oaks Baronridge Drive South Laurel Grove Chadbury North Parkmead Cragmore Drive North Lake Grove Drive Crownwood Drive West Woodbank Drive Harborcrest East Shorewood Drive Harborcrest West Timber Cove Drive Lakeshore Circle East Lakeshore Drive Lost Ridge Circle East Tangle Briar Drive Lost Ridge Circle West Tangle Briar Drive Parkstead South Honey Oaks Pine Shadows East Shorewood Drive Pine Shadows West Timber Cove Drive Pinewood Lane East Live Oak Lane Primrose Lane South Spring Cress Lane Spring Cress Lane South Larkspur Lane Timber Cove Drive South Shorewood Drive Whispering Oaks East Shorewood Drive Whispering Oaks West Timber Cove Drive Woodbank Court West Woodbank Drive Wyndwood Drive East Shorewood Drive Wyndwood Drive West Timber Cove Drive 
(northern end)  
(Ord. No. 94-346, Exhibit C, 2-16-94) 
Sec. 74-100. - Pedestrian crosswalks. 
    The provisions of section 74-35 shall be applicable to the following streets: Crosswalk markings located at Shady Springs Drive and Forest Lake Drive; Elderwood and Forest Lake Drive; and Laurel Grove and Forest Lake Drive. 
(Ord. No. 94-346, Exhibit E, 2-16-94; Ord. No. 06-526, § 1, 9-6-06) 
Sec. 74-101. - Bike lanes. 
    This section allows for bike lanes on the following streets: 
East and west side of Forest Lake Drive from Willow Hill to Shady Springs 
North and south sides of Timber Cove Drive north of Shorewood Drive. 
(Ord. No. 06-526, § 1, 9-6-06) 
Secs. 74-102-74-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LARGE TRUCKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-549, §§ 1, 2, adopted March 5, 2008, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Art. V, §§ 74-121 and 74-122, was at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 74-121. - Truck traffic regulated. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a truck on any portion of a street where operation of a truck is prohibited under this section after notice has been given by the placement of appropriate traffic control devices. 
(b)	For the purposes of this section "truck" means a motor vehicle which: 
(1)	Has a gross weight exceeding 26,000 pounds; and 
(2)	Is designed and maintained primarily for the transportation of material or property. 
(c)	It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the truck on the prohibited street: 
(1)	Is going directly to or from a premises for the purpose of delivering or picking up merchandise or material and the truck could not access the premises without making use of the prohibited street; 
(2)	Is owned by a governmental entity or is performing work under a contract with a governmental entity which required it to be on the prohibited street; 
(3)	Is owned by a public utility company or is performing work under a contract with a public utility company which requires it to be on the prohibited street; 
(4)	Is a school bus on a designated route; 
(5)	Is a truck on a designated detour; 
(6)	Is an emergency vehicle; or 
(7)	Is a vehicle used for the transportation of agricultural products ("agricultural vehicle") and is specifically authorized by subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a truck as defined in subsection (b) above, through the following streets: 
(1)	Kirby Boulevard. 
(2)	Old Kirby Road. 
(e)	The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to erect and maintain the appropriate signage along the streets referenced in subsection (d) above giving notice of the prohibition set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 08-549, § 1, 3-5-08; Ord. No. 10-591, § 1, 4-7-2010) 
Sec. 74-122. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall fail to observe and comply with a duly posted traffic control device or sign erected or established pursuant to this article, or who shall in any manner violate any provision of this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount of not less than $1.00 nor more than $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 08-549, § 2, 3-5-08) 
Chapters 75-77 - RESERVED 
Chapter 78 - WATERWAYS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; environment, ch. 30; floods, ch. 34; natural resources, ch. 42; planning and zoning, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; zoning, app. A. 

Sec. 78-1. - Operation of boats-State law prohibitions referenced. 
    Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.092, the city council hereby determines the necessity for and does designate that it shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to operate or cause to be operated any boat upon the waters of Taylor Lake within the corporate limits of the city in a manner prohibited under any of the following sections of V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code §§ 31.001-31.005, 31.021-31.043, 31.061-31.073, 31.092-31.105, 31.121-31.124. A copy of the Water Safety Act is incorporated in this section by reference just as though fully set out in this section, of those sections of the act listed in this section. 
(Ord. No. 108, § 1, 5-17-78) 
Sec. 78-2. - Same-Speed limits. 
(a)	No person shall operate a boat on Taylor Lake within the corporate limits of the city at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the circumstances and having regard for the actual and potential hazards then existing. The limits specified in this section, or established as authorized in this section shall be lawful, but any speed in excess of the limits specified in this section or established as authorized in this section shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful except in safety areas. 
(b)	Taylor Bayou, the manmade canals, and an area surrounding Taylor Lake extending 100 feet from the shoreline into the lake are hereby designated as safety areas. The maximum permissible speed limit for all boats in safety areas is five miles per hour. 
(c)	Anything to the contrary in this section notwithstanding, in every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, boat, vehicle, other conveyance or object in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(Ord. No. 108, § 2, 5-17-78) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the zoning ordinance of the city, Ord. No. 07-535, as adopted by the city council on July 10, 2010. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Section 2 of Ord. No. 07-535, repealed the former zoning ordinance which derived from an ordinance adopted on Nov. 3, 1993; Ord. No. 98-407, § 1, adopted Nov. 4, 1998; Ord. No. 98-409, § 1, adopted Dec. 10, 1998; Ord. No. 01-445, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sep. 5, 2001; Ord. No. 03-475, § 1, adopted May 7, 2003; Ord. No. 04-496, § 1, adopted Feb. 18, 2004; Ord. No. 04-502, § 1, adopted July 7, 2004; Ord. No. 06-523, adopted May 17, 2006. 
Cross reference- Ordinances establishing zoning regulations or changing the zoning classification of specific pieces of real property saved from repeal, § 1-10(17); ordinances granting variances to the zoning ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-10(18); buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; environment, ch. 30; floods, ch. 34; natural resources, ch. 42; planning and zoning, ch. 54; planning and zoning commission, § 54-31 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; waterways, ch. 78. 

ARTICLE I. - ENACTMENT AND DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 1. - Short title. 
    This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The City of Taylor Lake Village Zoning Ordinance." 
Sec. 2. - Purpose. 
    The zoning regulations and districts herein established have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the City of Taylor Lake Village, Texas, and its inhabitants. Such regulations and districts have been designated to lessen congestion on the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to facilitate adequate provisions of transportation, particularly in times of natural disaster when timely evacuation is critical for the protection of life; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate adequate provisions of water, sewage, schools, parks, and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration of the character of the districts and their suitability for particular uses, and with a view of conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City of Taylor Lake Village. 
Sec. 3. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this ordinance, certain words and terms are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; the singular number shall include the plural number and the plural number shall include the singular number. The word "building" shall include the meaning of the word "structure"; the word "lot" shall include the meaning of the word "plot"; and the term "used for" shall include the meaning of the terms "designed for" or "intended for." The word "shall" is mandatory, not directive. Such words and terms are as follows: 
    Accessory building or use. A subordinate building or use customarily incident to and located on the same lot occupied by the main building or use. 
    Attached garage. A garage which is connected to the residence such that one can walk from the living area of the residence to the garage area without passing through an unenclosed space. 
    Automobile shelter. A garage or carport. 
    Boathouse. An accessory building, constructed over tidal water, for the storage, support, enclosure, shelter or protection of boats owned by the occupant of the premises, and not kept for remuneration, hire or sale, and not suitable for human habitation. 
    Building. Any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
    Building area. The maximum portion of a lot over which a main building and permitted accessory buildings may be constructed. 
    Building, height of. The vertical distance from the top of the concrete slab foundation on which the building is constructed, to the highest point of the building, excluding chimneys or roof vents. If a concrete slab foundation is not used, the lowest level of air conditioned space within the structure will be used as the baseline point of measurement. 
    Building line. A line that runs parallel to the street line, and is set at the closest point to the street line that a building may be placed. In the case of non-orthogonal lots, the building line may be perpendicular to either of the side lot lines or parallel to the rear lot line. 
    Carport. A roofed structure or portion of a building which is open on one or more sides and suitable for parking one or more vehicles. 
    Corner lot. A lot situated at the intersection or the abutment of two (2) or more streets. 
    Curb line. The location of the outermost edge of the paved portion of a street. 
    Dwelling. Any building or portion thereof which is designed for or used for residential purposes. 
    Dwelling, single-family. A detached main building designed for and occupied exclusively by only one family, but shall not include any form of temporary home, or temporary or permanent mobile home, trailer or other vehicle, whether on wheels or not. 
    Family. One or more persons related by blood, adoption or marriage, living together as a single housekeeping unit, exclusive of household servants. A number of persons not exceeding two, living together as a single housekeeping unit though not related by blood, adoption or marriage, shall be deemed to constitute a family. 
    Frontage, block. All the property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead ended, then all of the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead-end of the street. 
    Garage. An automobile shelter incidental to a residential use with an operable door, plus three sides for parking one or more motor vehicles. 
    Glare. Emitted light which exceeds 60 foot-candles. 
    Lot. A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by use permitted in this ordinance, including one main building together with its accessory buildings, the open spaces and parking spaces required by this ordinance, and having its principle frontage upon a public street or upon an officially approved private street. 
    Lot axis. A line joining the midpoints of the front and rear property lines. 
    Lot, depth of. The horizontal length of a straight line connecting the midpoints of the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot line. The lines which constitute the property boundaries of an individual lot. 
    Lot line, front. The lot line adjacent to the street for lots that abut only one street. For lots that abut more than one street, the lot line adjacent to the street used in the address of the lot shall be designated as the front lot line. 
    Lot line, rear. The lot line that is on the opposite side of the lot from the front lot line. 
    Lot line, side. The lot lines which run between the front lot line and the rear lot line. 
    Lot, waterfront. A lot which is contiguous to tidal waters. 
    Lot width. If the side property lines are parallel, the shortest distance between the side lot lines. If the side property lines are not parallel, the lesser distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot axis at the point of intersection with the building line and at the point of intersection with the rear setback line. 
    Nonconforming use, building, lot or yard. A use, building, lot or yard existing legally at the time of adoption of these regulations [November 3, 1993], or at the time of any amendment hereto, which, by reason of design or use, does not conform with the regulations, original or amendatory, of the district in which it is situated. 
    Parking space, off-street. An area of not less than 180 square feet measuring approximately nine feet by 20 feet not on a public street or way, surfaced with an all-weather surface. A public street shall not be classified as off-street parking in computing the parking requirements for any use, nor shall head-in parking adjacent to a public street if dependent upon such street for maneuvering space. 
    Permeable surface. A paved surface that has been demonstrated through hydraulic calculations, performed by a registered engineer, to result in a runoff ratio no greater than the natural surface of the property for each of the 30-minute to 24-hour, two-year rainfall events defined by the Rainfall Frequency Atlas of the United States (National Weather Service Publication TP40). 
    Rear setback line. A line that runs parallel to the rear property line, at a distance from the rear property line equal to the depth of the required rear yard. 
    Removable paving. Individual man-made bricks or natural rock stones that are used to construct a flat hard surface such as a swimming pool deck, sidewalk,, or driveway, but which can be removed, if required, by an individual using only hand tools. Removal paving does not include paving that is supported by a concrete base, or that utilizes a sand/cement mixture as a base material. 
    Retaining wall. A wall that is open on one side, with soil or water on the other. 
    Screening device. A barrier of stone, brick, brick columns with wood shadowbox, or block, or other permanent material of equal character, density and design, at least eight feet in height above the finished grade, but not including any wood other than cedar or redwood. 
    Servants' quarters. An accessory building or portion of a main building located on the same lot as the main building and used as living quarters for servants employed on the premises and not rented or otherwise used as a separate domicile. 
    Shipping container/storage container. A portable compartment for the carriage of cargo in bulk or package form that has one or more of the following characteristics: (a) is of a permanent character and, accordingly, strong enough for repeated use, (b) is specially designed to facilitate transport by one or more modes of transport, without intermediate reloading, (c) is fitted with devices permitting its ready handling, particularly its transfer from one mode of transport to another, (d) is so designed to be filled and emptied, or (e) any enclosure, device, box, container, or anything similar in nature or use to any or all of the above. The term "shipping container" or "storage container" shall include all types of containers involved in maritime, railroad, and/or trucking industries, including, but not limited to those identified as flat racks, ventilated, half-height, tank, reefers, open-top, canvas-top, high cube, bulk, and similarly named containers. 
    Side street. A street that abuts a side lot line. 
    Sign. Any structure, part thereof, or device or inscription which is located upon, attached to, or painted or represented on any land, or on the outside of any building or structure, or on an awning, canopy, marquee or similar appendage, or permanently affixed to the glass on the outside of a window or door, as to be seen from the outside of the building, or structure, and which displays or includes any numeral, letter, work, model, banner, emblem, insignia, symbol, device, monogram, heraldry, trademark, light or other representation used as, or in the nature of an announcement, advertisement, attention arrester, direction, warning, or designation of any person, firm, group, organization, corporation, association, place, commodity, product, service, business, profession, enterprise, industry, activity, or any combination thereof. Where the word "sign" is used herein without further modification, the same shall be understood to embrace all regulated signs and replicas. 
    Story. That portion of a building, included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the floor next above or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above. 
    Story, half. A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall places of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than four feet above the floor of such story. 
    Street, arterial. A public thoroughfare which affords the principle means of access to abutting property, the right-of-way of which is at least 100 feet or greater in width. 
    Street. A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principle means of access to abutting property, the right-of-way of which is 60 feet or wider in width. 
    Street line. The right-of-way line of a street. 
    Structure. Anything constructed or erected which requires permanent location on the ground or is attached to something having a permanent location on the ground including, but not limited to, signs, billboards, poster panels, flatwork, decks, driveways, and concrete. 
    Structural alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
    Tidal waters. Shall include all waters bordering on or within the city boundaries subject to fluctuations in depth from storm, peak-lunar or normal tidal action and shall include, but not be limited to, all brackish and salt waters of streams, ponds, creeks, estuaries, bays, sounds, inlets and the ocean, and may include certain fresh waters. 
    Transient rental. The rental or lease of any structure or property, or any part of any structure or property, for occupancy by a person or persons for a period of less than 30 days. 
    Waterfront accessory structures. Accessory structures that are located over tidal water, including, but not limited to, boathouses, piers, pilings, docks, floating docks, lifts, ramps, [and] storage racks. 
    Waterfront line. The elevation and location of the waterline of tidal waters at mean high tide in normal tidal action. 
    Yard. An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise permitted herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard, or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building or any accessory building shall be used. Permitted exceptions for front, rear, and side yard include sidewalks and driveways. 
    Yard, front. A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or any projection thereof other than the projections of the usual uncovered steps. On all lots the rear yard shall be in the rear of the front yard. 
    Yard, rear. A yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the main building or any projection thereof other than the usual uncovered steps. 
    Yard, side. A yard between the main building and the adjacent side line of the lot and extending from the required front yard to the required rear yard, and being the minimum horizontal distance between an adjacent side lot line and the side of the main building or any projections thereof. 
    Yard, waterfront. A yard extending across that portion of a lot that abuts the waterfront line, between the lot lines that are perpendicular to such waterfront line, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the waterfront line and the main building or any projection thereof other than the usual uncovered steps. 
(Ord. No. 07-543, §§ 1.A, 1.B, 10-22-07; Ord. No. 08-566, § 1.A, 12-17-08; Ord. No. 09-573, § 1.A, 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10-600, § 1, 8-4-2010) 
Sec. 4. - Establishment of districts and boundaries. 
    For the purposes of this ordinance, the City of Taylor Lake Village is hereby divided into four districts, as follows: 
District R-1 single-family residential district; 
District R-2 single-family residential district, waterfront; 
District R-3 detached single-family high density residential district, waterfront; and 
District C-1 general business district. 
    The location and the boundaries of the districts described above are shown on the map that is attached hereto and made a part of this ordinance, which map is designated as the "zoning district map." Said map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon and all amendments thereto are made a part of this ordinance as if fully set forth and described herein. Said map shall be identified and verified on its face in the following manner: It shall bear the title "Zoning District Map - Taylor Lake Village, Texas"; it shall bear even date with the date of passage with this ordinance and shall reflect the name of the mayor of the city and shall be attested by the signature of the city secretary. The original of such map shall be kept and maintained in the office of the city secretary of the municipal offices of the City of Taylor Lake Village. 
(Ord. No. 15-654, § 2, 10-7-15) 
Sec. 5. - Rules for the interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)	Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(2)	Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(3)	Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following such city limits. 
(4)	Boundaries indicated as approximately following the shorelines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such shorelines. 
(5)	Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (1) through (4) of this section shall be thus construed. Distances not specifically shown on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(6)	Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (1) through (4) of this section, the board of adjustment shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(7)	Whenever any street or alley is vacated by official action of the city council, the district adjoining each side of said street or alley shall be automatically extended to the property thus abated and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended district or districts. 
Sec. 6. - Compliance with the regulations. 
    Except as hereinafter specifically provided: 
(1)	No land shall be used except for a purpose permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(2)	No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, nor shall any building be used, except for a use permitted in the district in which such building is located. 
(3)	No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the district in which such building is located. 
(4)	No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered except in conformity with the area regulations of the district in which such building is located. 
(5)	No building shall be erected or structurally altered to the extent specifically provided for herein except in conformity with the off-street parking and loading regulations of the district in which such building is located. 
(6)	The minimum yards, parking spaces and open spaces, including lot area per family, required by this ordinance for each and every building existing at the time of passage of this ordinance [November 3, 1993] or for any building hereafter erected, shall not be encroached upon or considered as part of the yard or parking space or open space required for any other building, nor shall any lot area be reduced below the requirements of this ordinance for the district in which such lot is located. 
(7)	Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot as herein defined and, except as hereinafter provided, there shall not be more than one main building on one lot. 
Secs. 7-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 27. - District R-1 single-family residential district. 
(a)	Use regulations. The building or premises in the R-1 district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)	Single-family dwellings. 
(2)	Churches or other places of worship. 
(3)	Parks, playgrounds, community buildings and other public recreational facilities owned or operated by the City of Taylor Lake Village or by another public body. 
(4)	Public buildings, including municipal buildings, libraries, museums, police and fire stations. 
(5)	Public schools. 
(6)	Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(7)	Real estate offices during the development of residential subdivisions, but not to exceed two years. 
(8)	Civic association, nonprofit recreational uses incidental to and an amenity of a single-family residential development. 
(9)	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith and not involving the conduct of a retail business; provided, however, that any such accessory building shall be of the same design and construction as the applicable primary structure. 
a.	A billboard, signboard or advertising sign shall not be permitted as an accessory use, except as follows: 
1.	An unilluminated for sale or for rent sign not more than six square feet in area and advertising the property on which the same is erected; provided, however, [that] the same shall be at least ten feet from the nearest street line. 
2.	An unilluminated open sign not more than six square feet in area and relating to the property on which the same is erected, provided such sign is at least ten feet from the nearest street line and the building to which such sign pertains is actually open for inspection to the public during the time the open sign is displayed. 
3.	An unilluminated sign advertising contractors or architects performing work on the property on which the sign is erected; provided, however, [that] such sign shall not be more than six square feet in area, shall be at least ten feet from the nearest street line, and shall be removed immediately upon completion of the building. 
4.	Unilluminated signs showing names, activities and services provided at religious institutions; provided, however, [that] such signs shall not exceed six square feet in area unless located on the property to which they relate, and shall not be located within public rights-of-way. Signs denoting or advertising religious institutions located on the property to which they relate shall comply with subsection 30(g) herein. 
b.	To qualify as accessory structures or uses, unlighted outdoor tennis courts shall be set back at least 25 feet from the nearest lot line; lighted outdoor tennis courts shall be set back at least 50 feet from the nearest lot line; provided, however, no tennis court shall be permitted in any front yard. 
c.	To qualify as permitted accessory structures or uses, swimming pools, including any attached decks or waterfalls, shall not be placed in any front yard and shall be set back at least ten feet from the nearest lot line. Pool equipment shall not be placed closer than five feet from a side lot line, or ten feet from a rear lot line. 
(10)	A transient rental is prohibited. 
(11)	Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted, if found to be in conformance with this section and the comprehensive plan, along Kirby Road, subject to review by the zoning commission and city council, and conformance with district R-1 or R-2 regulations, according to the use district applied to the property: 
a.	Administrative and professional offices, 
b.	Small scale personal or home services, 
c.	Or other such uses as approved by city council. 
Related retail sales may be included in the use provided they do not take up more than ten percent of the floor area devoted to the principle use. 
All uses shall be small in scale and low in intensity of visitation by non-employees. 
(b)	Building and structure height regulations. No building in the R-1 district shall contain more than two stories. The maximum building height shall be 42 feet. The highest point of the building, excluding chimneys and roof vents, shall not exceed 60 feet above mean sea level. Chimneys and roof vents shall not extend more than four feet above the highest point of the roof. No accessory building or structure shall exceed the height of the main building on the lot upon which such accessory building or structure is located. 
(c)	Lot dimension regulations for the R-1 district. 
(1)	Required dimensions for the front, rear, and side yards. 
a.	The minimum required front, side, and rear yards shall be provided. 
b.	Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet. 
c.	Side yard. There shall be two side yards on each lot, neither of which said side yard shall be less than ten feet in width; provided, however, a side yard adjacent to a side street shall have a width of not less than 25 feet. Provided, further, where a garage opening faces a side street, the building line for such garage shall be a minimum of 30 feet from the side lot line adjacent to the side street. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any main building or accessory structure lawfully existing on the effective date of this ordinance may be enlarged within a required side yard so long as such enlargement is not constructed any closer to the side lot line than the existing main building or accessory structure being enlarged. 
1.	Mechanical and pool equipment may be placed in a side yard, provided the equipment is not closer than five feet from the side lot line. 
2.	Building eaves may overhang the required side yard, provided the overhang is not more than three feet and the eaves are not closer than seven feet from the side lot line. 
3.	Building eaves may overhang the required front and/or rear yard, provided the overhang is not more than three feet. 
d.	Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 15 feet, subject to the following exceptions: 
1.	When adjacent lots are configured such that the rear yard of a lot abuts the side yard of an adjacent lot, then the required rear yard depth shall be reduced to equal the width of a required side yard. 
2.	Any main building or accessory structure lawfully existing on the effective date of this ordinance may be enlarged within a required rear yard so long as such enlargement is not constructed any closer to the rear lot line than the existing main building or accessory structure being enlarged. 
3.	Where lots have double frontage running through from one street to another, the required rear yard adjacent to the street shall have a depth of not less than 25 feet. 
e.	Yard abutting arterial street. Any yard abutting an arterial street shall have a depth, if a front or rear yard, or width, if a side yard, of at least 25 feet. 
f.	Exceptions. 
1.	A main building or an accessory structure that is rebuilt on a nonconforming lot must comply with at least one of the following criteria: 
i.	The rebuilt structure may be placed as close to the side lot line as the original structure, provided neither the height or square footage of the rebuilt structure exceed 110 percent of the height or square footage of the original structure; or 
ii.	The rebuilt structure shall be set back from the side lot lines a distance that is at least ten percent of the width of the lot as measured at the 25-foot building line. 
2.	A main building or an accessory structure that is rebuilt on a nonconforming corner lot of less than the required lot width may be placed as close to the abutting streets as allowed by the original building line. 
(2)	Required size and dimensions for lots. 
a.	Lot area. No lot shall be created which contains less than 12,000 square feet; provided, however, no corner lot shall be created which contains less than 14,000 square feet. No building shall be constructed or erected on any lot having less square footage than provided herein. 
b.	Lot width. No lot shall be created having a width of less than 90 feet at the front street building line nor shall its average width be less than 90 feet; provided, however, no corner lot shall be created having a width of less than 100 feet at the front street building line nor shall the average width of such corner lot be less than 100 feet. 
c.	Lot depth. No lot shall be created having a lot depth of less than 100 feet. 
d.	Exceptions. Where a lot having less area, width or depth than herein required existed in separate ownership prior to the effective date hereof or prior to the effective date of any applicable amendment hereto, the above regulations relating to the size of lot shall not prohibit the construction or erection of a single-family dwelling thereon. Provided further, a lot created through the subdivision of fee strips, as provided in section 3.25 of Ordinance No. 84-226, as amended, may have less area, width, or depth than herein required when any such lot abuts an existing lot which, either standing alone or when combined with such new lot, would meet the area, width or depth required herein. 
(3)	Maximum area (footprint) restrictions for buildings and other non-permeable surfaces. Not more than 50 percent of the lot area shall be covered by buildings, driveways, sidewalks, patios, pool decks, or other surfaces that are not permeable. For the purposes of this subsection, the water surface area of outdoor swimming pools shall be considered a permeable surface. 
(4)	Fencing. 
a.	Hurricane, chain-link and other similar wire-type fencing is prohibited; 
b.	Fence height shall not exceed eight feet; and 
c.	On corner lots, fencing of the rear yard adjacent to a side street may be placed no closer to the lot line than the required 25-foot side yard setback, but shall not extend towards the front of the lot past the rearmost corner of the primary structure closest to the side street. 
(Ord. No. 08-566, § 1.B, 12-17-08; Ord. No. 09-573, § 1.B, 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10-600, § 2, 8-4-10; Ord. No. 13-636, § 2, 11-6-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-636, § 2, adopted Nov. 6, 2013, set out provisions adding subsection 27(a)(10). To maintain the existing subsection 27(a)(10) as previously added by Ord. 10-600, adopted Aug. 4, 2010, and at the editor's discretion, said provisions have been included herein as subsection 27(a)(11). 
Sec. 28. - District R-2 single-family residential district, waterfront. 
(a)	Use regulations. The building or premises in the R-2 district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)	Single-family dwelling; 
(2)	Churches or other places of worship; 
(3)	Parks, playgrounds, community buildings, and other public recreational facilities owned or operated by the City of Taylor Lake Village or by another public body; 
(4)	Public buildings, including municipal buildings, libraries, museums, police and fire stations; 
(5)	Public schools; 
(6)	Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work; 
(7)	Real estate offices during the development of residential subdivisions, but not to exceed two years; 
(8)	Civic association, nonprofit recreational uses incidental to and an amenity of a single-family residential development; 
(9)	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith and not involving the conduct of a retail business; provided, however, that any accessory building shall be of the same design and construction as the applicable primary structure: 
a.	A billboard, signboard or advertising sign shall not be permitted as an accessory use, except as follows: 
1.	An unilluminated for sale or for rent sign not more than six square feet in area and advertising the property on which the same is erected; provided, however, [that] the same shall be at least ten feet from the nearest street line. 
2.	An unilluminated open sign not more than six square feet in area and relating to the property on which the same is erected, provided such sign is at least ten feet from the nearest street line and the building to which such sign pertains is actually open for inspection to the public during the time the open sign is displayed. 
3.	An unilluminated sign advertising contractors or architects performing work on the property on which the sign is erected; provided, however, [that] such sign shall not be more than six square feet in area, shall be at least ten feet from the nearest street line, and shall be removed immediately upon completion of the building. 
4.	Unilluminated signs showing names, activities and services provided at religious institutions; provided, however, [that] such signs shall not exceed six square feet in area unless located on the property to which they relate, and shall not be located within public rights-of-way. Signs denoting or advertising religious institutions located on the property to which they relate shall comply with subsection 30(g) herein. 
b.	To qualify as accessory structures or uses, unlighted outdoor tennis courts shall be set back at least 25 feet from the nearest lot line; lighted outdoor tennis courts shall be set back at least 50 feet from the nearest lot line; provided, however, no tennis court shall be permitted in any front yard. 
c.	To qualify as permitted accessory structures or uses, swimming pools, including any attached decks or waterfalls, shall not be placed in any front yard and shall be set back at least ten feet from the nearest lot line. Pool equipment shall not be placed closer than five feet from a side lot line or ten feet from a rear lot line. 
(10)	A transient rental is prohibited. 
(b)	Building and structure height regulations. No building constructed or designed for single-family residential use in the R-2 district shall contain more than two and one-half stories; provided, however, a bottom story that contains no habitable floor area, as defined in the city's flood damage prevention ordinance, shall not be considered as a story for the purposes of this subsection. The maximum building height shall be 42 feet. The highest point of the building, excluding chimneys and roof vents, shall not exceed 60 feet above mean sea level. Chimneys and roof vents shall not extend more than four feet above the highest point of the roof. No accessory building or structure shall exceed the height of the main building on the lot upon which such accessory building or structure is located. 
(c)	Lot dimension regulations in the R-2 district. 
(1)	Required dimensions for the front, rear, and side yards. 
a.	The minimum required front, side, and rear yards shall be provided. 
b.	Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet. 
c.	Side yard. There shall be two side yards on each lot, neither of which said side yard shall be less than ten feet in width; provided, however, a side yard adjacent to a side street shall have a width of not less than 25 feet, and a side yard adjacent to the waterfront shall have a width of not less than 50 feet. Provided further, where a garage opening faces a side street, the building line for such garage shall be a minimum of 30 feet from the side lot line adjacent to the side street. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any main building or accessory structure lawfully existing on the effective date of this ordinance may be enlarged within a required side yard so long as such enlargement is not constructed any closer to the side lot line than the existing main building or accessory structure being enlarged. 
1.	Mechanical and pool equipment may be placed in a side yard, provided the equipment is not closer than five feet from the side lot line. 
2.	Building eaves may overhang the required side yard, provided the overhang is not more than three feet and the eaves are not closer than seven feet from the side lot line. 
3.	Building eaves may overhand the required front and/or rear yard, provided the overhand is not more than three feet. 
d.	Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 15 feet, subject to the following exceptions: 
1.	When adjacent lots are configured such that the rear yard of a lot abuts the side yard of an adjacent lot, then the required rear yard depth shall be reduced to equal the width of a required side yard. 
2.	Any main building or accessory structure lawfully existing on the effective date of this ordinance may be enlarged within a required rear yard so long as such enlargement is not constructed any closer to the rear lot line than the existing main building or accessory structure being enlarged. 
3.	Where lots have double frontage running through from one street to another, the required rear yard adjacent to the street shall have a depth of not less than 25 feet 
e.	Yard abutting arterial street. Any yard abutting an arterial street shall have a depth, if a front or rear yard, or width, if a side yard, of not less than 25 feet. 
f.	Waterfront yard. Any waterfront yard shall have a depth of not less than 50 feet. 
g.	Exceptions. 
1.	A main building or an accessory structure that is rebuilt on a nonconforming lot shall comply with at least one of the following criteria: 
i.	The rebuilt structure may be placed as close to the lot line as the original structure, provided neither the height or square footage of the rebuilt structure exceeds 110 percent of the height or square footage of the original structure; or 
ii.	The rebuilt structure shall be set back from the side lot lines a distance that is at least ten percent of the width of the lot as measured at the 25-foot building line. 
2.	A main building or an accessory structure that is rebuilt on a nonconforming corner lot of less than the required lot width may be placed as close to the abutting streets as allowed by the original building line. 
(2)	Required size and dimensions for lots. 
a.	Lot area. No lot shall be created which contains less than 15,000 square feet. No building shall be constructed or erected on any lot having less square footage than provided herein. 
b.	Lot width. No lot shall be created having a width of less than 90 feet at the front street building line nor shall its average width be less than 90 feet; provided, however, no corner lot shall be created having a width of less than 100 feet at the front street building line nor shall the average width of such corner lot be less than 100 feet. 
c.	Lot depth. No lot shall be created having a lot depth of less than 150 feet. 
d.	Exceptions. Where a lot having less area, width or depth than herein required existed in separate ownership prior to the effective date hereof or prior to the effective date of any applicable amendment hereto, the above regulations relating to the size of lot shall not prohibit the construction or erection of a single-family dwelling thereon. 
(3)	Required area (footprint) restrictions for buildings and other non-permeable surfaces. Not more than 50 percent of the lot area shall be covered by buildings, driveways, sidewalks, patios, pool decks, or other surfaces that are not permeable. For the purposes of this subsection, the water surface area of outdoor swimming pools shall be considered a permeable surface. 
(4)	Fencing. 
a.	Other than along subdivision boundaries, solid fences, solid walls, and hedges are not permitted within 50 feet of a waterfront. 
b.	Hurricane, chain link, and other similar wire type fencing is prohibited. 
c.	Fence height shall not exceed eight feet. 
d.	On corner lots, fencing of the rear yard adjacent to a side street may be placed not closer to the lot line than the required 25-foot side yard setback, but shall not extend towards the front of the lot past the rearmost corner of the primary structure closest to the side street. 
e.	Street side or front yard fencing, of a type and design as defined in this paragraph, is permitted where the street frontage is along Lakeshore Drive, Lakeshore Circle, Kirby Boulevard, or individual platted lots of more than three acres in size. Provided, however, no such fence shall be permitted unless constructed of black wrought iron, ornamental metal, aluminum, or iron steel, with staves or pickets of not more than one inch square, and spaced not less than 31/2 inches apart, measured between the closest points of two successive staves or pickets, and with optional columns of natural earth tone colored brick, patterned concrete, natural stone or stucco not wider than two feet square and spaced not less than nine feet apart, measured between the closest points of two successive columns. Should the fence have optional columns, then the fence may have a solid lower component between the columns as long as the solid component does not exceed 33 percent of the total actual height of the fence. The solid component must be constructed from the allowable column materials. The height of street-side or front yard fences shall not exceed seven feet, as measured from the highest point of the fence or accessories to the ground. 
(5)	Waterfront accessory structures. 
a.	Waterfront accessory structures shall be allowed within the R-2 district, subject to the provisions of this section, and shall not be subject to waterfront setback requirements. 
b.	Waterfront accessory structures must be constructed in accordance with the approved Texas General Land Office and Army Corps of Engineer permits when constructed within areas where such permits are required. 
c.	Waterfront accessory structures located within areas not subject to the jurisdiction of the Texas General Land Office shall comply with the dimensional and location limitations specified for waterfront structures by the Texas General Land Office or the School Land Board Construction Guidelines, 31 T.A.C. § 155, which are an attachment to the "Application for State Land Use Lease - CE/SP" and shall not be constructed without having first received a permit therefor from the city building official. 
d.	Additional requirements. 
1.	The end and sides of any waterfront accessory structure may be partially enclosed by siding, dock boxes, or storage lockers, provided the amount of open area on any side or end being enclosed is not reduced by more than 25 percent as measured from the top of the deck/walkway to the top of the pilings. 
2.	No boathouse is required to have a roof; however, corrugated fiberglass, corrugated plastic, and corrugated galvanized steel roofs are not allowed on any Boathouse with a pitched roof. 
3.	No boathouse shall be rented or leased except in concert with the rental or lease of property served by such boathouse. 
4.	No Boathouse shall be used for the storage of any commercial vessel. 
5.	Piers, boathouses or other accessory structures extending into the waters of Taylor Lake shall be constructed or placed not more than 60 feet from the bulkhead or shoreline. Additionally, any such structure shall comply with applicable Texas General Land Office and United States permitting requirements. (V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code ch. 33; 33 USC §§ 1344, 1413; 33 CFR 320-332). 
(6)	Requirements for waterfront yards. 
a.	Subject to the provisions hereof, swimming pools and retaining walls are allowed within a required waterfront yard. 
b.	Swimming pools, including any attached decks or waterfalls, shall be set back at least ten feet from the waterfront line. 
c.	The grade level of the required waterfront yard may be increased using soil and/or retaining walls, but the resulting grade angle shall not exceed one foot of rise for every three feet of run, as measured from the nearest point of the waterfront line plus four feet of elevation. 
(ord. No. 07-543, §§ 1.C-1.E, 10-22-07; Ord. No. 08-566, §§ 1.C, 1.D, 12-17-08; Ord. No. 09-573, § 1.C, 7-1-09; Ord. No. 10-600, § 3, 8-4-2010; Ord. No. 15-652, § 1, 7-1-15) 
Sec. 29. - District C-1 general business district. 
(a)	Use regulations. The building or premises in the C-1 district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)	All uses permitted in districts R-1 and R-2. 
(2)	Bakeries, retail only. 
(3)	Banks. 
(4)	Florist shops. 
(5)	Gasoline service stations, provided that the activities permitted do not include major automobile repairs, the storage or dismantling of old or wrecked motor vehicles, the sale of used automobile parts, the sale of new or used vehicles or the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(6)	Offices and office buildings. 
(7)	Personal service uses such as barber shops, beauty parlors, dry cleaning and pressing, provided the actual process of dry cleaning is not conducted on the premises, tailoring, repair of household appliances and bicycles, shoe repairing, and other personal service uses of a similar character. 
(8)	Retail stores. 
(9)	Sales of new and used boats, provided that outdoor display of boats may be conducted only if screening devices are erected so as to eliminate any view of any such display from any adjacent residential district. 
(10)	Boat and boat motor repair services, provided that same is conducted indoors or behind screening devices so as to prohibit view of same from any adjacent property or public street. 
(11)	Light industrial uses related solely to the design, development, assembly or service of equipment or goods; provided, however, that no light industrial uses shall create any more offensive noise, vibration, dust, soot, smoke, odor, glare, or other objectionable influences than the minimum amount normally resulting from the permitted uses set forth in subsections (1) through (9) above; provided, further, no light industrial use shall be permitted without the issuance of a specific use permit as provided in section 14 of this ordinance. 
(12)	Restaurants, provided same are conducted indoors with no provision for window service or takeout business, and also, provided that same do not create any more offensive noise, vibration, dust, soot, smoke, odor, glare or other objectionable influences than the minimum amount normally resulting from the permitted uses set forth in subsections (1) through (9) above. 
(13)	Other uses as determined by the zoning official as equivalent to the uses otherwise permitted in subsections (1) through (9) above and which are not likely to create any more offensive noise, vibration, dust, soot, smoke, odor, glare or other objectionable influences than the minimum amount normally resulting from such uses permitted under subsections (1) through (9) above. For the purposes hereof, sexually-oriented businesses, such as massage parlors or studios, modeling studios/agencies/parlors, escort services, adult bookstores, adult news stores, adult video stores, video arcades, game rooms, and other similar establishments are not uses equivalent to the uses otherwise permitted in subsections (1) through (9) above. 
(14)	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above uses, provided that such shall not be objectionable because of noise, vibration, dust, soot, smoke, odor, glare or similar nuisance. 
(15)	Boathouses are not permitted in the C-1 district. 
(b)	Height regulations. Building height in the C-1 district shall not exceed 35 feet; provided, however, such limitation shall not apply to aerial antennas attached to the tops of buildings and church steeples. Mid-rise buildings may be allowed by specific use permit not to exceed ten stories or 120 feet, whichever is less. 
(c)	Area regulations in the C-1 district. 
(1)	Size of yard. 
a.	Residential. Same as district R-1 when no water frontage exists; same as R-2 if water frontage exists. 
b.	Other use. Buildings shall be a minimum of 60 feet from any street line and shall be a minimum of 30 feet from any property line or any waterfront line. 
(2)	Size of lot. 
a.	Lot area. No building shall be constructed on any lot having less than 20,000 square feet. 
b.	Lot width. The width of the lot shall be not less than 100 feet at the front street building line, nor shall its average width be less than 75 feet. 
c.	Lot depth. The average depth of the lot shall be not less than 120 feet. 
(3)	Size of building. The building area, inclusive of parking area, shall not exceed 90 percent of the lot area. 
(d)	Off-street parking requirements. One off-street parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area shall be provided in the C-1 district. 
(e)	Screening device requirements. A screening device, as defined in section 3 of this ordinance, shall be erected before any use other than uses permitted in the residential district are made of property in the C-1 district when such property abuts residentially zoned property. Insofar as is practical, such screening device shall be erected along the entire length of the common line between such commercial or business property and the abutting residentially zoned property. 
(1)	Erection and maintenance of screening devices. It shall be the responsibility of the user of the commercial or business property to erect the required screening device, and the same shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the premises on which such screening device is located. 
(2)	User of property responsible. All screening devices required by this ordinance shall be perpetually maintained by the user of the property on which such screening device is located. 
(f)	External building and structure materials limitations. Buildings and/or structures with externally visible sheet metal, tin, aluminum, and similar thin metallic materials are specifically prohibited in the C-1 district. 
(g)	Signs. It shall be unlawful for any person or business to erect, relocate, or structurally alter any sign within district C-1 except in conformity with the regulations herein. 
(1)	Definitions. For the purpose of this subsection, the following definitions shall apply: 
a.	Commercial sign shall mean any sign which directs attention to a business, commodity or service sold or offered on the premises where such sign appears. 
b.	Freestanding or ground sign shall mean any sign supported by one or more columns, poles, uprights, or braces anchored in or on the ground in a permanent nature, and not attached to any building. 
c.	Ground-mounted monument sign shall mean any double-faced freestanding sign permanently attached to a low base in such a manner that the sign appears to be resting on the ground. 
d.	Nonconforming sign shall mean a sign, which does not comply with the regulations contained herein. 
e.	Portable sign shall mean any moveable sign not permanently secured or attached to a structure, support or anchor. 
f.	Roof sign shall mean any sign attached to or mounted upon a building and which extends above any portion of a roofline. 
g.	Shopping or strip center shall mean any project built and intended to be used for two or more independent retail shops, restaurants, professional offices and other allied businesses. 
h.	Wall sign shall mean any flat sign, either of solid face construction or individual letters or symbols, which is placed against the exterior wall of any building, parallel to the wall upon which it is attached, and having the advertisement on one face only. 
i.	Noncommercial sign shall mean a sign, which contains a noncommercial message only. 
j.	Noncommercial message shall mean a civic, political, religious, seasonal, or personal message that is not displayed for a fee or for compensation, and is located on property owned or lawfully occupied by the person displaying the message. Signs containing noncommercial messages relating to political campaigns shall be removed within seven days following the election to which such signs pertain. 
(2)	Prohibited signs. Signs of the following nature are prohibited unless specifically authorized by this subsection. 
a.	Signs located within any private or public roadway right-of-way; 
b.	Portable signs; 
c.	Any sign, which pertains to a business, commodity, or service, sold or offered elsewhere than on the premises where such sign appears; 
d.	Wall signs, which extend above the roofline of the building upon which they are erected or with letters greater than 30 inches in height. 
e.	Roof signs; 
f.	Waterfront, shoreline, in-water, or water signs; 
g.	Any freestanding or ground sign which exceeds five feet in height or 36 square feet in area and which does not conform to all regulations stated herein governing "ground-mounted monument signs"; 
h.	A commercial sign or ground-mounted monument sign located within any zoning district other than district C-1; 
i.	More than one ground-mounted monument sign for any lot or development site, or for any individual shopping or strip center; provided however, if a lot or development site, or shopping or strip center has frontage on two public streets, one ground-mounted monument sign shall be permitted for each such street frontage. 
(3)	Regulations governing ground-mounted monument signs. Each ground-mounted monument sign shall: 
a.	Be a double-faced ground-mounted sign with a total area that does not exceed 36 square feet for each face of the sign; 
b.	Be a maximum of five feet tall, including both base and message area, as measured from the natural or average finished grade; 
c.	Be a maximum of two feet deep; 
d.	Have a base no more than 18 inches and no less than six inches above the natural or average finished grade; 
e.	Be constructed of materials architecturally compatible with the exterior building finish; 
f.	Be located within a vegetative landscaped area, which shall be maintained during the life of the sign; 
g.	Not have flashing or moveable lights, or exposed neon lights, but otherwise may be illuminated; 
h.	If a sign shared by multiple businesses of a shopping or strip center, have the same background color of the sign surface or a darker background with white letters, and containing margins; 
i.	Have a message which is limited to the name, type of business and business logo. A street number designation may appear either on the base or along the edge (two-foot depth) of the sign. 
(4)	Regulatory requirements for the removal of nonconforming signs. 
a.	A nonconforming sign existing on December 10, 1998 may be continued for a period of not more than seven years therefrom, provided that no such nonconforming sign shall in any way be modified. 
b.	The nonconforming sign shall be removed if there is a change in occupancy or ownership. 
c.	When nonconforming signs are replaced, they must be replaced with conforming signs. 
d.	The installation of any new sign is prohibited on a site where a nonconforming sign remains in use. 
(5)	Structural requirements. All signs and sign structures shall require a city permit and shall comply with the requirements of the building codes of the city. 
(6)	Fire hazards. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, structurally alter, or relocate any sign in such a manner as to obstruct, or in all probability cause to obstruct, ingress or egress, fire fighting, or escape from a building. 
(7)	Traffic hazards. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, structurally alter, or relocate any sign in such a manner as to constitute a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(8)	Maintenance and repair of signs. All signs and sign structures shall be kept in good repair and neat appearance. Signs shall be maintained at reasonable intervals, including replacement of damaged or defective parts, painting, repainting, and cleaning. The owner of a sign and the owner of the property upon which it is located shall be jointly and severally responsible for its maintenance and repair. 
(9)	Exceptions and exemptions. The provisions and regulations of this subsection shall not apply to certain classes of signs, which are designated in the following subparagraphs; provided however, such signs shall be subject to the provisions of paragraphs (5), (6), (7) and (8) of this subsection. 
a.	Real estate signs not exceeding six square feet in area per sign face pertaining to the sale or rental of the property on which they are displayed, but not more than one such sign for each street frontage. 
b.	Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, or danger signs placed or required to be placed by federal, state, or local governments. 
c.	Non-advertising signs of public service, pipeline, and utility companies as may be required by their operations in providing services for the health and welfare of the general public, or as required by any law or regulation of the federal or state governments, or any agency thereof. 
d.	Noncommercial signs. 
e.	Waterfront signs as may be required by property owners to notify visitors of safety procedures, private ownership and limited liabilities. The area of such sign shall not exceed four square feet. 
f.	Temporary special sales signs or window graphics provided: 
1.	Their use is limited to one continuous 14-day period per quarter; 
2.	They do not exceed 32 square feet; 
3.	They are attached to or visible on one side of a building only; 
4.	They are not extended beyond the roofline of the building; 
5.	They are erected only after written notification thereof to the city; 
6.	Their use is limited to a total of four promotions a year for a development site or any individual shopping or strip center. If only a single tenant has a promotion, this event shall count as one of the four promotions for the entire retail center; and 
7.	They do not consist of, or are used in conjunction with, any pennants or streamers. 
(h)	Fencing. Street-side or front yard fencing, of a metal type and designed as defined in this subsection, is permitted. Provided, however, no such fence shall be permitted unless constructed of black wrought iron or of material similar in appearance to ornamental iron with staves or pickets of not more than three-quarter-inch square and spaced not less than 31/2 inches apart, measured between the closest points of two successive staves or pickets, and with neutral colored brick columns not wider than two feet square and spaced not less than nine feet apart, or more than 20 feet measured between the closest points of two successive columns. The height of street-side or front yard fences shall not exceed seven feet. All street-side or front yard fencing in compliance with this subsection must also be set fully within the platted boundaries of the lot and must be a minimum of two feet away from any right-of-way or easement. 
(i)	Wire-type fencing. Hurricane, chain-link, and other wire-type fences are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 07-543, § 1.F, 10-22-07; Ord. No. 16-665, § 2, 10-5-16) 
Sec. 30. - Supplementary district regulations. 
(a)	Visibility at intersections/clearances on public ways. 
(1)	On a corner lot in any residential district, vegetation shall not be planted or allowed to grow in such a manner to materially impede vision between a height of 21/2 feet and ten feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street lines on such corner lots and a line joining points along said street lines 15 feet from the point of the intersection. 
(2)	Clearances over public roadways and sidewalks. Property owners shall maintain trees located on their property so that they do not interfere with the use of sidewalks or streets. 
a.	Trees which overhang the paved portion of a public street shall be trimmed to maintain a minimum vertical clearance of at least ten feet. 
b.	Trees which overhang public sidewalks shall be trimmed to maintain a minimum vertical clearance of at least eight feet. 
(b)	Fences, walls and hedges. 
(1)	Fences, walls, and hedges are permitted in or along the edge of any required yard other than a front yard or a side yard contiguous to a side street line, or, if a solid fence, wall, or hedge, within 50 feet of a waterfront. Hurricane, chain-link, and other wire-type fences are prohibited. 
(2)	Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance to the contrary, any fence, wall, or hedge not in compliance with the provisions of this section 10 shall be removed or otherwise brought into compliance upon the occurrence of any of the following conditions: 
a.	Damage to any such fence, wall, or hedge in excess of 50 percent of its value; or 
b.	Such fence, wall, or hedge is replaced. 
(c)	Accessory buildings. Except as specifically permitted by this ordinance, no accessory building shall be erected in any required yard or front yard, and no separate accessory building shall be erected within five feet of any other building. Accessory buildings shall be permitted in a front yard provided the location of the accessory building is at least 500 feet from the front property line. 
(d)	Easement encroachments. Structures, including decks and/or paving, shall not be placed within utility easement, except as provided by the following exceptions: 
(1)	The property owner has provided the building official with written verification from each utility having rights within that easement that such utility has consented to the encroachment; or 
(2)	The encroachment consists of a driveway or sidewalk which crosses the easement in such a manner as to minimize the width of the encroachment. 
(e)	Structures to have access. Every building hereafter erected shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street, or an approved private street, and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off-street parking. 
(1)	Fronting arterial street. Every building hereafter erected which fronts an arterial street shall have a circular driveway providing separate points for ingress and egress or a turnaround to allow entrance and exit in a forward direction to and from such arterial street. 
(f)	Lighting. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any artificial light source which creates glare upon a public street, sidewalk or adjacent residential property; provided, however, this provision shall not apply to streetlights installed pursuant to the subdivision regulations of the city. 
(g)	Signs. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, relocate or structurally alter any sign within the city except in conformity with the regulations herein. 
(1)	Definitions. For the purposes of this subsection, the following definitions shall apply: 
a.	Freestanding or ground sign. Any sign supported by one or more columns, poles, uprights or braces anchored in or on the ground in a permanent nature, and not attached to any building. 
b.	Portable sign. Any moveable sign not permanently secured or attached to a structure, support or anchor. 
c.	Wall sign. All flat signs, either of solid face construction or individual letters or symbols, which are placed against the exterior wall of any building, parallel to the wall upon which it is attached, and having the advertisement on one face only. 
d.	Roof sign. Any sign attached to or mounted upon a building and which extends above any portion of a roofline. 
(2)	Prohibited signs. Signs of the following nature are prohibited unless specifically authorized by this ordinance: 
a.	Signs located on or within ten feet of public property including, but not limited to, public buildings, streets, arterial streets, bridges, sidewalks, easements, or public rights-of-way within the city. 
b.	Portable signs. 
c.	Any sign which directs attention to a business, commodity or service sold or offered elsewhere than on the premises where such sign appears. 
d.	Freestanding or ground signs which exceed four feet in height above the pavement or finished grade. 
e.	Wall signs which extend above the roofline of the building upon which it is erected. 
f.	Roof signs. 
g.	Waterfront, shoreline, in-water or water signs. 
(3)	Structural requirements. All signs and sign structures shall comply with the pertinent requirements of the building and electrical codes of the city. 
(4)	Fire hazards. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, structurally alter or relocate any sign in such a manner as to obstruct, or in all probability cause to obstruct, ingress or egress, firefighting or escape from a building. 
(5)	Traffic hazards. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, structurally alter or relocate any sign in such a manner as to constitute a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(6)	Exceptions and exemptions. The provisions and regulations of this subsection shall not apply to certain classes of signs which are designated in the following subparagraphs; provided, however, such signs shall be subject to the provisions of paragraphs (4) and (5) of this subsection. 
a.	Real estate signs not exceeding six square feet in area per sign face pertaining to the sale or rental of the property on which they are displayed, but not more than one such sign for each street frontage, and not located within ten feet of the property line or street right-of-way line. 
b.	Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices or danger signs placed or required to be placed by federal, state or local governments. 
c.	Signs of public service, pipeline and utility companies as may be required by their operations in providing services for the health and welfare or regulation of the federal or state governments, or any agency thereof. 
d.	Temporary display posters, whether cardboard, silk screen, or otherwise, without independent structural support, used in connection with political campaigns and civic noncommercial health, safety and welfare campaigns, provided such posters shall be removed within five days following the conclusion of such campaign, and provided such posters are not displayed within public roadway rights-of-way. 
e.	Flags, emblems, insignia and noncommercial signs of patriotic, charitable, religious or civic character, provided such signs are not erected within ten feet of any street right-of-way line. 
(h)	Antennas and other devices. 
(1)	The following types of antennas may be placed within a required side yard or back yard, or on the roof of a structure, provided, however, that such antennas may not be located so as to be visible from the street which is adjacent to the front lot line of the property. 
a.	A "dish" antenna that is one meter or less in diameter and is designed to receive direct broadcast satellite service, including direct-to-home satellite service, or to receive or transmit fixed wireless signals via satellite; 
b.	An antenna that is one meter or less in diameter or diagonal measurement and is designed to receive video programming service via broadband radio service (wireless cable) or to receive or transmit fixed wireless signals other than via satellite; or 
c.	An antenna that is designed to receive local television broadcast signals. 
i.	The board of adjustment may grant a special exception to allow the types of antennas listed above to be placed in other locations if it can be shown by the applicant that failure to obtain such special exception would (i) unreasonably delay or prevent installation, maintenance, or use; (ii) unreasonably increase the cost of installation, maintenance or use; or (iii) preclude reception of an acceptable quality signal. 
ii.	It shall be unlawful for any person to erect any other type outdoor or external antenna, aerial, satellite dish or other similar device where visible from a public street or adjacent property. 
(i)	Ancillary items. Campers, recreational vehicles, trailers, boats and antique or inoperable vehicles shall not be situated or stored such that they are visible from a public street, lake or waterway, or adjacent property, unless they are on a paved surface, at least 50 feet from the front lot line and do not exceed ten feet in height. 
(j)	Nonconforming uses. 
(1)	Nonconforming use of land. The lawful nonconforming use of land where no building is involved existing on the effective date of this ordinance may be continued for a period of not more than one year therefrom, provided that no such nonconforming use of land shall in any way be expanded or extended either on the same or on adjoining property, and that if such nonconforming use of land or any portion thereof is discontinued or changed, any future use of such land shall be in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is situated. 
(2)	Nonconforming use of buildings. Lawful nonconforming use of a building existing upon the effective date of this ordinance may be continued, subject to the following exceptions: 
a.	If such nonconforming building is voluntarily removed, the future use of such premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
b.	If a nonconforming use of any building or premise is discontinued for a period of one year, the use of the same shall thereafter conform to the provisions of the district in which it is situated. 
c.	If a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use, it may not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use. 
d.	If by amendment to this ordinance property is hereafter transferred to a more restricted district by a change in the district boundaries, or if the regulations and restrictions applicable to a district in which property is located is amended so as to be more restrictive, the provisions of this ordinance relating to the nonconforming use of buildings or premises existing upon the effective date of this ordinance shall apply to buildings or premises occupied or used upon the effective date of such amendment. 
e.	Nonconforming uses shall not be extended or rebuilt in case of obsolescence or total destruction by fire or other cause. In the event of partial destruction by fire or other causes in excess of 50 percent of value of the nonconforming use, it shall not be restored, rebuilt, or repaired unless it is made to conform to the regulations of the district in which it is situated. 
(k)	[ Shipping and storage containers. ] Shipping containers and storage containers are prohibited within the city. 
(l)	Residential subdivision entryway structures. Structures marking the entrances to residential subdivisions will be permitted to be constructed over public streets and crossing public rights-of-way, provided such structures meet the following criteria and subject to the following conditions. For the purposes of this section, "entryway structures" shall refer to and mean any type of structure to be built over a public right-of-way, without accessible interior space. 
(1)	Permit required. A permit shall be required for all entryway structures. New or existing subdivisions may apply to the building official for construction of entryway structures over planned or existing public streets and rights-of-way. 
a.	Structures shall meet all applicable building and safety codes of the city. 
b.	Construction plans shall be submitted to the building official for approval, prior to making application to city council 
(2)	Council approval required. Council shall review and consider the merits and assurances of perpetual maintenance for each application, and may require staff review and the submission of such other materials as may be determined necessary to ensure an adequate review by council. Approval of such structures shall be made only after a finding that the structures will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, and will not burden the taxpayers of the city. 
(3)	[ Entryway structures. ] Entryway structures shall meet the following standards and requirements: 
a.	Entryway structures shall provide a minimum height of 161/2 feet clearance above the existing street grade in the center lane, and a minimum of 15 feet clearance above the street pavement at the curb to allow for the free flow and passage of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and shall be designed to be in context and proportion to the residences within the subdivision. The structure shall have a maximum height of 25 feet at the centerline of the road. 
b.	Entryway structures shall not encroach into nor be built upon any portion of the required street paving, nor shall they omit or obstruct required sidewalks, curbs and gutters, paving, utilities, or other public improvements, which are placed within the required right-of-way. In addition, entryway structures shall be built with a one-foot setback from the back of all curbs. The portion of the entryway structure which is located on the ground shall only be located on private property. If the structure is proposed to be built on land that has been dedicated to the public for any use, the applicant must purchase the public interest through the vacation process and ownership must be vested in the homeowners' association. Additionally, the applicant will be required to relocate all existing utility lines. If the property is being platted, the location of the entryway structure must be shown on the plat as a reserve owned by the homeowners' association for entryway signs or open space. 
c.	The facade of entryway structures shall be constructed of masonry materials similar to those predominantly in use on residential structures within the subdivision, including but not limited to, brick, stone, or stucco, and shall conform with the materials and colors used in the residential units located within the subdivision. 
d.	Restrictive covenants shall be submitted and shall be reviewed by the city attorney prior to city council approval of construction plans. Approval of such plans shall also be required from any subdivision homeowners' association, such approval to be evidenced on such plans by the signature of an authorized representative of such association. Such covenants shall contain adequate provisions for the perpetual care and maintenance of the entryway structure, and such covenants shall be recorded in the Deed Records of Harris County. The provisions for perpetual care and maintenance of the structures shall include required notice to and approval by the city in the event any amendment to the provisions relating to the entryway structures is considered. 
e.	Vertical clearance signage shall comply with TXDOT requirements. Metal plaques, with a maximum size of 24 inches by 24 inches stating the name of the subdivision shall be permitted, one on each side of the roadway. Other than such signs, lettering or signage shall not be allowed on the structure. 
f.	Gates and gatehouses shall not be allowed across a street or any portion of a public right-of-way. 
g.	Lighting: Accent and decorative lighting may be permitted provided an illumination plan is submitted with the application materials and provided that no illumination source casts light or glare on any private property. Neon, flashing, or moving lights will not be permitted under any circumstance. Lighting may be denied where it is determined it impacts private property or causes a traffic hazard. 
(4)	[ Required by applicant. ] The applicant for such structures shall submit the following materials to the building official: 
a.	Three copies of scaled construction drawings depicting the location of the structures across the street and public right of way, with all information required by the building official; 
b.	All required permit fees and completion of applicable permit application forms shall be required prior to acceptance of application by building official, and no review shall begin until such forms are complete. 
c.	Certification of approval of plans by the homeowners' association, 
d.	Subdivision plat (or revised plat), with all engineering stamps as required by the city's regulations. 
e.	Three copies of facade drawings depicting the architectural details of the structure, the colors and materials of the structure. 
f.	Copies of the insurance policies, naming the city as an additional insured, in a minimum amount of $1,000,000.00, shall be submitted to the city secretary annually. The applicant and party responsible for the perpetual maintenance of the structure shall indemnify and save harmless the city, its elected and appointed officials, officers, and employees from any and all loss, liability, damage, or injury from any and all suits, claims, or actions brought or filed by any person or persons for or on account of any loss, injury or damage whatsoever sustained in, caused by or arising or resulting from the placing, maintenance or removal of the entryway structures. 
g.	Letters from all utility companies who presently have improvements within, or have a right to use, the utility easements within the subdivision for location of their lines, said letters to state that the companies have no objections to the proposed placement of the entryway structures. Relocation of utility lines may be required at the applicant's expense and becomes a revision to a plat and requires meeting all regulations and standards of the utility providers and city regulations. 
h.	A survey, plan and profile of the site showing the location of the entryway structure and property within ten feet from any side of the structure unless site characteristics require more area. 
i.	Such other documentation as may be reasonable to afford the building official and council the necessary information for review of the application. 
j.	Upon approval by city council and review and approval of the construction plans, the building official shall issue a building permit. 
(5)	Removal or demolition. After plan approval, an estimate shall be prepared by the applicant's engineer of the costs of removal of the entryway structure and remediation of the site back to its original condition. The applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city council that the applicant has and will have the financial capability to cover such future demolition and removal costs. 
(Ord. No. 07-543, § 1.G, 10-22-07) 
Sec. 31. - Conditional use permits. 
    A conditional use permit for property located on Kirby Road and zoned R-1 may be requested under this section. 
(1)	Purpose. A conditional use permit is intended to provide a location for limited uses which are appropriate in low rise structures in a low density landscaped setting, along Kirby Road. It is designed to protect adjacent residential neighborhoods from encroachment of incompatible commercial, office, and other non-residential activities, and to promote the development of vacant, bypassed lots in harmony with adjacent land uses and the surrounding environment. It is not designed to allow uses other than single family residential uses in established single family neighborhoods. This district places a great emphasis on open space and aesthetic considerations in building construction and landscaping. 
(2)	Effect. A conditional use permit, when approved by council, must be adopted by ordinance, and will allow only the specific use applied for. Changes to the type or intensity of use approved by the ordinance shall require a new application and completion of the procedures outlined in this section. 
(3)	Application and procedure. An application for a use allowed by conditional use permit is required. 
a.	An application form shall be submitted to the building official, meeting, at a minimum, the following standards, and showing all existing or planned improvements as required in this section. 
b.	When the building official has certified that the application is complete, he shall forward the application to the zoning commission for recommendation to city council for its review and action. 
(4)	Application contents . Administrative information shall be provided on the form established by the city. The city may charge a fee for the processing of the application, as may be established by city council. A site plan and relevant supporting documents are required showing the following: 
a.	Location of property. 
1.	Property must front on Kirby Road. 
2.	Access from residential roads may be restricted or prohibited. 
b.	Area and building regulations and standards. All code references are to this Appendix A, Code of Ordinances, unless specifically noted. 
1.	Minimum lot standards required. In accordance with all R-1 or R-2 district regulations in section 27(c). 
2.	Height of structures. In accordance with all R-1 district regulations in section 27(b). 
3.	Maximum area (footprint) restrictions for buildings and non-permeable surfaces in section 27(c)(3). 
4.	Screening and landscaping. Property abutting a residential district shall be screened and landscaped to protect residential uses from light and noise by installation of a wood or masonry fence and landscaping sufficient to provide a predominantly opaque buffer. All fencing, screening, and landscaping shall be in accordance with the R-1 district regulations in section 27(c)(4). If not prescribed by section 27(c)(4), all CUP property shall conform with section 30. 
5.	Parking. All uses shall provide adequate space on site to provide for parking, loading, and maneuvering of vehicles in accordance with city regulations for the use being requested. Parking shall be designed and located: 
i.	To not disturb abutting residential land uses. If parking is located adjacent to residential land uses, additional landscaping, masonry fencing, or a combination thereof shall be installed for screening; and 
6.	The use will provide adequate ingress and egress to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets, as shown by a reasonable estimated trip generation factor submitted with the application. 
7.	Lighting on the site shall be located and shielded so as not to cast light over property lines. Lighting in the rear yard or on the rear of the building for properties located adjacent to residential uses shall be by motion detector or other timed mechanism. 
8.	Signage shall be allowed, but shall not exceed 25 square feet, and shall not be illuminated. A separate sign permit will be required. The standards in section 29(g) apply unless amended by this section. 
9.	Building elevations shall be submitted. Design of the structure shall mimic a residential appearance commensurate with other such structures within the city. 
10.	The use shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(5)	Consideration of application. The building official shall review the application, and forward the complete application, with his comments, if any, to the zoning commission. The zoning commission shall hold a public hearing and make a recommendation on the application. Upon receipt of the recommendation from the zoning commission, council shall place the item on the next meeting agenda for consideration, subject to notice provisions. The zoning commission and council may hold a joint public hearing, with the zoning commission issuing its recommendation prior to council action. 
a.	Council shall consider the following: 
1.	Whether the proposed use is in conformance with the comprehensive plan; 
2.	Whether the structure is designed to have the appearance of a single family home similar to adjacent developments within Taylor Lake Village; 
3.	The nature and condition of all adjacent uses and structures and possible impacts of the proposed conditional use on them, as well as the general public health, safety and welfare and to ensure that: 
  The use is not detrimental to the existing character of the development in the immediate neighborhood, and will not endanger the public health, safety or general welfare. 
  The use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted by right in the R-1 district. 
  The zoning commission may recommend, and city council may impose reasonable conditions and limitations in granting an approval as are determined to be necessary to fulfill the spirit and purpose of the zoning code and to protect adjacent properties. 
4.	The city council may approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove an application for a conditional use permit. Compliance with any conditions shall be required prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 13-636, § 3, 11-6-13) 
Sec. 32. - R-3 detached single-family high density residential district, waterfront. 
(a)	Purpose . The purpose of an R-3 district is to provide for an integrated, master planned single-family home development located on the waterfront that will have public or private recreational amenities, be of a consistent and unified architectural design that marks it as a high-end, unique, and identifiable residential area within Taylor Lake Village. The R-3 district is designed for larger parcels of undeveloped or redeveloped land, and shall not be used for infill development, nor for redevelopment of isolated or scattered lots within an existing residential area. 
(b)	Area . An R-3 district shall be a minimum of three acres in size. 
(c)	Use regulations. The building or premises in the R-3 district shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)	Detached single-family dwellings, 
(2)	Long term rentals with initial terms of no less than four months; lease, rentals or subleases for a term of four months or less are prohibited, unless related to sale of related real property. 
(3)	City facilities or utility uses; 
(4)	Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work; 
(5)	Real estate offices during the development of residential subdivisions, but not to exceed two years; 
(6)	Property owners' association, nonprofit recreational uses incidental to and an amenity of a single-family residential development; 
(7)	Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith and not involving the conduct of a retail business; provided, however, that any accessory building shall be of the same design and construction as the applicable primary structure. 
a.	A sign shall not be permitted as an accessory use, except one unilluminated temporary sign not more than six square feet in area, which shall be located at least five feet from the nearest street line. 
(d)	Building and structure height regulations. No building in the R-3 district shall contain more than five stories; provided, however, a bottom story that contains no habitable floor area, as defined in and built to comply with the city's flood damage prevention ordinance, shall not be considered as a story for the purposes of this subsection. The maximum building height shall be 74 feet as measured from the average elevation for the center line of the street in front of the house. Chimneys and roof vents shall not extend more than four feet above the highest point of the roof. No accessory building or structure shall exceed the height of the main building on the lot upon which such accessory building or structure is located. 
(e)	Lot dimension regulations in the R-3 district and additional requirements. 
(1)	Required dimensions for the front, rear, and side yards. 
a.	Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 20 feet. 
b.	Side yard. All buildings shall have side yard setbacks of not less than five feet on each side. 
1.	Swimming pools, hot tubs, and cabanas or other accessory shade structures shall not be placed in side yards or yards abutting a street. 
2.	No mechanical or pool equipment, including air conditioner condensers and generators, may be placed in side yards or yards abutting a street. 
c.	Rear yard and common areas. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 20 feet. 
1.	Swimming pools and hot tubs, whether private or common to all residents, including any attached decks or waterfalls, shall be allowed in rear yards or in common areas as accessory uses by permit and shall be set back at least five feet from the nearest lot line. 
2.	Any mechanical or pool equipment, including air conditioner condensers and generators, placed in a rear yard shall be set back at least five feet from the nearest lot line. Any mechanical or pool equipment, including air conditioner condensers and generators, placed in common areas shall be set back at least two feet from the nearest lot line. 
3.	All common areas must be maintained by a property owners' association. 
d.	Water-abutting yard: 
1.	The minimum waterfront setback shall be of 20 feet. 
(2)	Required size and dimensions for lots. 
a.	Lot area. No lot shall be created which contains less than 2,250 square feet. No building shall be constructed or erected on any lot having less square footage than provided herein. 
b.	Lot width. No lot shall be created having a width of less than 30 feet at the front street building line nor shall its average width be less than 30 feet. 
c.	Lot depth. No lot shall be created having a depth of less than 75 feet nor shall its average depth be less than 75 feet; 
(3)	Building area. Not more than 60 percent of total site area shall be covered by building footprint. 
(4)	Fencing. 
a.	Walls and hedges are not permitted within 25 feet of a waterfront. 
b.	Fence construction shall be of durable material constructed in such manner as to prevent obstruction of view more than 30 percent of the fence area; no area shall be of a privacy fence nature. Chain link fences are prohibited. 
c.	Fence height shall not exceed 4.5 feet. 
d.	On corner lots, fencing of the rear yard adjacent to a side street may be placed not closer to the lot line than the required five-foot side yard setback. 
(5)	Requirements for waterfront yards. 
a.	Subject to the provisions hereof, retaining walls are allowed within a required waterfront yard. 
b.	The grade level of the required waterfront yard may be increased using soil and/or retaining walls, but the resulting grade angle shall not exceed one foot of rise for every three feet of run, as measured from the nearest point of the waterfront line plus four feet of elevation. The grade level of individual houses should not be changed. 
(6)	Accessory structures. 
a.	Accessory structures shall not be placed in front or side yards. Accessory structures may be placed in rear yards by permit from the city building official. No structure may have a thatched roof. 
b.	Additional requirements for accessory structures located in yards abutting waterfronts: 
1.	Waterfront accessory structures must be constructed in accordance with the approved Texas General Land Office and Army Corps of Engineer permits when constructed within areas where such permits are required. 
2.	Waterfront accessory structures located within areas not subject to the jurisdiction of the Texas General Land Office shall comply with the dimensional and location limitations specified for waterfront structures by the Texas General Land Office or the School Land Board Construction Guidelines, 31 T.A.C. § 155, which are an attachment to the "Application for State Land Use Lease - CE/SP" and shall not be constructed without having first received a permit from the city building official. 
3.	The end and sides of any waterfront accessory structure may be partially enclosed by siding, dock boxes, or storage lockers, provided the amount of open area on any side or end being enclosed is not reduced by more than 25 percent as measured from the top of the deck/walkway to the top of the pilings. 
4.	No boathouses are permitted. 
(7)	Required parking. 
a.	Four off-street parking spaces for each residence shall be provided in the R-3 district. Off-street parking may be provided using garage space or improved surface on the same lot as the residence. Each parking space shall be a minimum of nine feet by 19 feet of improved surface. No residential garage shall be modified or converted to prevent its use as a parking structure. 
b.	No overnight on-street parking shall be allowed in R-3 districts. 
c.	No private streets shall be allowed in R-3 districts. 
(8)	Animal control. 
a.	No farm fowl or other domestic farm animals shall be kept in R-3 districts. 
(9)	Outside display and storage. 
a.	No storage is permitted beyond the front building line. 
b.	No storage is permitted in required parking areas. 
(10)	Supplementary regulations. 
a.	Temporary structures for uses incidental to construction work on the premises which are removed upon completion or abandonment of construction work are allowed upon permit from the building official. 
b.	No temporary structures, including recreational vehicles, construction trailers or travel trailers, may be used for on-site dwelling purposes. 
c.	Building eaves may overhang the required yard, provided the overhang is not more than 18 inches. 
(Ord. No. 15-654, § 3, 10-7-15) 
Secs. 33-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 41. - Official zoning map. 
    The official zoning map of the City of Taylor Lake Village shall be kept in the office of the city secretary, and one copy shall be maintained in the office of the building official. 
    It shall be the duty of the city engineer to keep the official map current and the copies thereof, herein provided for, by entering on such maps any changes which the city council may from time to time order by amendments to the zoning ordinance and map. 
    The city secretary, upon the adoption of this ordinance, shall affix a certificate identifying the map in her office as the zoning district map of the City of Taylor Lake Village. She shall likewise officially identify the copies directed to be kept by the zoning commission and in the office of the building official. 
Sec. 42. - Enforcement and application. 
(a)	Administrative official. The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the building official of the City of Taylor Lake Village. The building official or his duly authorized representative shall have the right to enter upon any premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this ordinance. Whenever any construction work is being done contrary to the provisions of this ordinance, the building official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on the owner or contractor doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the building official to proceed with the work. 
(b)	Building permits required. No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered without a permit therefore issued by the administrative official. No building permit shall be issued by the administrative official except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance unless he receives a written order from the board of adjustment in the form of an administrative review, or variance, as provided by this ordinance. 
(c)	Application for building permit. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by accurate plot plans, submitted in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing: 
(1)	The actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon; 
(2)	The exact sizes and locations on the lot of the buildings and accessory buildings then existing; 
(3)	The lines within which the proposed building and structure shall be erected or altered; 
(4)	The existing and intended use of each building or part of building; and 
(5)	Such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this ordinance. 
One copy of such plot plans shall be returned to the owner when such plans have been approved. An inspection period of as much as two weeks shall be allowed for inspection of plans before a permit shall be issued. All dimensions shown on these plans relating to the location and size of the lot to be built upon shall be based on an actual survey by a registered public surveyor or civil engineer (registered in the State of Texas) and the lot shall be staked out on the ground before construction is started. 
(d)	Existing permits and private agreements. This ordinance is not intended to abrogate or annul: 
(1)	Any permits issued before the effective date of this ordinance; or 
(2)	Any easement, covenant or any other private agreement which imposes more stringent regulations or requirements than this ordinance. 
(e)	Preserving rights in pending litigation and violations under existing chapters. By the passage of this ordinance, no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been legalized unless specifically such use falls within a use district where the actual use is a conforming use. Otherwise, such uses shall remain nonconforming uses where recognized, or an illegal use, as the case may be. It is further the intent and declared purpose of this ordinance that no offense committed, and no liability, penalty or forfeiture, either civil or criminal, shall be discharged or affected by the adoption of this ordinance; but prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties or forfeitures may be instituted or causes presently pending be proceeded with in all respects as if such prior ordinance had not been repealed. 
(f)	Completion of authorized buildings. Nothing in these regulations nor in any amendments hereto which change district boundaries shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building which shall be completed in its entirety within two years from the date of the passage of this ordinance, provided such building was authorized by building permit before the passage of this ordinance, and further provided construction shall have been started within 90 days of the passage of this ordinance. Commitments with reference to construction of public utility buildings necessary for proposed expansion of the city made prior to the passage of this ordinance shall be observed. 
