Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. How Code designated and cited
Sec. 1-2. Catchlines of sections.
Sec. 1-3. Rules of construction and definitions.
Sec. 1-4. Amendments or additions to Code.
Sec. 1-5. Voting districts set out.
Sec. 1-6. Polling Places.
Sec. 1-7, Sec. 1-8. Reserved.
Sec. 1-9. General penalty; continuing violations; culpable mental state not
required.
Sec. 1-10. Severability of parts of Code.
Sec. 1-11. Standard of care for emergency action.
Sec. 1-12. Interference with Code Enforcement.
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. How Code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute
and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Temple, Texas" and may be so cited.
Sec. 1-2. Catchlines of sections.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as
mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to
be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided,
shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted.
Sec. 1-3. Rules of construction and definitions.
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city
council, the following rules shall be observed and the following definitions shall apply,
unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council:
Generally. The provisions of this Code shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes
expressed therein or implied from the expressions thereof. In case of doubt or ambiguity in
the meaning of such provisions, the general shall yield to the particular. Reference for
interpretation and construction shall tend to further the accomplishment of the elimination of
the particular mischiefs for which the provisions were enacted. Words shall be construed in
their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated.
Board of Commissioners. The words "board", "city board" or "board of commission" shall
mean the board of commissioners of the City of Temple, constituting the governing body of
the city.
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Temple, in the County of
Bell and State of Texas.
City officers and departments. Whenever reference is made to an officer or a department,
the same shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Temple, Texas".
Computation of time. In computing any period of time mentioned in the provisions of this
Code, the date of the act, event or default after which the designated period of time begins to
run is not to be included, and the last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless
it is a Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day
which is neither a Sunday nor a holiday.
County. The term "county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Bell, Texas.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to
females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males.
Highway. The term "highway" shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue or public
place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city,
dedicated or devoted to public use.
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other
persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other
persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word
importing the plural number shall include the singular.
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which,
by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear"
and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed".
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or", if the sense requires it.
Owner. The word "owner", applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, or
the whole or of a part of such building or land.
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations,
firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. Where criminal
prosecution may lie, the officers of any corporation shall jointly and severally be subject to
prosecution as being included within the term "person".
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next
after, respectively.
Roadway. The word "roadway" shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular traffic.
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb, or
the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. The words "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark
when a person cannot write.
Standard time. All hours of time mentioned in this Code refer to and shall be determined
by Central Standard Time, as commonly known, except that, if at any future time any
different standard of time is established by the United States for an area which includes this
city, all such hours shall be determined by such officially proclaimed standard, so long as the
same remains in effect.
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The term "street" shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place
or square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel and causeway in the city, dedicated or
devoted to public use.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and
present.
Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include
any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year.
Sec. 1-4. Amendments or additions to Code.
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect
this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and
printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or
subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by
omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or
omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances
until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted
as a new Code by the city council.
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such
provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following
language:
"That section _______ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Temple, Texas, is hereby amended
to read as follows: . . .". The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.
In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the
following language shall be used "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Temple, Texas, is
hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____, which said section reads as
follows: . . .". The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.
Sec. 1-5. Voting districts set out.
The city shall be divided into four (4) districts, such districts to be known as
Councilmember District 1, Councilmember District 2, Councilmember District 3 and
Councilmember District 4. One councilmember shall be elected from each of the four (4)
districts and one councilmember shall be elected from the city at large. Such districts shall
comprise the council districts in conformity with the Charter of the City of Temple.
The boundaries of each councilmember district shall be described in a text description and
on a map, attached as Exhibit "A," and maintained in the City Secretary's Office.
Sec. 1-6. Polling Places.
The location of each polling place in the City shall be as determined by resolution of
the City Council from time to time.
Sec. 1-7, Sec. 1-8. Reserved.
Sec. 1-9. General penalty; continuing violations; culpable mental state not required.
(a) Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited, is made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or
ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be
unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of any such provision of
this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred
($500.00) dollars; provided, however, that the following specific Code provisions shall be
punished by a fine of not exceeding two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars on such offenses:
Entire chapters: 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 23, 29, 30, 31, 34,
Appendix A to "Zoning Ordinance"
Entire articles: Chapter 38, Articles I, V, VI
Individual sections: 3-25, 3-29, 3-31, 3-49, 4-4, 22-2, 22-3, 22-5, 22-6, 22-8, 22-9,
22-10, 32-3, 32-4
Each day of any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall constitute a separate
offense. Provided that no penalty under this section shall be greater or less than the penalty
provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the State of Texas.
(b) Furthermore, a culpable mental state is not required for the commission of any offense
under this Code or of any ordinance of the city, unless the provision defining the conduct
expressly required a culpable mental state, otherwise the requirement of a culpable mental
state is expressly dispensed with for purposes of constituting, alleging, or proving a violation
of a provision of this Code or other city ordinance.
Sec. 1-10. Severability of parts of Code.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence,
paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or
decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of
the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of the Code, since the
same would have been enacted by the board without the incorporation in this Code of any
such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
Sec. 1-11. Standard of care for emergency action.
Every officer, agent or employee of the city and every officer, agent or employee of an
authorized provider of emergency services, including, but not limited to, every unit of
government or subdivision thereof, while responding to emergency calls or reacting to
emergency situations, regardless of whether any declaration of emergency has been declared
or proclaimed by a unit of government or subdivision thereof, is hereby authorized to act or
not to act in such a manner to effectively deal with the emergency. Any action or inaction is
"effective" if it in any way contributes or can reasonably be thought to contribute to
preserving any lives or property. This section shall prevail over every other ordinance of the
city and, to the extent to which the city has the authority to so authorize, over any other law
establishing a standard of care in conflict with this section. Neither the city nor the employee,
agent or officer thereof, or other unit of government or subdivision thereof or its employees,
agents or officers, shall be liable for the failure to use ordinary care in such emergency. It is
the intent of the city council, by passing this ordinance, to assure effective action in
emergency situations by those entrusted with the responsibility of saving lives and property
by protecting such governmental units from liability, and their employees, agents and officers
from nonintentional tort liability to the fullest extent permitted by statutory and constitutional
law. This section shall be liberally construed to carry out the intent of the city council.
Sec. 1-12. Interference with Code Enforcement.
(a) A person commits an offense is he by words or physical actions prevents a code
enforcement officer of the city or his authorized representative from performing a duty or
exercising authority imposed or granted by law.
(b) The police department shall assist a code enforcement officer or his authorized
representative in executing his duties relating to violations of the law, codes and ordinances
of this city, including, but not limited to, Chapter 37, Article V, "Junked Motor Vehicles;"
Chapter 16, Article IV, "Neighborhood Nuisances;" Chapter 6, "Animals and Fowl;" Chapter
21, "Minimum Housing Standards;" and Ordinance No. 91-2101, the "Zoning Ordinance,"
and all its amendments.
1
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 2-1. City seal.
The seal of the city shall be the coat of arms of the State of Texas in a circle with the
words "City of Temple, State of Texas" engraved around the margin thereof.
Sec. 2-2. Rental or sale of city property or materials.
It shall be unlawful for any officer or employee of the city to rent any equipment
belonging to the city to any person, or to sell any materials belonging to the city, unless such
rental or sale is previously authorized by the city manager.
Sec. 2-3. Change orders.
Change orders involving a decrease or increase in cost of twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) or less in contracts for the construction of public works or for the purchase of
materials, equipment, and supplies shall be approved by the city manager or his designee for
the City of Temple, Texas.
Sec. 2-4. City Attorney--Qualifications.
The city attorney shall be a licensed lawyer and competent to discharge the duties
required of him by the Charter and ordinances of the city.
Sec. 2-5. Same--Duties.
It shall be the duty of the city attorney to serve the city council, to advise it as a council,
and each of the councilmen respectively, from time to time, with respect to the provisions
and a proper interpretation of the Charter, and the powers and authority of the council as the
governing body for the city, and to attend the meetings of the council. The city attorney is
also charged with the duty to draw all ordinances and resolutions that may be passed on by
the council, and to represent the city in all of its litigation in the courts, and to discharge
such other duties as are usually imposed upon city attorneys, including advice and counsel
from time to time to the city manager.
Sec. 2-6. Same--Opinions requested by appointive boards, committees, etc.
The city attorney shall, at the request of any appointive board, committee or commission
2
of the City of Temple, Texas, give written or oral opinions upon any question touching the
public interest and concerning the official duties of said board, committee or commission.
No request for an opinion of the city attorney shall be made by any board, committee or
commission except upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the members thereof present
and voting at a meeting open to the public. Every such request shall be made through the
chairperson of said board, committee or commission.
Sec. 2-7. City engineer to ascertain monuments, make surveys, etc.
It shall be the duty of the city engineer to ascertain the established monuments of the
city, and from them to extend surveys thereof and establish others and to locate, establish
and survey all private property, streets and alleys where the interests of the city are
involved, within the territorial limits of the city, when so called on or required to do so.
Sec. 2-8. Legal defense and indemnification of city officers and employees.
(a) Definitions. For purposes of this section the term "officer" shall include any elected
or appointed official of the City, and the term "employee" shall include all employees of the
City, whether under civil service or not; including firemen and policemen.
(b) Indemnification. Any officer or employee who is liable for the payment of any
claims or damages, excluding punitive damages, arising out of the course and scope of
employment shall be entitled to indemnification by the City provided that the acts or
omissions resulting in such liability were done in good faith and without malicious or
felonious intent. For the purposes of this section, the term, "arising out of the course and
scope of employment" shall not include any action which occurs during a period of time in
which the officer or employee is engaged in outside employment or is rendering contractual
services to someone other than the City. Whether the acts were done in good faith, without
malicious or felonious intent, and within the course and scope of employment shall be
determined by the City, and such determination shall be final for the purposes of the
representation and indemnity of this section; provided, however, that in the event such
representation and indemnity have been denied by the City, if upon a trial on the merits the
City determines that the officer or employee was acting in good faith, without malicious or
felonious intent and within the scope of employment the indemnification hereunder shall be
granted and reasonable legal expenses incurred in the defense of the claim reimbursed. The
City shall not be liable for any settlement of any such claim or suit effected without its
consent, and the City reserves the right to assert any defense and make any settlement of any
claim or suit that it deems expedient.
(c) Representation in actions. The City shall have the right and duty to provide legal
representation through the city attorney, or in its discretion through the selection of outside
legal counsel, to any officer or employee sued in connection with any claim for damages or
other civil action against such person arising out of the course and scope of employment,
provided that such officer or employee is entitled to indemnification as set forth in this
3
section. Such legal representation shall be provided at no cost to the officer or employee,
and any officer or employee may have his or her own counsel assist in the defense at the
sole expense of the officer or employee. The officer or employee shall cooperate fully with
the City in preparation and presentation of the case, and the failure to cooperate shall waive
such officer's or employee's right to representation and indemnity under this section.
(d) City's defenses. Nothing in this section shall be construed as waiving the City's
defense of governmental immunity to it or its employees or officers in any action brought
against the City or such officer or employee. For any suit or claim arising under the Texas
Tort Claims Act, the indemnity provided by this section shall be limited to the statutory
limits applicable to the City provided in said Act, as amended.
(e) Notice. The provisions of this section shall apply only where the City has been
given notice of the action brought against the city officer or employee within seven (7)
calendar days of service of process upon the officer or employee.
(f) Disciplinary actions. Nothing in this section shall prevent the City from taking
any disciplinary action against any officer or employee for conduct defended or
indemnified by the City under this section, either before or after conclusion of the civil
suit.
(g) Suits in behalf of the City. Nothing in this section shall require the City to
indemnify any officer or employee for recoveries made against him or her in suits by or on
behalf of the City.
Secs. 2-10 – 2-60. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. CODE OF ETHICS
2-61.- Purpose.
It is essential in a democratic system that the public have confidence in the
integrity, independence, and impartiality of those who act on their behalf in government.
Such confidence depends not only on the conduct of those who exercise official power,
but on the availability of aid or redress to all persons on equal terms and on the
accessibility and dissemination of information relating to the conduct of public affairs.
The purpose of this Code of Ethics is to promote confidence in the governance of
the City of Temple, and thereby enhance the City’s ability to function effectively. This
Code of Ethics also establishes guidelines for standards of conduct for all officials of the
City of Temple by discouraging conduct which is incompatible with the best interests of
the City.
4
2.62.- Title; Application.
This Article may be cited as the City of Temple’s Code of Ethics. This Code of
Ethics applies to all city officials as defined in this Code. The standards in this Code
apply to individuals who are employed by the City on a full-time, part-time or internship
basis, including employees who hold Council-appointed positions. Complaints and
investigations about employees will be addressed as set forth in the City of Temple
Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual.
This Code of Ethics is not intended to preempt or prevent the cumulative
application and enforcement of State or Federal law, the City Charter or the Personnel
Policies and Procedures Manual of the City of Temple.
This Code of Ethics is effective from the date of adoption by the City Council.
This Code may not be applied retroactively, as it governs conduct from the date of
adoption forward.
2.63.- Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this code, have the meaning
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
Affinity - has the meaning set forth in Texas Government Code Sections 573.024
and 573.025, or as amended.
Benefit - anything reasonably regarded as economic gain, or advance, including a
benefit to another person in whose welfare the beneficiary is interested, but does not
include a contribution or expenditure made and reported in accordance with law.
Board or Commission – for the purposes of this Article, “board or commission”
refers to City boards and commissions that have quasi-judicial authority, or
responsibilities beyond those that are advisory in nature. The boards and commissions
that fall under this definition are the Building and Standards Commission, Building Board
of Appeals, Civil Service Commission, Development Standards Advisory Board,
Planning & Zoning Commission, Reinvestment Zone Number One Board of Directors,
and Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Business entity – a sole proprietorship, partnership, firm, corporation, holding
company, joint-stock company, receivership, trust, or any other entity recognized by law.
Candidate - an individual seeking to be elected or appointed to a position on the
City Council, a City board or commission, or any employment position within the City
that is appointed by the City Council.
5
City official - a public official, either elected or appointed, that serves the City as a
councilmember or board member for any of the City boards or commissions and all
employees including those that are in council appointed positions.
Confidential Information - any information to which a city official has access in
such person’s official capacity which may not be disclosed to the public except pursuant
to State and/or Federal law and which is not otherwise a matter of public record or public
knowledge.
Consanguinity - has the meaning set forth in Texas Government Code Sections
573.022 and 573.023, or as amended.
Property - real estate, intellectual property, personal items, equipment, goods,
crops, livestock, or an equitable right to income from real estate, intellectual property,
personal items, equipment, goods, crops or livestock.
Relative - any person related to a city official within the first degree of
consanguinity or affinity, as determined under Texas Government Code, Chapter 573.
Representation - all forms of communication and personal appearances in which a
person, not acting in performance of official duties, formally or informally, serves as an
advocate for private interests, regardless of whether the representation is compensated.
2.64. - Standards of Conduct.
(a) Conflicts of Interest/ Disclosure of Relationships.
(1) City officials and candidates are subject to State law governing dual office
holding and the common law doctrine of incompatibility.
(2) City officials must comply with State law pertaining to conflicts of interest of
local government officials, including, but not limited to Texas Local Government
Code, Chapter 171, as amended, and Chapter 212, as amended, regardless of
whether or not the individual defined as a “city official” in this Code would
ordinarily be subject to the State law at issue. This provision specifically requires
that the affected city official refrain from participation in discussion, deliberation
or vote in any matter where a conflict exists, and disclose the nature and extent of
the conflict.
(b) Confidential Information.
(1) A city official may not:
6
(A) Disclose confidential information;
(B) Disclose or reveal any information, or the contents of any discussion,
considered during an executive session or closed meeting conducted
pursuant to the Texas Open Meetings Act, Texas Government Code,
Chapter 551, as amended, and held by the City Council, any City board,
commission, committee, or department;
(C) Directly or indirectly use any confidential information that was gained
by reason of such person’s official position for such person’s own gain or
benefit or for the benefit of others;
(D) Disclose or reveal any information or the contents of any discussion
when disclosure would violate the provisions of the Texas Public
Information Act, Texas Government Code, Chapter 552, as amended, or the
Texas Open Meetings Act, Texas Government Code Chapter 551, as
amended; or
(E) Use his/her position to secure official information about any person or
entity for any purpose other than the performance of his/her official duties.
(2) This section does not prohibit disclosure that is authorized or required by law
or the confidential reporting of illegal or unethical conduct to authorities
designated by law.
(c) Gifts.
(1) A city official may not accept or solicit any money, property, service or other
thing of value, by way of gift, favor, loan or otherwise which the official knows, or
should know, is being offered or given with the intent to unlawfully influence the
exercise or performance of such person’s official duties, or in return for having
exercised or performed official duties.
(2) This provision does not apply to:
(A) an occasional non-pecuniary gift less than $50.00 in value;
(B) an award publicly presented in recognition of public service;
(C) an occasional meal, breakfast, lunch, or dinner where public business
was discussed;
(D) lawful campaign contributions;
7
(E) admission to an event in which the city official is participating in
connection with official duties;
(F) attending social functions, ground breakings, or civic events pertinent to
the public relations and operations of the City;
(G) T-shirts, caps, and other similar promotional material;
(H) a gift to a city official relating to a special occasion such as a wedding,
anniversary, graduation, birth, illness, death, or holiday, provided that the
value of the gift is fairly commensurate with the occasion and the
relationship between the donor and the recipient;
(I) floral arrangements, edible arrangements, fruit and/or gift baskets given
to celebrate an achievement, special occasion or holiday, and clearly not
given with intent to influence; or
(J) a gift that would have been offered or given to the official if such person
were not a public official.
(3) A city official must take reasonable steps to persuade a relative not to solicit,
accept, or agree to accept any gift or benefit that would violate subsection (1) if the
official solicited, accepted, or agreed to accept it.
(d) Improper Economic Benefit; Unfair Advancement of Private Interests.
(1) A city official may not use his/her official position or knowledge from the
official position to secure special privileges or exemptions for the purpose of
achieving monetary gain for himself/herself or others.
(2) A city official may not grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage
to any citizen, individual, business organization, or group beyond that which is
normally available to every other citizen, individual, business or group.
(3) A city official may not appoint, nominate, or vote to nominate or appoint, any
relative within the third degree of consanguinity or within the second degree of
affinity. Degrees of consanguinity and affinity must be calculated as set out in
Texas Government Code, Chapter 573, as amended.
(4) A member of the City Council, Planning and Zoning Commission, or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, must file a statement with the record keeper, disclosing the
existence of a financial interest in property within the statutory 200-foot notice
area for a decision on a land matter. If the city official does not have a conflict of
interest under State law, and has not filed a protest, the city official may participate
8
in deliberation about the item, but may not vote on the item. For this provision, the
term “land matter” should be interpreted broadly to include zoning, permitting, plat
approval and variances.
(5) A city official who is a member of a City board or commission, may not serve
as a representative, before that board or commission, of any person, group or
entity.
(6) A city official may not represent any person, group, or entity, other than
himself/herself, his/her spouse, or his/her minor children, in any litigation to which
the City is a party, if the interests of that person, group, or entity are adverse to the
interests of the City.
(e) City Property and Resources.
A city official may not use City supplies, personnel, equipment or facilities for any
purpose, including political or campaign purposes, other than to conduct official
City business or to the extent those resources are lawfully available for public use.
(f) Outside Employment and Activities.
(1) A city official may not accept other employment incompatible with the full and
proper discharge of such person’s duties and responsibilities with the City, or
which might impair the official’s independent judgment in the performance of
his/her public duty.
(2) A city official may not knowingly engage in any outside activity which will
conflict, or be incompatible with the person’s position as an official of the City.
(3) A City Councilmember who is on the board of a nonprofit organization or
whose relative is on the board of a nonprofit organization may not vote on any
funding request by that nonprofit organization, unless the nonprofit organization
has a board of directors or trustees appointed in whole or part by the City Council.
2.65.-Complaint Procedures.
(a) Any person who believes there has been a violation of this Code may file a sworn,
written complaint with the City Secretary’s Office that alleges such violations. Complaint
forms may be obtained from the City Secretary’s Office.
(b) A complaint filed under this section must be in writing and under oath and must set
forth the following information:
(1) The name of the complainant;
9
(2) The street or mailing address, telephone number, and email address of the
complainant;
(3) The name of each city official and/or city employee complained about;
(4) The position or title of each city official and/or city employee complained
about;
(5) The nature of the alleged violation, including, if possible, the specific provision
of the Code of Ethics alleged to have been violated;
(6) A statement of the facts constituting the alleged violation and the dates or
period of time during which the violation is alleged to have occurred; and
(7) All documents or other materials in the possession of the complainant that are
relevant to the allegation; a list of all documents or other material relevant to the
allegation and available to the complainant, but that are not in the possession of the
complainant, including the location of the documents, if known; and a list of all
documents or other material relevant to the allegation, but unavailable to the
complainant, including the location of the documents, if known.
(c) The complaint must be accompanied by an affidavit stating that the information
contained in the complaint is based on personal knowledge and is true and correct, or that
the complainant has good reason to believe and does believe, that the facts alleged
constitute a violation of this Code of Ethics. The complainant shall swear to or affirm the
facts under oath before a notary public or other person authorized by law to administer
oaths under penalty of perjury. A complaint that is not sworn as required will not be
accepted and will be returned to the complainant.
(d) The complaint must state on its face an allegation that, if true, constitutes a violation
of this Code of Ethics.
(e) A complaint for violation of this Code must be made within 18 months from the date
of the alleged violation(s).
(f) A general complaint lacking in detail or failing to identify one or more alleged
violations of this Code of Ethics, will not be considered sufficient to invoke the
procedures set forth herein.
(g) Anonymous complaints will not be accepted for filing or further action. A person who
knowingly makes a false statement in a complaint shall be subject to criminal prosecution
for perjury as allowed by the laws of this State.
10
2.66. - Enforcement.
(a) City Employees. Complaints and investigations arising under this Code and involving
employees, including those that are Council appointed, will be addressed as set forth in
the City of Temple Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual.
(b) City Officials.
(1) Board and Commission Members. Board and commission members serve at the
will of the City Council and may be removed from their positions by the City
Council at any time. If the City Council has reason to believe that a board or
commission member has violated the standards set forth in this Code, the City
Council may take any action necessary to investigate the alleged violation. If the
City Council ultimately finds that the member has violated any standard set forth in
this Code, the City Council may, by majority vote, remove the member from the
board or commission on which he/she serves.
(2) City Councilmember. If a City Councilmember is believed to have violated the
standards set forth in this Code, the City Council may take any action necessary to
investigate the situation. The Councilmember accused of a potential violation may
not participate in any discussion, investigation, or vote related to the accusation. If
the City Council ultimately finds that the Councilmember has violated the
standards set forth in this Code, the City Council, by majority vote, may adopt a
resolution of censure against the Councilmember. The resolution will be
transmitted to the City Secretary’s Office and a copy placed on the City’s website.
The City may also take any other action allowed by law, including, but not limited
to, publication in the newspaper or through a press release.
(c) The City Council will not consider or investigate an alleged violation of this Code by
a board or commission member or Councilmember if the alleged violation occurred more
than 18 months prior to the date the City Council was made aware of the alleged
violation.
2.67.- Ethics Advisory Opinions.
(a) Any city official or employee may request from the City Attorney’s Office an advisory
opinion with respect to whether proposed action by that person would violate the Code of
Ethics. Such request must be in writing and provide sufficient detail to allow a thorough
and accurate analysis of the proposed action. A request lacking in detail may be returned
to the requestor for clarification or more information
(b) Within twenty (20) business days of receipt of the request, the City Attorney’s Office
must issue a written advisory opinion. Opinions that address new issues and that are
instructive on the application of the Code of Ethics must be posted on the City’s webpage
11
for reference, but must be posted in a manner that does not reveal the identity of the
individual requesting the opinion.
(c) A person who reasonably and in good faith acts in accordance with a written advisory
opinion issued by the City Attorney’s Office may not be found to have violated the Code
of Ethics by engaging in conduct approved in the advisory opinion, provided that:
(1) He or she requested the issuance of the opinion;
(2) The request for an opinion fairly and accurately disclosed all relevant facts; and
(3) Less than five (5) years has passed between the date the opinion was issued and
the date of the conduct in question.
Sect. 2-68 – 2-111. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. PAYMENT BY CHECK OR CREDIT CARD
Section 2-112. Fee for returned checks.
The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and directed to assess and collect a
fee on all checks issued to the City of Temple, Texas, or any of its departments, which
checks are returned by the bank upon which they are drawn. The amount of the fee shall
be established by resolution of the City Council. It shall be unlawful for any person who
issues such a check to fail or refuse to pay the fee as authorized here.
Section 2-113. Postdated checks.
Postdated checks are not acceptable for payment of any funds owed to the City of
Temple, Texas, or any of its departments. Upon receipt of a postdated check the City may
either return the check to the sender or maker or immediately present the check for
payment. Any person who makes payment to the City with a postdated check assumes the
risk of overdraft and all consequences of overdraft if the postdated check is paid early.
Sec. 2-114. Payment of fees or costs by credit cards.
All municipal officers, officials and employees who collect feels, fines, court costs or
other charges, including, but not limited to, the Director of Finance, Clerk of Municipal
Court, Director of the Civic Center and the Building Inspector are hereby authorized to
accept payment of any such fees, fines, court costs or other charges by credit card. Provided,
however, ad valorem taxes shall not be payable in anything other than currency of the
United States or by a check or money order or other method consistent with Section 31.06
of the Property Tax Code (V.A.T.C.S.) nor shall credit card payment be authorized if it is
otherwise prohibited by law.
12
Sec. 2-115. Service charge.
There is hereby established a service charge, which shall be the same as the fee charged
by the City of Temple for the collection of a check drawn on an account with insufficient
funds, which shall be collected from the person owing the fee, fine, court cost or other
charge, if that person's payment by credit card is not honored for any reason by the credit
card company on which the funds are drawn. This fee shall be in addition to the original fee,
fine, court costs or other charge and is for the collection of the original amount. The
municipal officer, employee or official collecting the service charge shall deposit the fee in
the general fund.
Sect. 2-116. Encumbrance of credit cards; fee.
Any municipal officer, employee or official who collects fees, fines, court costs or other
charges is hereby authorized to contract with the company issuing credit cards to collect and
seize credit cards issued by the company that are returned or otherwise unauthorized. All
such contracts shall be approved by the City Council and the City Attorney. The Director of
Finance shall establish a reasonable fee to be charged the credit card company for return of
the credit cards. The municipal officer, employee or official collecting the fee shall deposit
the fee in the general fund.
Sec. 2-117 – 2-169. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. RISK MANAGEMENT
Section 2-170. Policy.
(a) It is the goal of the City Council to provide the requisite municipal services to
its citizens most cost-effectively in terms of human, material, and financial resources.
(b) The City Council recognizes that it has a responsibility to provide a safe
working environment for its employees and that each employee must pursue the highest
of standards in his or her assigned activities and that all municipal employees must
recognize that the well-being of persons involved and the protection of our physical
resources are as important as the activity and work being performed.
(c) The City Council, acting as a trustee of municipal funds and assets, recognizing
that there is a constant exposure to risk of loss from occurrences involving damage to
property, injury to employees and other individuals, and unforeseen liabilities imposed by
law or assumed by contract, hereby establishes this policy for the intensive management
of municipal risks, and directs that this policy be implemented in stages over the next
several months. This policy applies to all pure risks, such as fire, liability suits, theft,
workers compensation, and other risks of property and liability losses, both direct and
13
indirect. It specifically does not apply to deliberately assumed loss of employee benefits,
depreciation or normal obsolescence. The policies contained herein supersede any
policies currently in force and effect and to the extent that these policies are in conflict
with current policies these policies shall control.
Sec. 2-171. Office of risk management.
There is hereby created an office of risk management within current personnel,
material, and financial constraints for the purpose of recognizing, avoiding, preventing
and controlling the chance of resource losses by whatever means feasible.
Sec. 2-172. Appointment and duties of risk manager.
The City Manager is hereby authorized to appoint a risk manager who will be
responsible to the City Manager and whose duties will include, but not be limited to, the
overall development, supervision, coordination, and implementation of the City of
Temple's risk management plans and programs.
Sec. 2-173. Risk Management Committee.
The City Manager shall appoint a risk management committee. The committee's
duties and responsibilities are to oversee the City's risk management plans and programs,
provide general policy guidance to all City departments, evaluate and make
recommendations to the City Manager to protect the interests of the City, its employees
and citizens, as well as to review the City's operations to insure adequate protection from
loss.
Sec. 2-174. Risk management techniques.
The Office of Risk Management, the Risk Management Committee, and all City
departments will be guided by the following policies and techniques:
(a) Because of the need to protect the assets of this municipality against
catastrophic loss (or to provide financial restitution if such loss should occur) and the
expense involved in such protection, risk management is a critical part of the total
management of the City of Temple, Texas.
(b) Risk management is a specialized discipline intended to provide the decisionmaking
management level with data pertinent to the identification, analysis, evaluation,
and alternative treatment of exposures to loss through chance events, for both program
review and planning new undertakings. In these management areas, the City of Temple
will utilize the services of qualified risk management specialists either in its own staff or
through the use of risk management outside consultants, as required. Provided, however,
consultants shall be hired only after approval by the City Council.
14
(c) The following techniques of risk management will be employed by the City of
Temple, Texas.
1. Recognition. The recognition function will be to identify, analyze,
and evaluate all exposure to loss through chance events, either in
existence or subsequently created, that involve loss potentials of
significant amounts either in one event or in the aggregate annually.
In this municipality, acceptable loss exposures will be determined by
the Risk Management Committee. From time to time this Committee
shall assess such loss exposures and may modify them in accordance
with current or anticipated fiscal limitations.
2. Avoidance. The anticipated financial rewards for assuming any
exposures to loss should exceed or at least be approximately equal to
potential loss. The City of Temple, Texas, will avoid incurring
disproportionate exposures to loss in contractual agreements. All
new undertakings shall be evaluated carefully and those already in
existence shall be re-evaluated periodically for the purpose of
determining if any loss exposure can be avoided.
3. Loss Prevention. Once it is decided that a loss exposure should be
retained (or transferred) and not avoided, it is the policy of this
municipality to try to utilize loss prevention techniques wherever
possible, consistent with the costs involved. It is the belief of this
municipality that it is preferable to attempt to prevent losses before
considering other techniques for handling loss exposures.
The reduction of losses depends primarily upon a careful review of
all operations, equipment, and facilities to identify potential hazards
and to eliminate or reduce them to their practical minimum. This
review must be a constant process--in the design, construction, and
operating stages on the part of all management and supervisory
personnel. Periodic safety inspections should serve as an overall
second look in all the above stages. The essential part of these
reviews is the corrective actions taken as a result of the
recommendations enacted.
4. Retention. Generally, the City of Temple, Texas will retain a loss
exposure under the following circumstances.
a. when the amount of annual potential loss is relatively so small
that it may conveniently be treated as a normal operating
expense; or
15
b. when
(1) the probability of loss (frequency) is so great that loss
is almost certain to occur; and
(2) the rates for insurance or other transfer mechanisms are
disproportionately high; and
(3) potential loss amounts are within the financial ability
of the City to retain; and
(4) no necessary insurance services are required; or
c. When the probability of occurrence is so remote that the
ordinarily prudent businessman would not incur any amount
of premium expense for insurance; or
d. When insurance is not available, or only available at
prohibitive cost.
5. Noninsurance Transfer. In all contractual relationships, the City of Temple,
Texas, will transfer to others all exposures to loss from chance events
appropriate to the transaction and relationship of the parties. This means
that the City of Temple, Texas, will consider before contractually
transferring a loss exposure to another party, that party's ability to assume
the potential loss, ability to control the loss, and the customs and traditions
of the parties and the industries involved. In the absence of adequate net
worth of other parties, contractual transfers shall be supported by insurance
of the indemnitor and evidence thereof required. Whenever a choice exists
among two or more methods of accomplishing a business purpose, the
opportunity to transfer the exposure shall be given appropriate
consideration.
6. Insurance Transfer. The City of Temple, Texas, will purchase insurance
under the following circumstances:
a. when required by law or contract; or
b. when the amount of potential loss is too large to be safely
retained (measured against assets, operating income, earnings,
and cash flow); or
16
c. when the probable annual cost variation is unacceptable and
insurance is available on acceptable terms; or
d. when insurance can better or more economically provide
accessory services required, such as inspection, claims
handling, legal qualifications, and loss prevention.
7. Joint Insurance Transfer and Retention. The City of Temple, Texas will
combine insurance transfer and retention through the use of deductibles,
franchises, excess insurance, and retrospective rating plans when relatively
low loss amount exposures can be safely retained.
Sec. 2-175. Dissemination and implementation.
This risk management policy has been developed and will be disseminated by the risk
manager to be used as a tool to help all department heads and supervisory personnel to
minimize the City's exposure to loss, whether these losses be in the form of funds expended,
theft, lost productivity, personal injury, vehicular accidents, inconvenience, pain and
suffering, or in other areas. This office of risk management will make itself available to
assist all departments in implementing these policies by providing such advice, guidance, or
counseling as required.
Sect. 2-176. Departmental operation.
The City Council of the City of Temple, Texas, recognizes that no risk management
plan, policy, or statement for the City will be any more effective than the weakest link in its
chain of command. Therefore, department heads and other supervisory personnel will be
required to cooperate fully with the risk manager and the risk management committee to
implement and enforce the risk management plan and policy.
Chapter 3
AIRPORTS AND AIRCRAFT
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 3-1. Airport department--Created; supervision.
Sec. 3-2. Same--Manager--Generally.
Sec. 3-3. Same-- Powers and duties.
Sec. 3-4. Draughon-Miller Joint Airport Zoning Board created;
membership; board of adjustment; administrative agency.
Secs. 3-5--3-7. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. DRAUGHON-MILLER CENTRAL TEXAS REGIONAL
AIRPORT
Sec. 3-8. Definitions.
Sec. 3-9. Conduct at airport; airport manager to have control; penalty for
violation.
Sec. 3-10. When open for use.
Sec. 3-11. General use restrictions and limitations.
Sec. 3-12. Approval of signs and billboards.
Sec. 3-13. Unauthorized entry to loading aprons, taxiways, runways or
landing area.
Sec. 3-14. Applicability of traffic code; accident report required.
Sec. 3-15. Aircraft to be operated only by licensed pilots.
Sec. 3-16. Starting aircraft engine without competent operator or pilot.
Sec. 3-17. Airworthiness of aircraft.
Sec. 3-18. Compliance with rules of Federal Aviation Administration.
Sec. 3-19. Compliance with local rules.
Sec. 3-20. Restrictions on taxiing aircraft.
Sec. 3-21. Taking off or landing at other than runway.
Sec. 3-22. Taking off or landing contrary to UNICOM instructions or
traffic pattern.
Sec. 3-23. Operation of aircraft while under influence of or using liquor or
drugs.
Sec. 3-24. Parking of vehicles generally.
Sec. 3-25. Parking of aircraft or vehicles near fire hydrants.
Sec. 3-26. Parking of aircraft after sunset.
Sec. 3-27. Leaving disabled aircraft on taxiways, runways overnight;
removal by airport manager.
Sec. 3-28. Unattended aircraft.
Sec. 3-29. Aircraft engine not be run in hangar.
Sec. 3-30. Restrictions on running up or checking aircraft engines.
Sec. 3-31. Fire prevention regulations.
Sec. 3-32. Aircraft not to be left in landing or takeoff area for instructional
purpose.
Sec. 3-33. Unauthorized use of aircraft, tools, accessories, parts, of another.
Sec. 3-34. Unauthorized work on aircraft or sale of merchandise.
Sec. 3-35. Construction of chapter.
Sec. 3-36. Use and privilege fees--Prescribed.
Sec. 3-37. Same--When payable; interest on delinquencies.
Sec. 3-38. Same--Place of payment.
Sec. 3-39. Same--Taking off before payment.
Sec. 3-40. Same--Agreements and liens to secure payment.
Sec. 3-41. Same--Free use of facilities.
Sec. 3-42. Rental of hangars, offices, buildings and airport space.
Sec. 3-43. Ground rentals for construction or installation of facilities.
Sec. 3-44. Rental of nonaviation buildings and areas.
Sec. 3-45. Grant of exclusive right prohibited; lease of excessive space or
facilities prohibited.
Sec. 3-46. Lost articles.
Sec. 3-47. Adjustment of rental rates and fees.
Sec. 3-48. Aircraft accident reports.
Sec. 3-49. Weapons, explosives and flammable materials.
Secs. 3-50--3-56. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. AIRPORT ADVISORY BOARD
Sec. 3-57. Created.
Sec. 3-58. Purposes.
Sec. 3-59. Membership.
Sec. 3-60. Quorum; voting.
Sec. 3-61. Chairman and meetings.
Sec. 3-62. Appointment and terms.
Chapter 3
AIRPORTS AND AIRCRAFT
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 3-1. Airport department--Created; supervision.
There is hereby created an airport department of the city government, which department
shall be under the general supervision of the city manager.
Sec. 3-2. Same--Manager--Generally.
The affairs of the airport department shall be administered by an official who shall have
the title of manager of the airport department, and such manager shall be appointed by the
city manager and approved by the city council, and he shall hold office for such period of
time as may be determined by the city manager. He may be removed at any time, with or
without cause, by the city manager.
Sec. 3-3. Same-- Powers and duties.
The manager of the airport department shall be in charge of all the administrative and
managerial duties pertaining to and connected with the management and operation of any and
all airports under the supervision and control of the city and shall make recommendations to
the city manager for the hiring and firing of the various employees and subordinate personnel
who may be employed to work in or about such airports. He shall handle the day-to-day
operations of any and all airports under the supervision and control of the city and also all
aviation matters which affect the city or its aviation program. He shall make
recommendations from time to time to the city manager and to the city council with reference
to questions of policy and regarding any problems affecting the supervision of the city
manager and shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him from time to time
in connection with aviation work by the city manager or the city council.
Sec. 3-4. Draughon-Miller Joint Airport Zoning Board created; membership; board of
adjustment; administrative agency.
(a) There is hereby created a joint airport zoning board, to be known as the Draughon-
Miller Joint Airport Zoning Board, which shall have the powers and exercise the duties set
forth by the Airport Zoning Act.
(b) The Draughon-Miller Joint Airport Zoning Board shall be composed of five (5)
members, two (2) to be appointed by the city council of the City of Temple, Texas and two
(2) members to be appointed by the Commissioners' Court of Bell County, Texas. The fifth
member shall be elected by a majority of the members so appointed, and said fifth member
shall serve as chairman of the said Draughon-Miller Joint Airport Zoning Board.
(c) The city council consents and authorizes the board to appoint the city planning and
zoning board as the airport zoning commission.
(d) The city council hereby consents and authorizes the board to appoint the city's zoning
board of adjustment as the airport zoning board of adjustments.
(e) The city council also hereby consents and authorizes the board to appoint the city as
the administrative agency of the airport zoning regulations.
Secs. 3-5--3-7. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. DRAUGHON-MILLER CENTRAL TEXAS REGIONAL AIRPORT
Sec. 3-8. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall, for the purpose of this
chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows:
Air carrier. Any aircraft operated for hire in which a pilot is provided, either for training
purposes or passenger or cargo purposes, operated on scheduled or nonscheduled flights,
including any aircraft operated or owned by an air transport line, air feeder line, air cargo
line, or charter service, and excluding any resident private aircraft or aircraft of an aircraft
service operator engaged only in student flying activities or sightseeing flights.
Air line passenger carrier. An air carrier, other than an air carrier operated for charter
service or charter parties, operated for the transportation of passengers and air mail and air
express.
Aircraft service operator. Any person or company engaged in the demonstration of
aircraft and aircraft parts, the retail or wholesale distribution of aircraft and aircraft parts,
aircraft repairs, aircraft storage, aircraft servicing, student flight training, sightseeing by
aircraft, aircraft rentals other than as an air carrier, or any other activity connected with
aircraft maintenance, servicing, sales, storage, rentals, or instruction for which a fee or
service charge is assessed or received.
Airport. The landing field and all property and facilities within the area constituting the
fenced enclosure known as the Draughon-Miller Central Texas Regional Airport, and
formerly known as Temple Army Airfield, located on U.S. Highway 36 approximately five
and one-half (5 1/2) miles west of the city.
The word "airport" shall include the land, buildings, roads, hangars, landing area, and all
property of the city included within the airport area of the city.
Airport manager. The administrative head of the airport department of the city. The
airport manager may be represented in his absence by the assistant airport manager, or in his
absence, by the designated line attendant on duty.
Concessionaire. Any person engaged in the operation of any restaurant, newsstand,
vending machine, shop or business, other than the business of an aircraft service operator, or
the sale of any goods, wares or merchandise other than aircraft, aircraft parts, gasoline or oil.
Gasoline service operator. Any person vending, handling, storing, servicing or furnishing
gasoline or oil, or both for use in such person's aircraft, or the aircraft of another, with or
without a charge or profit, at wholesale or retail, or as an accommodation for himself or
another.
Landing area, runways, taxiways, etc. The landing area, runways, taxiways, loading
aprons, parking aprons, parking areas and other areas and buildings referred to in this chapter
shall respectively refer to and indicate the landing area, runways, taxiways, loading aprons,
parking aprons, and parking area or other particular type of area or building as designated on
the ground by signs or markers or upon the map or plan of the airport.
Motor carrier. Any taxicab, bus or other vehicle operated for hire in which a driver is
provided, either for passenger or cargo purposes.
Private aircraft. Any aircraft other than an air carrier.
Resident carrier. Any aircraft, other than an air carrier or aircraft used for hire or student
training in the business of an aircraft service operator, that remains in operation at the airport,
using the same as a base for a period of thirty (30) days or longer.
Sec. 3-9. Conduct at airport; airport manager to have control; penalty for violation.
(a) Any person making use of the area belonging to the City of Temple, known as
Draughon-Miller Central Texas Regional Airport, or found thereon or being thereon, shall be
held to have consented to all ordinances of a general nature as being applicable to his conduct
in or over the airport, just as they are applicable to any person within the City of Temple.
(b) The airport manager, through the city manager, shall have control of the operation and
management of the Draughon-Miller Central Texas Regional Municipal Airport and persons
in, on or over it.
(c) All general ordinances of the city pertaining to the conduct of persons shall be in full
force and effect at the Draughon-Miller Central Texas Regional Airport. The chief of police,
or any police officer under this authority, has the authority to enforce any violation of any
ordinances or rules or regulations pertaining to the airport.
(d) The airport manager may promulgate such rules and regulations as necessary to ensure
the orderly conduct of the affairs of the Draughon-Miller Central Texas Regional Airport.
However, such rules and regulations must first be approved by the city council of the City of
Temple. Such rules and regulations, when adopted and approved, shall be printed, and copies
of the rules and regulations put in prominent places throughout the Draughon-Miller Central
Texas Regional Airport. A copy of such regulations shall be given to all persons leasing the
real property within the airport at the time a lease is entered into. The airport manager shall
have the authority to remove aircraft or persons from the airport who are in violation of any
of the rules and regulations set forth as provided above. Any towing charges necessary to
remove aircraft will be charged against the owner of such aircraft and, upon failure to pay,
shall become a lien against that aircraft.
(e) [Reserved.]
Sec. 3-10. When open for use.
The airport shall be open for public use at all hours of the day subject to the restrictions
provided in this chapter and to such other restrictions due to inclement weather, the condition
of the landing area, and presentation of special events and like causes, as may be determined
by the airport manager.
Sec. 3-11. General use restrictions and limitations.
(a) Conditioned upon payment of fees, obedience to rules. The right to use the airport or
to exercise any privilege in connection therewith, for any purpose, whether such right is
granted generally by the provisions of this chapter or by lease, contract, permit or license,
expressed or implied, shall be subject to the conditions that:
(1) All fees or charges in connection with such use or privilege be paid as the same
accrue and become payable;
(2) All terms and provisions of this chapter be fully and in good faith observed; and
(3) All orders, rules or regulations made by the airport manager be fully and in good
faith observed.
(b) Termination of privileges. The right to use the airport or to exercise any privilege in
connection therewith shall automatically terminate upon the breach of any of the foregoing
conditions and any such right or privilege so forfeited shall be reinstated or renewed only
upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall deem necessary to assure that the
foregoing conditions will be satisfied. The use of the airport or the exercise of any privilege
in connection therewith shall constitute an acceptance of the foregoing conditions and an
acknowledgment that such use or privilege is subject thereto.
(c) City's right to deny privilege for use of facilities. The right to use or exercise any
privilege at or in connection with the airport is limited by the extent of the facilities available
therefor at the airport, and there is hereby reserved to the city, in the public interest, the right
to deny to any person the use of, or the exercise of, any privilege at or in connection with the
airport whenever facilities therefor are unavailable, either because of the absence of such
facilities or because existing facilities are then being fully utilized by others.
(d) City's right to deny privilege to unfit persons. There is hereby further reserved to the
city, in the public interest, the exclusive right to judge, determine and pass upon the
qualifications and fitness of any person to use or exercise any privilege at or in connection
with the airport, and to deny an unqualified or unfit person such use or privilege whenever, in
the judgment or opinion of the city council, such action is necessary or desirable for the
purpose of promoting the protection and preservation of the public health, safety, order,
property and general welfare of the city and its inhabitants.
Sec. 3-12. Approval of signs and billboards.
No sign, billboard or advertising device shall be installed, erected, constructed or
maintained within the boundaries of the airport district of the city unless and until the
location, size, height, materials and subject matter thereof have been approved by the airport
manager bearing his written endorsement of approval.
Sec. 3-13. Unauthorized entry to loading aprons, taxiways, runways or landing area.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or walk or be carried upon or to
enter the loading aprons, taxiways, runways or usable landing area of the airport at any time
as a spectator or for the purpose of sightseeing or any other purpose not authorized by the
airport manager.
Sec. 3-14. Applicability of traffic code; accident report required.
(a) The traffic code of the city now in effect and hereafter amended or supplemented shall
be applicable to and is hereby extended so as to apply to the area included in the airport
district of the city.
(b) All persons involved in any accident occurring on the premises of the Draughon-
Miller Central Texas Regional Airport shall report same to the airport manager or the Temple
Police Department as soon as possible giving all pertinent information requested by the
person in charge.
Sec. 3-15. Aircraft to be operated only by licensed pilots.
No aircraft shall take off or land at the airport unless it is being navigated by a pilot
holding an effective, valid pilot's certificate issued by the proper agency of the government
of the United States, an effective foreign pilot's certificate validated by such agency of the
government of the United States, or is a qualified student pilot.
Sec. 3-16. Starting aircraft engine without competent operator or pilot.
It shall be unlawful for any person to start or run any aircraft engine at the airport without
a competent operator or pilot at the controls of the aircraft.
Sec. 3-17. Airworthiness of aircraft.
No aircraft shall take off or land at the airport unless the aircraft holds an effective, valid
certificate of airworthiness from the proper agency of the government of the United States,
and the aircraft is operated according to the terms thereof.
Sec. 3-18. Compliance with rules of Federal Aviation Administration.
It shall be unlawful for any person to navigate any aircraft over, land upon or take off
from, or service, repair or maintain any aircraft on the airport or conduct any operation on or
from the airport otherwise than in conformity with the rules and regulations of the Federal
Aviation Administration of the United States of America, and such rules and regulations are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this chapter as fully in all respects as if
particularly set forth in this chapter.
Sec. 3-19. Compliance with local rules.
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act prohibited by or to omit any act required
by rules, regulations and orders promulgated by the airport manager for the purpose of
implementing, supplementing or carrying into effect, with respect to all phases of air travel
and transportation, the ordinances of the city, the laws, rules and regulations of the state or
any proper agency thereof, the air traffic rules of the Federal Aviation Administration, and
other local air traffic rules and ground rules relating to safety or the prevention of unsafe
practices.
Sec. 3-20. Restrictions on taxiing aircraft.
It shall be unlawful for any person at the airport:
(1) To taxi any aircraft on a loading apron or parking apron at a speed in excess of ten
(10) miles per hour or to taxi any aircraft not equipped with adequate brakes on a
loading apron or parking apron at any speed unless an attendant is at all times
beside at lest one wing tip.
(2) To taxi any aircraft on a loading apron so as to enter any area where passengers
are entering or leaving any aircraft.
(3) To taxi any aircraft in the vicinity of aircraft landing or taking off, or to fail to
completely stop an aircraft being taxied in the vicinity of aircraft landing or taking
off.
(4) To taxi any aircraft upon a runway except as a necessary part of taking off or
landing.
(5) To taxi any aircraft at night or after sunset unless the navigation lights and at least
one landing light, if equipped with landing lights, are turned on and burning.
Sec. 3-21. Taking off or landing at other than runway.
It shall be unlawful for any person to take off or land any aircraft, except in case of
emergency or accident, on any loading apron, parking apron, taxiway, or any other place at
the airport other than a runway.
Sec. 3-22. Taking off or landing contrary to UNICOM instructions or traffic pattern.
It shall be unlawful for any person to take off or land any aircraft at the airport contrary to
the instructions of the UNICOM, if operative, or the air-traffic pattern established for the
airport.
Sec. 3-23. Operation of aircraft while under influence of or using liquor or drugs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to take off, land or operate any aircraft from, at or over
the airport while under the influence of or using any intoxicating liquor or habit-forming
drug.
Sec. 3-24. Parking of vehicles generally.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any automobile or other vehicle at the airport
outside of the limits of the designated parking area for the particular kind or type of
automobile or vehicle.
Sec. 3-25. Parking of aircraft or vehicles near fire hydrants.
No aircraft or vehicle shall be parked within twenty-five (25) feet of a fire hydrant at the
airport.
Sec. 3-26. Parking of aircraft after sunset.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any aircraft standing or parked at the airport
outside of a designated parking area at night or after sunset, unless the navigation lights and
at least one landing light, if equipped with landing lights, are turned on and burning.
Sec. 3-27. Leaving disabled aircraft on taxiways, runways overnight; removal by
airport manager.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any disabled or wrecked aircraft overnight
on any taxiway, runway, or any place at the airport other than a designated parking area,
unless specific prior authority has been granted by the airport manager.
(b) If any person refuses to move an aircraft as directed by the airport manager, said
aircraft may be towed away by the airport manager at the owner or operator's expense and
without liability for damage which may result in the course of or after such moving. The
same shall apply to removal of a wrecked or damaged aircraft and its parts.
Sec. 3-28. Unattended aircraft.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any aircraft unattended at the airport on any
loading apron, taxiway, runway or area other than a designated parking area, or to fail to
securely tie down any unattended aircraft.
Sec. 3-29. Aircraft engine not be run in hangar.
It shall be unlawful for any person to start or run any aircraft engine in any hangar at the
airport.
Sec. 3-30. Restrictions on running up or checking aircraft engines.
It shall be unlawful for any person to run up or check any aircraft engine at any place
without having adequate brakes fully set or without having the wheels set with blocks
equipped with ropes or other suitable means for removing the blocks.
Sec. 3-31. Fire prevention regulations.
It shall be unlawful for any person at the airport, except an aircraft service operator:
(1) To fuel or drain any aircraft while the engine is running or while in a hangar or
other enclosed place, and without equipment for grounding static electricity
continuously during such fueling or draining operation.
(2) To bring, keep or store cylinders, flasks or open containers for any flammable fuel
in any hangar except in the fuel tanks of aircraft or such other containers as may
have been approved in advance for use in hangars by the airport manager.
(3) To clean, repair, paint or assemble motors, aircraft parts or aircraft within the
storage area of any hangar when flammable fluids or substances or open flames
are used in such cleaning, repairing or assembling.
(4) To smoke, or ignite any match or cigarette lighter in any hangar or building used
for the storage or repair of aircraft or fuel therefor, except in offices, waiting
rooms or portions of such buildings in which smoking is authorized by the airport
manager, or at any other place where a "No Smoking" sign is displayed.
Sec. 3-32. Aircraft not to be left in landing or takeoff area for instructional purpose.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any aircraft on the landing or take-off area of
the airport for the purpose of instructing students between flights.
Sec. 3-33. Unauthorized use of aircraft, tools, accessories, parts, of another.
It shall be unlawful for any person to borrow, use or enter any aircraft, or borrow or use
aircraft parts or accessories or tools or other equipment owned or controlled by any other
person and stored or otherwise left at the airport, without the consent of the owner or
operator thereof.
Sec. 3-34. Unauthorized work on aircraft or sale of merchandise.
It shall be unlawful for any person who is not the owner, pilot or a passenger on any
aircraft to work on such aircraft or on the ramp or landing area of the airport, or to sell
merchandise of any kind on the ramp or landing area of the airport, or to sell merchandise of
any kind anywhere on the premises of the airport.
Sec. 3-35. Construction of chapter.
The provisions and terms of this chapter shall not be construed to:
(1) Prevent the city council from entering into contracts, leases and agreements which
do not strictly comply with the requisites hereof, provided the facts reasonably
support a variance;
(2) Prevent the city manager from establishing fees and charges for other services at
the airport which exceed the minimum charges provided herein.
Sec. 3-36. Use and privilege fees--Prescribed.
There is hereby levied and imposed upon the owners and operators of all aircraft using the
airport and all persons performing services or furnishing goods, wares or merchandise in
connection therewith the following fees and charges for the use of the landing area and the
privilege of performing such services or furnishing goods, wares and merchandise, and such
fees and charges shall accrue and be due and payable to and for the use and benefit of the
airport at the time and in the manner provided in this chapter:
(1) Landing fees:
(a) Air carriers. Landing fees paid by air carriers shall be regulated as may be
agreed upon by contract between the carrier and the city and confirmed by
resolution. Landing fees for air carriers not controlled by contract shall be
set from time to time by resolution of the city council.
(b) Aircraft service operators. Landing fees for aircraft service operators may
be agreed upon by contract between the owner or operator and the city and
confirmed by resolution. Landing fees for aircraft service operators not
regulated by contract shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city
council.
(2) Minimum landing fees. The minimum charge for other than private aircraft for
landing an airplane at Draughon-Miller Central Texas Regional Airport shall be a
sum equal to twenty cents ($.20) per each one thousand (1,000) pounds gross
weight of the airplane, together with its passenger or freight cargo.
(3) Minimum aircraft service operator fees. The minimum fees for aircraft service
operators shall include charges for land rental, hangar/office rental, and fuel
service as follows:
(a) The minimum annual charge for land space is three cents ($.03) per square
foot.
(b) The minimum annual charge for hangar/office space is twenty-five cents
($0.25) per square foot.
(c) The minimum charge for delivery of aviation fuel to an aircraft service
operator storage tank for use in the operator's vehicles and equipment is
airport in-tank cost, plus ten (10) percent in-tank cost, per gallon.
(4) Gasoline service operator fees:
(a) For each calendar year or part thereof, such fees as may be agreed upon by
contract between the individual and the city.
(b) All gasoline which is sold at the airport shall be sold by the city for such
price as may be determined either by the airport manager or the city
council.
(5) Concessionaire fees. For each calendar year or part thereof, such fees or rental as
may be agreed upon by contract between the individual and the city.
(6) Motor carrier fees. For each calendar year or part thereof, such fees as may be
agreed upon by contract between the individual and the city.
(7) Aircraft owned and operated by federal or state government. Fees for the use of
the landing area by, and provisions for performing any services or furnishing any
goods, wares or merchandise in connection with, any military, naval or other
aircraft owned and operated by the government of the United States or the
State of Texas, or any agency or department of either of such governments, shall
be determined and provided for by agreement between the city and the agency or
department of such governments and no person shall charge any fees in
connection therewith or perform any services or furnish any goods, wares or
merchandise to such aircraft unless and until permission therefor has been granted
by ordinance or resolution of the city council.
(8) Other fees. Fees for ramp parking, automobile parking, aircraft boarding and other
miscellaneous fees for services may be established by the city manager or the city
council as the need for such fees is determined.
Sec. 3-37. Same--When payable; interest on delinquencies.
(a) All fees prescribed by section 3-36 shall be payable in advance except that:
(1) All fees based upon the gross value or volume of sales or gross revenue, directly
or in the alternative, shall be payable on or before the tenth day of the month next
succeeding the month to which the fees are applicable; and
(2) All landing fees for nonscheduled air carriers that are based upon the gross weight
of the aircraft shall be payable on the day the landing occurs.
(b) The amount of such fees accrued and not paid on or before the date the same become
due and payable shall bear interest from the due date until paid at the rate of ten (10) percent
per annum.
Sec. 3-38. Same--Place of payment.
All fees or rentals prescribed by this chapter shall be paid to the city at the office of the
airport manager.
Sec. 3-39. Same--Taking off before payment.
It shall be unlawful for any person who incurs or who is directly or indirectly responsible
for incurring any landing fees, privilege fee or other fee or charge of any nature or kind
whatsoever levied or imposed by, or payable to or for the benefit of the city on account of, or
as a result of, the use of the airport or the furnishing or sale of any services, goods, wares or
merchandise to, for or in connection with any aircraft owned, operated or otherwise in the
possession or under the control or supervision of such person unless and until all such fees
and charges have been satisfied and paid in full, and the airport manager is hereby authorized
and instructed to close and deny to such person the use of the runways, taxiways and other
parts of the airport capable of being used for taking-off aircraft unless and until such fees and
charges have been so satisfied and paid.
Sec. 3-40. Same--Agreements and liens to secure payment.
The right to use the airport or to exercise any privilege in connection therewith, where the
use or privilege is subject to any fee or charge provided by this chapter, is reserved to the city
and withheld from every person unless and until the payment of such fees or charges to
accrue and be incurred have been secured by express agreement with the city, and every
person who shall use the airport or exercise any privilege in connection therewith, without
first having expressly provided by agreement with the city for security for such fees and
charges, shall, by the act of using the airport or exercising any privilege in connection
therewith, grant and give, and consent to, a lien in favor of the city in the amount of the fees
and the charges to be incurred by him then or thereafter, for such use or privilege, upon all
property which he shall at any time use, or have in his control, at the airport, in the same
manner and to the same extent as if such lien were expressly agreed to and contracted for,
and any such lien shall be foreclosed as provided by Rule 309 of the Texas Rules of Civil
Procedure.
Sec. 3-41. Same--Free use of facilities.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the owners and operators of
aircraft may use the landing area, ramps and roadways of the airport in common with others
without charge; provided, however, that such use conforms in all respects to the airport rules,
air traffic patterns, ground rules and other rules, orders and ordinances promulgated by the
airport manager and the city council relating to aircraft, air services and aviation and to the
civil air regulations and air traffic rules of the Federal Aviation Administration or other
proper agency of the government of the United States and the State of Texas.
Sec. 3-42. Rental of hangars, offices, buildings and airport space.
(a) Lease or contract required for use or occupancy; exceptions. The use or occupancy
for any purpose of any hangar, shop, warehouse, office building or any portion of the
grounds of the airport, except the use of the landing area, tie-down facilities, ramps and
roadways in common with others, by any person shall be unlawful unless and until
application therefor has first been made to the airport manager and a lease or contract for
such use or occupancy has been made and entered into by and between such person and the
city.
(b) Execution of lease or contract. The airport manager, for and on behalf of the city,
shall have authority and power to lease, for any period not exceeding one month, by oral or
written agreement, space in any hangar for the storage of aircraft only, and fix the rental or
storage charge therefor. All other leases or contracts shall be in writing, signed by the lessee
or user, approved by resolution of the city council and executed on its behalf by the mayor
and the city controller.
(c) The fees and requirements in this subsection set forth, shall be in effect at Draughon-
Miller Central Texas Regional Airport in all instances, except leases and contracts negotiated
and approved by the city council in open, public meetings wherein the terms hereof may be
varied consistently with the facts of each such contract, or lease, as found by the city council:
(1) To limit unreasonable and unnecessary administrative costs and future limitations
at the airport, hangars, office space and ground space shall be leased on a term of
twelve (12) months, when practical, and no lease for a period in excess of twentyfour
(24) months shall be executed except upon approval of the city council.
Leases may provide for the payment of rentals on a monthly, quarterly,
semiannually or annual basis.
(2) To ensure that space usage at the airport serves the purposes of the airport, and to
provide for a reasonable return upon expenditures for the improvement of the
airport. Hangars designed for the storage of aircraft shall not be rented or leased
for any purpose except the storage of aircraft; provided, that, upon written consent
of the airport manager, individuals renting a hangar for the purposes of aircraft
storage may, together with the aircraft, store additional items as itemized in the
written consent. The minimum fee for rental of any private aircraft hangar shall be
seventy dollars ($70.00) per month and no hangar shall be rented or leased for
purposes other than storage of aircraft without approval of the city council.
(3) The minimum yearly charge for the use, lease or rental of office space in the
terminal building at Draughon-Miller Central Texas Regional Airport shall be
eight dollars and fifty cents ($8.50) per square foot.
(d) Provisions, conditions and covenants of lease or contract. Every lease or contract
made under this section shall be subject to the following provisions, conditions and
covenants, whether expressed therein or incorporated therein by reference or not:
(1) That the lessee or user shall restore all buildings and the premises used to the same
condition and good order as that existing at the time of entering upon the same,
ordinary wear and tear excepted, at or before the expiration or termination from
any cause of the lease or contract.
(2) That the lessee or user shall remove all improvements and personal property
placed thereon by him at or before the expiration or termination from any cause of
the lease or contract, and that any improvements or property not so removed shall
thereupon be and become the property of the city.
(3) That the lessee or user shall not make alterations, attach fixtures or erect additions,
structures or signs in or upon the premises leased, unless the plans and
specifications therefor have been submitted to the airport manager and the
same have been approved in writing by the airport manager or by resolution of the
city council.
(4) That the lease or contract shall not be assigned, in whole or in part, without prior
approval of the city council.
(5) That the lessee or user shall keep the premises in a neat, safe and sanitary
condition at all times and that the city, its officers, agents and employees, shall
have the right at reasonable times to enter and inspect the premises and to make
any necessary repairs thereto, or determine that any obligation or covenant of the
lessee or user to maintain the premises in good repair has been observed.
(6) That the city has the right, as it sees fit, to further develop or improve that area of
the airport or any building or structure thereon and to take any action it considers
necessary or advisable to protect the aerial approaches to the airport against
obstruction and to increase the usefulness of the airport and prohibit and prevent
structures and property which, in the opinion of the city council, constitutes a
hazard to aircraft.
(7) That the lessee or user shall carry fire, wind and general liability insurance, as well
as public liability and property damage insurance, with such coverage as the city
council shall, from time to time, require by ordinance or resolution upon the
premises, equipment and property under the control of the lessee or user.
(8) That the lessee or user shall restore any building or other property destroyed or
damaged by fire or other casualty while the same is leased to or occupied or used
by him and under his control.
(9) That the lessee or user shall prevent his agents or employees, and all persons
coming upon the airport at his invitation, express or implied, or to transact any
business with him, from going upon or being at any restricted or unsafe portion of
the airport and shall assume all liability and responsibility for, and shall indemnify
and hold harmless the city from, any damage or claim of any nature or kind
whatsoever by any such agent, employee or person, as well as the claims of any
other person, arising from, or attributable directly or indirectly to, going upon or
being at any restricted or unsafe portion of the airport.
(10) That the lessee or user will indemnify and hold harmless the city from all claims
or demands of any kind or character whatsoever arising out of, or connected in any
kind of way with, the demonstration of aircraft and aircraft accessories or student
flying activities conducted by the lessee or user, his agents, employees or students,
arising out of the operation of any aircraft owned or operated by him, his agents,
employees or students.
(11) That, as between the lessee or user and the city only, the lessee or user shall
assume all risks of every kind and character whatsoever incident to the use of
the airport or the exercise of any privilege in connection therewith, including
specifically, but not being limited to, the risk of damage or injury arising from any
act done or omitted to be done by any other lessee, user or person, and that the
lessee or user shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and
employees, from any liability or loss to the lessee or user, his agents or employees,
arising out of the use of any airport or the exercise of any privilege in connection
therewith by the lessee or the user, his agents or employees, or by any other
person.
(12) That the lessee or user, his agents, employees and students, shall fully and
faithfully observe all the ground rules, air traffic rules, and other rules, regulations
or orders relating to safety or the prevention of unsafe practices which shall be
promulgated from time to time by the airport manager.
(13) That the lessee or user, his agents, employees and students, shall fully and
faithfully observe all ordinances of the city, all laws of the state and the rules,
regulations and orders of any agency or department thereof, and all laws of the
United States of America and the rules, regulations and orders of any agency or
department thereof, and relating to air travel and commerce, aircraft, and the
maintenance and operation of aircraft and facilities in connection therewith.
(14) That all rents or charges be paid monthly in advance in case to the city at the
office of the airport manager.
(15) That all fees and other charges imposed by this chapter upon the lessee or user he
paid at the time and in the manner therein provided.
(16) That the lease or contract shall cease and terminate and be ineffective as to any
expired portion of the term thereof automatically upon the expiration or
termination of any permit or license granted to the lessee or user or required of the
lessee to obtain or renew, or obtain the renewal of, any such permit or license.
(17) That the rights of the lessee or user shall be subordinate to the provisions of any
existing or future agreement between the city and the United States of America
relative to the operation or maintenance of the airport, the execution of which was
or may be required as a condition precedent to the expenditure of funds of the
United States government for the development or improvement of the airport.
(18) That the rights of the lessee or user shall be subordinate to the provisions of any
existing or future agreement between the city and the United States of America for
use of the airport or any part thereof during time of war or national emergency for
military or naval purposes, and that any provisions of the lease or contract shall be
suspended insofar as the same are inconsistent with the provisions of such
agreements with the United States of America.
(19) That, insofar as general municipal regulation is concerned, lessee binds himself,
his heirs, executors and administrators to comply, at his own costs and expense,
with all municipal regulations, ordinances and zoning regulations now in force, or
that may be hereafter enacted with regard to the use of the airport premises
including present or future rules and regulations applying specifically to aircraft
service operators as a whole, including fees and rates charged.
(20) That, in the case of default in any of the covenants or conditions, the city may
enforce performance of the lease in any mode provided by law, and the lease may
be forfeited at its discretion if such default continues for a period of ten (10) days
after the lessee or user is notified of such default and the intention to declare the
lease forfeited, such notice to be sent by mail or otherwise to the leased premises;
and thereupon (unless the default has been completely removed or cured) the lease
or contract shall cease for the expiration of the term thereof, and the city, its agents
or attorney, shall have the right, without further notice or demand, to reenter and
remove all persons and property without being deemed guilty of any manner of
trespass and without prejudice to any remedies for arrears of rent or breach of
covenant, and the city shall have a lien as security for the unpaid rent upon the
property of the lessee or user at the airport.
Sec. 3-43. Ground rentals for construction or installation of facilities.
No lease or contract for the use of a site or space at the airport for the construction,
erection or installation by the lessee or user of any hanger or office space, store, restaurant,
service establishment, warehouse, or building or other facility shall be made covering any
portion of the grounds of the airport for so long as existing facilities at the airport are
available and suitable for the intended purposes of the lessee or the user. Leases or contracts
for the use and occupancy of a site or space for the construction, erection or installation of
any facility not available at the airport, or to take the place of unsuitable existing facilities at
the airport, shall be made and entered into upon application therefor in the manner and
subject to the terms and conditions provided in section 3-42, with the following exceptions in
the case of a lease or contract for a site or space for any building, structure or facility other
than for tanks or other means of storing or dispensing fuel:
(1) The lease or contract shall be for a term, as determined by the city council, on the
basis of the area and space required, the location thereof, the type and nature of
the building, structure or facility, the purposes and intended use thereof, the cost
thereof and the rate of depreciation thereto.
(2) The original cost of constructing, erecting or installing the building, structure or
facility may be prorated or amortized and may be in part or full satisfaction of all
obligations of the lessee or user to pay any rental for and during the full term of
the lease or contract.
(3) Upon completion of the building, structure or facility, and during and upon
expiration or termination of the lease or contract, the building, structure or facility
shall be and become the property of the city.
(4) The lessee or user shall keep the building, structure or facility in good repair and
in a safe, sanitary and attractive condition, and shall landscape the area
appurtenant thereto, during the entire term of the lease, and shall replace the same
in the event it shall be destroyed by fire or other casualty during the term of the
lease.
(5) The lessee or user may assign or sell the lease or contract to any person approved
by the city council.
(6) The lease or contract shall be subject to such other and additional terms, covenants
and conditions as may be agreed to and incorporated in the lease or contract.
Sec. 3-44. Rental of nonaviation buildings and areas.
(a) The city, upon the recommendation of the airport manager, shall designate the
buildings and areas included in the airport district that are not suitable for, or are not
currently required for, air commerce or other aviation purposes and that are suitable or
adaptable for use as warehouses, stores, service establishments or any other commercial,
industrial, or agricultural or livestock purposes not connected directly with air commerce or
the furnishing of services and goods, wares or merchandise to air passengers or aircraft
owners or operators. Such nonaviation buildings and areas shall be leased by inviting
competitive bids. The invitation to bid shall designate the particular building or area, the
purpose for which it will be leased, the minimum and maximum term for which it will be
leased, and the time within which bids must be submitted. The invitation to bid shall be
published in any manner which the city council may determine, and all bids submitted shall
be sealed and delivered to the city controller. At the time announced in the invitations, the
bids shall be opened in the presence of a majority of the city council and no award shall be
made except to one of such bidders. The council shall determine the most advantageous bid
for the city and shall award the lease to such bidders, but the council shall have the right to
reject any and all bids, and, in the event all bids are rejected, may call for new bids. Pending
the time of submitting bids, the terms and conditions of the lease that is to be made and
entered into with the successful bidder shall be on file in the office of the city manager and
the airport manager for inspection of all persons desiring to bid. The building or area shall
also be made available for inspection by all persons desiring to bid.
(b) The rental for such nonaviation buildings and areas shall be based upon the number of
square feet or area, a fixed annual or monthly rental, a percentage or share of the gross value
or volume of sales, other fees as negotiated, or any combination thereof, as the city council
shall determine and cause to be stated in the invitation of bids.
(c) Each lease under this section shall be in writing, executed by the lessee, approved by
resolution of the city council, and executed on behalf of the city by the mayor and city
controller.
Sec. 3-45. Grant of exclusive right prohibited; lease of excessive space or facilities
prohibited.
There shall never be granted to any person the exclusive right for the use of any landing
area or air navigation facility or the exercise at the airport of any privilege to carry on any
business, trade or profession for or in connection with the sale or furnishing of services,
goods, wares or merchandise to or for aircraft, or the operation or navigation thereof, and
there shall never be leased at the airport any space or facility in excess of that reasonably
necessary for the conduct and operation of the business, trade or profession of the lease.
Sec. 3-46. Lost articles.
All lost articles shall be turned in to the airport manager's office by the finders. Any such
articles not claimed in sixty (60) days will be disposed of as determined by the manager.
Sec. 3-47. Adjustment of rental rates and fees.
The rental rates and fees established herein are considered to be the minimum for 1980,
and may be adjusted on the anniversary date of any lease between the city and a lessee on the
airport, upon recommendation by the airport manager to the city manager according to the
current price index for Dallas, Texas, or in keeping with rates and fees for similar business
endeavors then prevailing in Temple, Texas.
Sec. 3-48. Aircraft accident reports.
The operator of an aircraft involved in an accident occurring on the airport shall
immediately, and by the most expeditious means available, notify the airport manager and the
Federal Aviation Administration. The report shall contain the following information:
Location; date; time; aircraft make, model and registration number; name of operation,
number of people involved; injuries to each person, and weather conditions. When a written
report of any accident is required by the Federal Aviation Regulations, a copy of such report
may be submitted to the City of Temple in lieu of the report that is required above.
Sec. 3-49. Weapons, explosives and flammable materials.
No person, except peace officers, duly authorized post office, airport and air carrier
employees or members of the Armed Forces of the United States on official duty, shall carry
any weapons, explosives or flammable material on the airport except a cased sporting gun
carried for shipment.
Secs. 3-50--3-56. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. AIRPORT ADVISORY BOARD
Sec. 3-57. Created.
The airport advisory board is created by resolution of the City Council of the City of
Temple, Texas
Sec. 3-58. Purposes.
The board shall have the general purpose of advising the city council in matters pertaining
to the Draughon-Miller Central Texas Regional Airport of the City of Temple. It shall make
recommendations as to fees, charges, improvements and needs of the airport, and such other
matters as may be assigned to it by the city council. The board shall also have the following
purposes:
(1) To keep abreast of legislation, whether federal or state, having application to the
airport and from time to time advise the city council regarding same.
(2) To advise the city council upon ways and means to strengthen and improve the
effectiveness and operation of the airport.
(3) To investigate and advise the city council upon the needs of the airport and the
means of alleviating same.
Sec. 3-59. Membership.
The board shall consist of six (6) residents of the City of Temple and three (3) residents
at-large, one of which shall be appointed from the City of Temple Tax Increment Financing
Reinvestment Zone Number One Board of Directors and one from the Temple Economic
Development Corporation Board of Directors. The airport manager, city manager, and mayor
shall be ex-officio members of the board.
Sec. 3-60. Quorum; voting.
Five (5) members of the board shall constitute a quorum. The vote of five (5) members
(excluding ex-officio members) shall be necessary to adopt, approve, pass or act upon any
matter.
Sec. 3-61. Chairman and meetings.
The board shall select one of its members as chairman and shall adopt its own rules and
methods of procedure. The board shall select a time and place of meeting which shall be open
to the public unless, in the opinion of the chairman, some meeting or portion thereof should
be closed to the public.
Sec. 3-62. Appointment and terms.
The members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of the
city council, for three-year terms.
Chapter 4
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
State law reference -- Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.01 et seq.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 4-1. Definitions.
“City” means the City of Temple, Texas, the City Council of Temple, Texas, or its representatives,
employees, agents, or designees.
“City Council” means the City’s elected governing body.
“City Manager” means the City’s city manager or their designee.
“License or permit” means a license or permit granted by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Commission.
“Licensee or permittee” means a person holding a license or permit granted by the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Commission.
“Private school” means a private school, including a parochial school, that:
(a) offers a course of instruction for students in one or more grades from kindergarten through grade
12; and
(b) has more than 100 students enrolled and attending courses at a single location.
ARTICLE II. EXTENDED HOURS
Sec. 4-2. Extended hours.
(a) Pursuant to Sections 105.03(d) and 105.05(d) of the V.C.T.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, as
amended, the City adopts extended hours sales of alcoholic beverages in any part of the City as
follows:
(1) A holder of a mixed beverage late hours permit may sell and offer for sale mixed beverages
between midnight and 2 a.m. on any day.
(2) A holder of a retail dealer’s on-premise late hours license may sell, offer for sale, and
deliver beer between midnight and 2 a.m. on any day.
State law reference -- V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § § 105.03, 105.05, and 105.06.
ARTICLE III. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES NEAR SCHOOL, CHURCH, OR
HOSPITAL
Sec. 4-3. Sales near school, church, or hospital.
(a) The sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited at a place of business that is located within:
(1) 300 feet of a church, public or private school, or public hospital;
(2) 1,000 feet of a private school if City Council receives a request from the governing body of
the private school.
(b) Subsection (a)(1) does not apply to the holder of:
(1) a license or permit who also holds a food and beverage certificate issued by the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Commission covering a premise that is located within 300 feet of a
private school; or
(2) a license or permit covering a premise where minors are prohibited from entering under
V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.53, as amended, (i.e. a package store) and that is
located within 300 feet of a private school.
(c) Subsection (a)(2) does not apply to the holder of:
(1) a retail on-premises consumption permit or license if less than 50% of the gross receipts for
the premises is from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages;
(2) a retail off-premises consumption permit or license if less than 50% of the gross receipts for
the premises, excluding the sale of items subject to the motor fuels tax, is from the sale or
service of alcoholic beverages;
(3) a wholesaler’s, distributor’s, brewer’s, distiller’s and rectifier’s, winery, wine bottler’s or
manufacturer’s permit or license, or any other license or permit held by a wholesaler or
manufacturer as those words are ordinarily used and understood in V.T.C.A., Alcoholic
Beverage Code Chapter 102, as amended;
(4) a license or permit issued under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code Chapters 27
(Temporary and Special Wine and Beer Retailer’s Permit), 31 (Caterer’s Permit), or 72
(Temporary Licenses), all as amended, who is operating on the premises of a private school;
or
(5) a license or permit covering a premise where minors are prohibited from entering under
V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.53, as amended, (i.e. a package store) and that is
located within 1,000 feet of a private school.
(Prior Code, § 4-2; Ord. No. 2017-4830)
State law reference -- V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33.
Sec. 4-4. Measurement of distances for church and public hospital.
The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are
sold and the church or public hospital will be along the property lines of the street fronts and from
front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections.
(Prior Code, § 4-3; Ord. No. 2009-4323)
State law reference -- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33(b).
Sec. 4-5. Measurement for public and private school.
The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are
sold and the public or private school will be:
(a) in a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the
place of business, and in a direct line across intersections; or
(b) if the permit or license holder is located on or above the fifth story of a multistory building, in
a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the
place of business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the
property line to the base of the floor on which the permit or license holder is located.
(c) As to any business who held a license or permit on September 1, 1983, the measurement of the
distance between the place of business of the dealer and a public or private school will be along
the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across
intersections.
(Prior Code, § 4-4; Ord. No. 2017-4830)
State law reference -- Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33(b), (d).
Sections 4-6--4-10. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. MUNICIPAL FEES AND REGISTRATION
State law reference -- Authority to require licenses and permits and fees, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic
Beverage Code § § 11.38; 61.36.
Sec. 4-11. Municipal fees and City registration.
(a) A municipal fee is levied in the amount of one-half the state fee for each license or permit issued
for premises located within the City, except as otherwise provided by state law. The municipal
fees must be paid to the City when the license or permit fees are paid to the state.
(b) The City will issue a certificate of registration under this Section to a licensee or permittee
authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages under this Chapter and a license or permit, if the
licensee or permittee:
(1) pays the fees established by Subsection (a); and
(2) provides the City with a copy of the license or permit.
(c) A person who sells an alcoholic beverage at a business location before the person receives a
certificate of registration from the City as provided by this Section commits a Class C
misdemeanor.
(d) The City’s certificate of registration must be displayed in a conspicuous place at all times on the
licensed or permitted premises. It is unlawful for a person in charge of such premises to fail to
display this certificate of registration.
(Prior Code, § 4-11; Ord. No. 2009-4323)
State law reference -- Authority for license and permit fees, V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code
§ 11.38; § 61.36.
Sections 4-12--4-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON CITY PROPERTY
Sec. 4-21. Sale of alcoholic beverages on City property prohibited except where specially
permitted.
(a) City Property. It is unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages in any public park of the
City, or on or in other publicly owned property, save and except that the City and
concessionaires or caterers having a contract with the City to sell alcoholic beverages at the
Frank W. Mayborn Civic and Convention Center, Santa Fe Depot, and at Sammons Park, if
properly licensed or permitted by the state, may sell alcoholic beverages upon the premises of
the civic and convention center, depot, and within the Sammons Park Restaurant, Clubhouse,
and deck exclusively. The City Manager may authorize a special event permit for the sale of
alcoholic beverages on City property other than a City park.
(b) Criteria for Permits. The City Council may from time to time by resolution establish criteria for
special event permit applications and approvals under this Section.
(Prior Code, § 4-21; Ordinance No. 2009-4323)
ARTICLE VI. ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 4-22. Criminal offense.
(a) A person violating a provision of this Chapter commits a Class C misdemeanor for each separate
violation for each day, or part of a day, during which the violation is committed, continued, or
permitted. Each offense is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) A culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove an offense under this Chapter.
Chapter 5
AMBULANCE SERVICES
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Section 5-1. Definitions.
Section 5-2. Use of emergency and transfer service.
ARTICLE II. EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE (EMS)
Section 5-3. EMS.
Section 5-4. Provision of EMS Services; first responder service by fire and
rescue department.
Section 5-5. Persons to whom available.
Section 5-6. When Peace Officer Must Accompany Patient.
Section 5-7. Rates.
ARTICLE III. (NON-EMERGENCY) AMBULANCE TRANSFER SERVICE
Section 5-8. Franchise required.
Section 5-9. Franchise application; requirements.
Section 5-10. Review and public hearing.
Section 5-11. Prerequisite to issuance of franchise.
Section 5-12. Length of franchise
Section 5-13. Insurance.
Section 5-14. Performance bond and revocation clause.
Section 5-15. Franchise fee.
Section 5-16. Transfer of franchise.
Section 5-17. Inspection of books and reports.
Section 5-18. Franchise holder personnel.
Section 5-19. Standards and requirements for vehicles and equipment.
Section 5-20. Refusal to give service.
Section 5-21. Non-emergency ambulance transfer service dispatching service.
Section 5-22. Rates.
1
Chapter 5
AMBULANCE SERVICES
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Section 5-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases listed below shall have the
following meanings:
Advanced life support. Emergency pre-hospital care provided by a certified, emergency
medical technician-intermediate or an emergency medical technician-paramedic using
invasive medical acts under the medical supervision and control of a licensed physician.
Advanced life support (ALS) vehicle. A vehicle that is designed for transporting the sick
and injured and that meets the requirements of the State of Texas for a basic life support
vehicle and has sufficient equipment and supplies for providing intravenous therapy and
endotracheal or esophageal intubation or both.
Basic life support. Emergency pre-hospital care provided by a certified pre-hospital care
provider using noninvasive medical acts. The provision of basic life support is care given
under the medical supervision and control of a licensed physician.
Basic life support (BLS) vehicle. A vehicle that is designed for transporting the sick or
injured and that has sufficient equipment and supplies as required by the State of Texas for
providing basic life support.
Emergency/Urgent. An emergency is any circumstance that calls for an immediate action
and which the element of time in transporting the sick, wounded or injured for unscheduled
medical treatment at an emergency room or a facility providing emergency medical care is or
may be essential to the health or life of any person.
Emergency call. Any request for an ambulance that is made by telephone or other means
of communication in circumstances which are or have been represented to be of an
emergency/urgent nature, which requires an unscheduled transport to an emergency room at a
hospital or a facility providing emergency medical care.
Emergency medical service personnel. A person employed to provide basic or advanced
life support and certified as a basic emergency medical technician, emergency medical
technician intermedical, or a paramedic emergency medical technician.
Emergency pre-hospital care. Care provided to the sick or injured either on the scene or
during emergency transport to an emergency room at a hospital or a facility providing
emergency medical care.
2
Emergency medical service (EMS). The provision of basic or advanced life support and
transportation of patients to an emergency room of a hospital for emergency pre-hospital
care. In Temple, EMS and emergency ambulance transfer service is exclusively provided by
a private contractor (the City’s EMS provider) under contract. In addition, the City provides
First Responder services (which may include some basic or advanced life support) to its
contracted EMS Provider through members of the Temple Fire and Rescue Department.
EMS Provider. The entity under contract with the City that provides EMS services to
residents of the City.
Emergency medical technician (EMT). An individual who is certified by the Texas
Department of Health as minimally proficient to perform emergency prehospital care that is
necessary for basic life support and that includes the control of hemorrhaging and
cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
Emergency medical technician-paramedic (EMT-P). An individual who is certified by
the department as minimally proficient to provide emergency prehospital or interfacility care
by providing advanced life support that includes initiation and maintenance under medical
supervision of certain procedures, including intravenous therapy, endotracheal or esophageal
intubation or both, electrical cardiac defibrillation or cardioversion, and drug therapy.
First Responder. Members of the Temple Fire and Rescue Department who are assigned
responsibility for responding to calls received from the Bell County 911 Dispatch Center for
emergency medical service in cooperation with the City’s EMS Provider.
Medical facility. Any building or place of business established for the purpose of
examination or treatment by a licensed physician of individuals that are sick or injured.
Non-emergency ambulance transfer service. The operation of a service to transport
patients for non-emergency, previously scheduled, medical treatment from a point originating
and terminating within the City limits. The transport of a patient for unscheduled medical
treatment or evaluation at an emergency room at a hospital or a facility providing emergency
medical care is not a non-emergency ambulance transfer service, but rather is the provision of
EMS.
Originates. For purposes of this chapter, a call for EMS services “originates” within the
City limits if the person in need of EMS service (emergency pre-hospital care or emergency
ambulance transfer service) is physically located at an address with the city limits.
ARTICLE II.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE (EMS)
Section 5-2. Use of emergency and urgent service.
All calls for EMS that originate within the city limits of the City shall be directed to the Bell
County Communication Center (9-1-1) and responded to solely by the City of Temple First
3
Responders and the City’s contracted EMS provider, except as provided herein.
Section 5-3. EMS.
It shall be unlawful for any person or service to furnish, operate, advertise or otherwise
engage or profess to be engaged in the service or operation of EMS that originates at an
address within the City unless said person or entity is:
(1) The City of Temple’s contracted EMS provider;
(2) a person or entity providing service to or from a hospital located in the city
limits and going to or from a hospital located outside of the city limits;
(3) a person or entity providing service to or from an address located outside of
the city limits and going to a hospital located inside of the city limits; or
(4) any person meeting requirements of the State of Texas for personnel, vehicles and
equipment who responds to a request of the Bell County Communications Center (9-1-1), the
Temple Fire Department, or City’s Director of Emergency Management to lend assistance
when a major disaster or other occurrence results in emergency calls exceeding the capacity
of City contracted EMS provider.
Section 5-4. Provision of EMS Services; first responder service by fire and rescue
department;
The City provides EMS to residents of the City through a contract with an EMS provider.
The City provides First Responder services for its residents through services provided by its
Fire and Rescue Department under a contract with its EMS provider.
Section 5-5. Persons to whom available.
EMS shall be available to all persons within the city limits. The service shall also be
available to persons in other portions of Bell County, Texas, wherein the point of origination
or destination is within the city limits.
Section 5-6. When Peace Officer Must Accompany Patient.
Any person placed under an emergency order of detention or “EOD” must be
accompanied by a peace officer in route to the hospital.
Section 5-7. Rates.
Any person who uses the emergency medical services of the City shall be charged for
such services. Charges for emergency medical services shall include, but not be limited to,
standing time, standby time, oxygen, medication, and other related expenses incurred by the
EMS. The City Council reserves the right to set the rates by resolution for EMS, including
4
but not limited to, emergency calls, standing time, and emergency pre-hospital care, provided
by the City’s contracted EMS provider.
ARTICLE III.
(NON-EMERGENCY) AMBULANCE TRANSFER SERVICE
Section 5-8. Franchise required.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish, operate, advertise or otherwise engage
or profess to be engaged in the operation of non-emergency ambulance transfer service from
a point originating and ending within the streets of the City without a franchise as provided
by this article.
(b) A non-emergency ambulance transfer service franchise shall be subject to revocation
if it is found that the holder of said franchise or any company, service or corporation that the
holder is affiliated or in partnership with is providing, offering to provide, or representing
itself as the City’s EMS provider, without a contract with the City to provide EMS.
Furthermore, if a private ambulance franchise holder receives an emergency call from any
source to respond in the city limits, franchisee shall immediately notify the Bell County EMS
Communications Center and shall not respond unless requested to do so by the Bell County
EMS dispatcher. Duplication of emergency service is responding without the request of the
Bell County EMS dispatcher to the same call as a City’s franchised EMS provider and is
prohibited by this chapter.
Section 5-9. Franchise application; requirements.
Application for a non-emergency ambulance transfer service franchise shall be filed with
the City Manager. An applicant shall furnish the following information, which shall be
subscribed and sworn to before a notary public:
(1) That the applicant has not been convicted of a felony or of a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude within the last ten (10) years.
(2) A statement that the applicant has obtained or will obtain liability insurance in
accordance with the requirements provided by this chapter before commencing
service, in the event a franchise should be granted.
(3) A description of the number, year of manufacture, make, model and body style
of each type of BLS or ALS vehicle that the applicant proposes to operate as a
franchise holder.
(4) The names of all persons having a financial interest, direct or indirect, in such
application and the ambulance service to be conducted thereunder.
Section 5-10. Review and public hearing.
5
(a) Copies of each application for a non-emergency ambulance transfer service franchise
shall be forwarded to the City Manager and Fire Chief for review and recommendation to the
City Council.
(b) The City Council shall comply with the requirements for issuing, transferring or
renewing a franchise provided for in the City Charter.
(c) The City Council reserves the right to refuse to grant, transfer or renew a nonemergency
ambulance transfer service franchise if it finds and determines that the public
convenience will not be served by the issuance thereof. In all hearings, the burden of proof
shall be upon the applicant to establish clear, cogent and convincing evidence that the public
convenience will be served by the granting, transferring or renewal of a non-emergency
ambulance transfer service franchise.
(d) In determining public convenience, the City Council shall consider the following:
(1) The distance from the permanent address at which the applicant proposes to
operate the ambulance service to hospitals and other medical facilities
providing service to the public.
(2) The number of ambulance vehicles which will be covered by the ambulance
franchise and the hours during the day and days during the week that the
applicant proposes to furnish such service.
(3) In the event the applicant has previously participated, or is currently
participating, in an ambulance service, evidence as to whether the applicant
performed or is performing in a satisfactory manner shall be presented.
(e) Public convenience further shall mean that the permanent address from which the
ambulance service is proposed to be operated will be within the city limits.
Section 5-11. Prerequisite to issuance of franchise.
The City Council shall not grant a nonemergency ambulance transfer service franchise
unless:
(1) the City Council determines that the application as required by section 5-10 is true
and correct;
(2) the City Council determines that the granting of the franchise is in the public
interest; and
(3) the City Council determines that the proposed operation of the non-emergency
ambulance transfer service will be in compliance with all provisions of this
chapter, and
all applicable state and federal statutes and regulations and requirements laid out
6
in the franchise agreement.
Section 5-12. Length of franchise.
The length of the franchise will be for five (5) years ending on September 30th of the 5th
year. However, the ambulance service franchise holder will be subject to review and analysis
by the City staff on an annual basis with results being presented to the City Manager, Fire
Chief and the City Council.
Section 5-13. Insurance.
No ambulance vehicle shall be operated on the public streets of the City unless the
applicant provides evidence to the City Manager that he has in full force and effect a public
liability insurance policy on that ambulance vehicle, such insurance policy to be issued by an
insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Texas. Such insurance policy shall:
(1) provide liability coverage for each vehicle of not less than two hundred and fifty
thousand dollars ($250,000) per person, or five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000) per occurrence for personal injury or death, and one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000) for property damage;
(2) name the City of Temple as an additional insured, and provide a waiver of
subrogation in favor of the City;
(3) not contain a passenger liability exclusion; and
(4) provide for at least thirty (30) days prior written notice of cancellation to the City.
Section 5-14. Performance bond and revocation clause.
(a) The non-emergency ambulance transfer service franchise holder shall establish a ten
thousand dollar ($10,000.00) performance bond. The purpose of this bond is to recover costs
to the City for accepting and administering applications for an ambulance service in the event
the franchise is revoked.
(b) If the non-emergency ambulance transfer service franchise holder violates any
provision or standard of this chapter, the City Council may order the revocation of the
franchise, and forfeiture of the performance bond.
7
Section 5-15. Franchise fee.
(a) To compensate the City for the use of public streets and right-of-way, the nonemergency
ambulance transfer service franchise holder shall, during the life of said franchise,
pay to the City, at the office of the Director of Finance in lawful money of the United States,
three and one-half (3½%) percent of the total amount billed for the ambulance service fees
and other income derived from the operation of the ambulance service within the City, which
said remittance shall be made monthly on or before the tenth day of each calendar month.
The compensation provided for in this section shall be in lieu of any other fees or charges
imposed by any other ordinance now or hereinafter in force during the life hereof, but shall
not release the franchise holder from the payment of ad valorem taxes levied, or to be levied,
on property it owns.
(b) It shall be the duty of a franchise holder to file with the Director of Finance a sworn
statement for each calendar quarter showing the total amount billed for service within the
City for the preceding three (3) months which statement shall be filed within ten (10) days
following the end of the third month. A franchise holder herein shall be required to install
and adequately keep a system of bookkeeping to be approved by the Director of Finance,
which books shall be subject to inspections of the governing body of the City and such
person or persons as the City may designate, or either of them, so as to enable the City to
check the correctness of the accounts kept and to compute fairly and accurately the amount
billed that may be due to the City.
Section 5-16. Transfer of franchise.
No assignment, sale or subletting of any part of this franchise shall ever be made by the
franchise holder herein without first receiving written approval of the City Council of the
City.
Section 5-17. Inspection of books and records.
The books and records of the non-emergency ambulance transfer service franchise holder
shall be open at any reasonable time for inspection by the City Manager or any official
designated by the City Manager.
Section 5-18. Franchise holder personnel.
Attendants and drivers employed by the non-emergency ambulance transfer service
franchise holder shall:
(1) Be at least eighteen (18) years of age;
(2) Be a citizen of the United States;
(3) Not have been convicted of a felony or any offense involving moral turpitude
within the past ten (10) years, and not have had any license for the operation of
8
motor vehicles suspended or revoked within such a period;
(4) Be the holder of a valid Texas drivers license, entitling driver to operate an
ambulance; and
(5) Be currently certified by the Texas Department of State Health Services, or its
successor, as a Basic Emergency Medical Technician or higher.
Section 5-19. Standards and requirements for vehicles and equipment.
(a) Vehicles. Each vehicle must be authorized by the Texas Department of State Health
Services, or its successor, as a basic life support vehicle or higher, and may be operated only
when said vehicle meets all conditions required by Chapter 773 of the Texas Health and
Safety Code.
(b) Equipment. A vehicle may not be operated as a basic life support vehicle unless it is
furnished with all of the equipment (and qualified personnel) required by the Texas
Department of State Health Services, or its successor, for a basic life support vehicle and is
permitted as such. A vehicle may not be operated as an advanced life support vehicle or
higher unless it is furnished with all of the equipment (and qualified personnel) required by
the Texas Department of State Health Services, or its successor, for an advanced life support
vehicle and is permitted as such. Such equipment must be clean, in working order, and
available in sufficient quantity to provide safe transport and care of sick and injured persons.
(c) Response time. A franchise holder must maintain sufficient vehicles, trained
personnel, and equipment on hand to allow it to respond within one hour to any request for
non-emergency service. If a franchise holder is unable to maintain a one hour response for a
given period of time, the franchise holder shall notify the Bell County Communications
Center that it is out of service, and shall also notify persons requesting the services of the
franchise holder of the period for which it will be unable to perform ambulance services.
Section 5-20. Refusal to give service.
Neither the non-emergency ambulance transfer service franchise holder nor any employee
thereof shall refuse to transport a patient requesting ambulance service, except for good
cause. In determining "good cause" for purposes of this section, the franchise holder may
consider whether the patient is insane, mentally ill, drunk, disorderly or unruly; whether the
patient has previously willfully refused to pay for services; whether the franchise holder can
safely transport the patient; or whether it is the best available ambulance service with the
capabilities to perform such a transport; or similar matters.
Section 5-21. Non-emergency ambulance transfer service dispatching service.
(a) The non-emergency ambulance transfer service franchise holder must provide at its
own expense and staff twenty-four (24) hours a day a telephone for ambulance service
requests.
9
(b) The franchise holder may respond to requests for EMS for trips that originate and
terminate within the City limits if requested by the Bell County Communications Center (9-
1-1) or the Temple Fire and Rescue Department.
(c) The ambulance service franchise holder shall respond to any scheduled request for
non-emergency ambulance service within an acceptable time determined by the parties
involved.
(d) If, during a scheduled transport, the patient's condition worsens or he suffers an acute
condition, attendants of the ambulance vehicle shall immediately contact the Bell County
Communications Center (9-1-1) and advise the dispatcher of such and then proceed on an
emergency basis to the emergency care facility at the hospital of patient's choice or nearest
appropriate medical facility.
(e) Any transport call that results in an emergency/urgent transport, shall be self reported
by the non-emergency ambulance transfer service franchise holder to the City and the City’s
medical director within 10 business days.
(f) All transports are subject to review by the city and the city’s medical director.
Section 5-22. Rates.
(a) The City Council hereby expressly reserves the right, power, and authority to fully
regulate and fix, by resolution, the rates and charges for the services of the non-emergency
ambulance transfer service franchise holder to its customers, fully reserving to the City
Council all the rights, powers, privileges, and immunities, subject to the duties, limitations
and responsibilities which the Constitution, the laws of the State, and the Charter confer upon
the City.
(b) A non-emergency ambulance transfer service franchise holder may from time to
time propose changes in the general rates by filing an application with the City Secretary for
consideration of the City Council. Within a reasonable time consistent with law, the City
Council shall afford a non-emergency ambulance transfer service franchise holder a fair
hearing with reference to the application and shall either approve or disapprove the proposed
changes or make such order as may be reasonable.
(REVISED: Ordinance No. 2012-4555, September 20, 2012)
1
Chapter 6
ANIMALS AND FOWL
Sec. 6-1. Division of Animal Services Established.
Sec. 6-2. Definitions.
Sec. 6-3. At-Large Animals.
Sec. 6-4. Animal Nuisance.
Sec. 6-5. Care of Animals.
Sec. 6-6. Cruelty and Injury to Animals.
Sec. 6-7. Impoundment.
Sec. 6-8. Disposition and Redemption of Impounded Animals.
Sec. 6-9. Adoption of Animals.
Sec. 6-10. Rabies.
Sec. 6-11. Spaying and Neutering of Animals.
Sec. 6-12. Disposal of Animals.
Sec. 6-13. Sale of Animals.
Sec. 6-14. Keeping of Certain Animals.
Sec. 6.15. Additional Regulations.
Sec. 6-16. Dangerous Animals.
Sec. 6-17. Additional Provisions Relating to Dangerous or Vicious Animals.
Sec. 6-18. Impoundment and Reclamation of Dangerous Animals.
Sec. 6-19. Affirmative Defenses.
Sec. 6-20. Citations.
Sec. 6-21. Penalty.
Sec. 6-22. Culpability.
2
Chapter 6
ANIMALS AND FOWL
Sec. 6-1. Division of Animal Services Established
(a) Division of Animal Services. In order to protect the public health and welfare, to provide
for the public safety, and to more effectively control, regulate and provide for animals within the
City of Temple, the division of Animal Services is established. The division of Animal Services
shall consist of the Animal Services Manager and such other officers and employees as may be
provided by the City Council.
(b) Animal Services Manager. The Animals Services Manager shall be appointed by the City
Manager. The Animal Services Manager shall have control and supervision over all employees
assigned to this division subject to the supervision of the City Manager or his designee.
(c) Functions. The Animal Services Manager shall enforce all laws and ordinances pertaining
to the keeping, treatment, impounding and regulation of animals within the City of Temple.
(d) Duties. The Animal Services Manager shall manage the City's animal shelter. The Animal
Services Manager shall keep such records and make such reports concerning the activities of the
division of Animal Services as may be required by ordinance, state law, the City Manager, or by
the City Council.
(e) Local Health Authorities. The Animal Services Manager shall act as the local health
authority for the purposes of enforcing all laws and regulations of the State of Texas pertaining to
animals which authorize the local health authority or Animal Services officers to enforce the same.
(f) Conduct of Division Members. It shall be the duty of all members of the division of Animal
Services to enforce this ordinance and all laws of the State of Texas applicable to domesticated
and wild animals, to conduct themselves in a law-abiding manner and to avoid the use of
unnecessary force on animals in the possession or control of the Division of Animal Services.
Sec. 6-2. Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter, and as used herein, the following terms shall have the meaning
as given in this section:
Animal. A living organism which feeds on organic matter, has specialized sense organs and
nervous system, and is able to move about and to respond rapidly to stimuli, not including a human
or an insect.
At large. Off the premises of the owner and not under the complete control of the owner by leash,
halter, cage, or other means of confinement.
3
Dangerous animal. Any dog, cat, or other animal that, without clear provocation, (a) bites or
attacks humans or (b) in a vicious or terrorizing manner approaches any person in an apparent
attitude of attack, whether or not the attack is consummated or capable of being consummated.
Fowl. A bird of any kind.
Hen. A female domestic chicken, not including guinea hens.
Keep. To retain on the premises by any means; to harbor, control, own, or have custody of or
possession of.
Keeper. Any person who has custodial or supervisory authority over an animal, or who has any
responsibilities for the care, custody or control over an animal, including but not limited to the
provision of adequate shelter, food and water, and/or access to necessary veterinary care, even on
a temporary basis.
Maintain. To feed, shelter, protect, provide for or bear the expense of.
Owner. Any person, firm, association, partnership or corporation owning, keeping, in charge of,
in control of, maintaining or harboring one or more animals or fowl.
Person. Any natural person, corporation, partnership, association, firm or legal entity.
Rooster. A male domestic chicken.
Wild animal. Any animal not ordinarily tame or domesticated, or which by its very nature has
propensities toward inflicting serious bodily harm. Any animal or reptile which, in its natural state,
possess dangerous or vicious propensities and includes, but is not limited to coyotes, wolves, bears,
wildcats (puma, bobcat, lynx), lions, tigers, poisonous snakes, alligators, crocodiles, and monkeys,
whether or not said animal or reptile has been tamed.
Sec. 6-3. At-Large Animals
(a) Animal At-Large. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any cat, dog, fowl or other
domesticated animal, to permit or allow such animal to run at large within the city limits. “At
large” means that an animal is off the premises of the owner, and not on a leash or otherwise under
the immediate control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal. A cat is at large
when straying onto the property of anyone except the owner. All animals at large are subject to
impoundment by Animal Services.
(b) Pursuit of Animal. Animal services shall have the right to enter onto private property in
order to pursue and apprehend a free roaming animal without first requesting permission from the
owner of the property. When in pursuit of such animal, no search warrant is required.
4
Sec. 6-4. Animal Nuisance
(a) Animal Nuisance; Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal on any
property located within the city limits when the keeping of such animal constitutes a public
nuisance or menace to public health or safety.
(b) Animal Nuisance; Defined. Public nuisance animal means any animal that unreasonably
annoys humans, endangers the life or health of persons or other animals, or substantially interferes
with the rights of citizens, other than the animal’s owner, to enjoy life or property. The term “public
nuisance animal” includes, but is not limited to:
(1) Any animal that is found running at large;
(2) Any animal that damages, soils, defiles, or defecates on any property other
than that of its owner;
a. In such cases, the owner shall make sanitary disposal of any excreta
(waste) deposited by his animal on any property other than that of
its owner.
b. Failure to remove excreta as required by this section is an offense,
and may result in a citation being issued.
(3) Any animal that makes disturbing noises, including but not limited to,
continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances
causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors
or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or
harbored;
a. When possible, prior to filing a complaint with the City, the person
having been disturbed by an animal as described above must give
written notice to the owner or keeper of the animal that the animal’s
conduct has disturbed his or her peace on more than one occasion.
A copy of such written notice must be presented to the City at the
time the complaint is filed.
(4) Any animal in estrus (in heat) that is not confined so as to prevent attraction
or contact with other animals;
(5) Any animal, whether or not on the property of its owner, that without
provocation, molests, attacks, or otherwise interferes with the freedom of
movement of persons in a public right-of-way;
(6) Any animal that chases motor vehicles in a public right-of-way;
(7) Any animal that attacks other domestic animals without provocation;
(8) Any animal that is being kept in unsanitary conditions that cause fouling of
the air by noxious or offensive odors that create an unreasonable annoyance
5
or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises
where the animal is kept or harbored;
(9) Any animal tied or staked within ten (10) feet of any street, park, or other
public land, public sidewalk, public passageway, or public building when
on an open or unfenced lot or parcel of land; or
(10) Any animal that is a wild animal.
Sec. 6-5. Care of Animals
(a) Proper Care. It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any animal to fail or refuse to
provide such animal with sufficient wholesome and nutritious food, sufficient clean drinking
water, sanitary shelter, veterinary care when necessary to prevent suffering and ensure humane
care and treatment, or to unnecessarily expose any such animal to extreme or inclement weather.
(1) In case of dispute over adequacy of proper care, the Animal Services
Manager will be the final authority.
(2) Violation of this section shall constitute a Class C misdemeanor or state law
criminal offense when applicable.
(b) Abandoned Animal. No owner or custodian of any animal shall willfully abandon an
animal on any street, road, highway or public place, or on private property when not in the care of
another person.
(c) Abandoned Animal in Custody. Any animal left without proper food, water, or shelter for
more than three (3) calendar days OR any animal left in conditions which endanger the health, life,
and safety of the animal shall be considered abandoned. Animal Services shall take any abandoned
animal into protective custody for a reasonable time in order to determine whether ownership can
be established and possible criminal prosecution of persons responsible.
Sec. 6-6. Cruelty and Injury to Animals
(a) Injury to Animal. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously strike, beat,
abuse, torment, overload, overwork, trap with steel jaw traps or intentionally run down with a
vehicle any animal, or otherwise engage in any act or omission which causes or inflicts
unnecessary pain, injury, suffering or death to such animal.
(b) Animal Combat. It shall be unlawful to cause, instigate, or permit any dogfight, cockfight,
bullfight, or other combat between animals or between animals and humans.
(c) Poisoning of Animal. No person, except an authorized Animal Services employee or a
licensed veterinarian for humanitarian purposes, shall administer poison to any animal, or
knowingly leave any poisonous substance of any kind or ground glass in any place with the intent
to injure any animal. The provisions of this section are not applicable to licensed exterminators
6
using poisons as part of a pest control program or the use of commercial insecticides and rodent
baits used to control insects and wild rodents.
(d) Animal in Vehicle. No dog or other animal shall be left enclosed in a parked vehicle in
such a way as to subject the animal to extreme temperatures that could adversely affect the animal’s
health, safety, or welfare. Any Animal Services officer, police officer or personnel of the fire
department may use reasonable force to remove the animal from the vehicle if the person believes
that an emergency situation exists.
(e) Transportation of Animal. It shall be unlawful to transport or carry on any public roadway,
any animal in a motor vehicle unless the animal is safely enclosed within the vehicle; and if
traveling in an unclosed vehicle (including but not limited to convertibles, pickup trucks, jeeps,
and flatbed trucks), the animal is safely confined by a vented container or cage, by chain, rope or
other device cross- tied to prevent the animal from falling or jumping from the motor vehicle or
from strangling on a single leash.
Sec. 6-7. Impoundment
(a) Impoundment of Animals. In addition to any other remedies provided in this Ordinance,
an Animal Services employee, police officer, or any designated employee of the City if an Animal
Service officer is not available, may seize, impound and humanely confine to an animal shelter or
hospital any of the following animals:
(1) Any animal at large;
(2) Any animal constituting a danger to the public;
(3) Any animal not displaying a metal vaccination tag;
(4) Any animal that is in violation of any quarantine or confinement order of
the Animal Services Manager;
(5) Any unattended animal that is ill, injured, or otherwise in need of care;
(6) Any animal that is reasonably believed to have been abused or neglected;
(7) Any animal that is reasonably suspected of having rabies;
(8) Any animal that is charged with being potentially dangerous where an
Animal Services employee, a police officer, or the Animal Services
Manager determines that there is a threat to public health and safety;
(9) Any animal that a court of competent jurisdiction has ordered impounded
or destroyed; or
(10) Any animal that is considered unattended or abandoned, as in situations
where the owner is deceased, has been arrested or evicted from his regular
place of residence.
7
(b) Animal Eluding Capture. In the event of actual or immediate danger of injury to any person
because of an animal’s vicious nature or actions, or in the event that an animal which constitutes
a threat to the health or safety of people or other animals is about to elude capture, an officer shall
be justified in immediately destroying the animal by the use of any reasonable means available,
without liability to the owner for the death of the animal.
(c) Vicious or Wild Animals. Any vicious animal or wild animal, other than an endangered
species, that has been impounded may be immediately disposed of as deemed appropriate by the
Animal Services Manager. Wild animals trapped because they have become a nuisance may be
transported to less populated areas and released.
(d) Notification to Animal Services. Any person finding an animal at large upon his property
may hold the animal in his own possession and shall notify Animal Services. It shall be the duty
of Animal Services to impound the animal.
(e) Vaccination Tag of Impounded Animal. If a dog or cat wearing a vaccination tag is
impounded, an Animal Services officer shall request the name and address of the owner from the
veterinarian who issued the tag. If the owner cannot be reached readily by telephone, written
notification shall be mailed to the address furnished by the veterinarian.
(f) Impounded Animal Released to Owner. An impounded dog or cat shall be released to its
owner during regular hours of operation only upon payment of the fee as established by City
Council, and upon proof of ownership. Possession of a vaccination certificate describing the dog
or cat or bearing the same serial number that appears on a metal tag worn by the dog or cat, shall
be accepted as prima facie proof of ownership.
Sec. 6-8. Disposition and Redemption of Impounded Animals
(a) Disposition and Redemption. The Animal Services Manager shall keep any stray dog or
cat at least three (3) calendar days prior to release for adoption, and at least five (5) calendar days
prior to humane destruction, not counting the day of impoundment. Unadoptable animals or
animals selected for destruction because of overcrowding may be humanely destroyed after the
three (3) calendar day period.
(b) Fees. Impoundment fees are set out by resolution adopted by the City Council.
(1) No animal shall be released to an owner until all impoundment fees have
been paid.
(2) Any animal impounded more than four (4) times in a twelve-month period
shall not be released to its owner or custodian without the written approval
of the Animal Services Manager. In this instance, impoundment fees shall
be double the highest listed fee.
8
Sec. 6-9. Adoption of Animals
An impounded dog or cat which is not claimed and redeemed by an owner within the three (3)
calendar days following the day of its impoundment may be released to any person for a fee
established by City Council. The decision to place an animal for adoption is in the sole discretion
of the Animal Services Manager. No person seeking to adopt an animal shall be discriminated
against on the basis of race, sex, religion or national origin. No person convicted of the offense of
dog fighting and/or cruelty to an animal shall be permitted to adopt any animal.
Sec.6-10. Rabies
(a) Vaccination Against Rabies, Generally. The owner of each dog or cat kept within the City
of Temple shall have such dog or cat vaccinated against rabies by the time the dog or cat is four
(4) months of age and once each year thereafter. It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep
an unvaccinated dog or cat over four (4) months of age within the city limits.
(b) Vaccination of Adopted Animals; Proof Required. In the event a dog or cat to be adopted
from the City of Temple is four (4) months of age or older and is not vaccinated, a fee in an amount
set by resolution of the City Council shall be paid at the time of adoption for the issuance of a
rabies vaccination certificate, which the adopting person shall present to any veterinarian within
one (1) week from the date of adoption for vaccination against Rabies. The issuing veterinarian
may present the certificate with a statement verifying the vaccination to the Animal Services
Manager for reimbursement of the prepaid fee, or the veterinarian's fee for administering the
vaccination, whichever is less.
(1) A person commits an offense if, after adopting a dog or cat four (4) months
of age or older, he knowingly fails to obtain a rabies vaccination for such
animal within one (1) week of the adoption date.
(2) It shall be presumed that the person failed to have the animal vaccinated if
within ten (10) days of the adoption date he has not presented the Animal
Services Manager with proof of the vaccination. Such proof shall be in the
form of a receipt from the veterinarian administering the vaccination.
Failure to provide proof as required may result in the issuance of a citation.
(3) The Animal Services Manager shall be authorized to re-impound any dog
or cat adopted under this subsection if the vaccination is not obtained within
the required time. In such case there shall be no refund of the adoption fee,
and ownership of the animal shall revert to the City.
(c) Issuance of Tags and Certificate. Upon vaccinating any dog or cat, the veterinarian
performing such vaccination shall deliver to the animal's owner a numbered metal tag and a
certificate of vaccination. A record shall be made by the veterinarian and kept for at least two (2)
years showing the date of issuance and serial number of each tag issued, the name and address of
the dog or cat's owner, and a brief description of the dog or cat vaccinated.
9
(d) Vaccination Tag as Evidence. It shall be unlawful for an owner to allow a dog or cat over
the age of four (4) months to be at large without wearing a current metal vaccination tag issued by
a veterinarian during the preceding twelve (12) months. It shall be prima facie evidence of
vaccination against rabies that a dog or cat is wearing attached to its collar a current metal
vaccination tag.
(e) Unlawfully Displaying False Tag. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a dog or cat
to wear attached to its collar, or otherwise, a vaccination tag issued for any other dog or cat.
(f) Suspected Rabid Animals. A person having knowledge of an animal bite or scratch to an
individual that the person could reasonably foresee as capable of transmitting rabies, or knowledge
of an animal that is reasonably suspected to be rabid, shall report the information immediately to
the Animal Services Manager or the police department.
(1) The owner of an animal that is reported to be rabid, or to have exposed an
individual to a risk of contracting rabies, shall submit the animal to the
Animal Services Manager or a licensed veterinarian to be quarantined until
such time as it can be definitely determined whether such animal is infected
with rabies, but in no case less than ten (10) days.
(2) It is an offense under this chapter for a person to refuse to submit for
quarantine any animal reasonably suspected of being rabid. It is also an
offense to knowingly sell, release or otherwise dispose of an animal before
the expiration of the quarantine period if the animal is reasonably suspected
of being rabid.
(3) An animal that is lacking proof of current vaccination for rabies at the time
it bites or scratches a person is presumed to be under suspicion of rabies.
(g) Quarantine and Testing. Animals suspected of being rabid shall be quarantined with a
licensed veterinarian at the expense of the owner. If it is determined by a veterinarian that a
quarantined animal shows the clinical signs of the disease of rabies, the veterinarian shall
humanely destroy the animal. If the animal dies or is destroyed while in quarantine, the veterinarian
shall remove the head or brain of the animal and submit it to the Texas Department of State Health
Services for testing.
(h) Home Quarantine. The owner of any animal allowed to home quarantine an animal shall
comply with written procedures regarding the quarantine as provided to the owner by the Animal
Services officer.
(1) Upon the request of the owner of a dog or cat which has bitten or scratched
a human, and at the sole discretion of the Animal Services Manager, the
Animal Services Manager may permit home quarantine for the animal if all
of the following criteria can be met:
a. The animal was currently vaccinated against rabies at the time of
the bite or scratch;
10
b. The animal was not at large at the time of the bite or scratch;
c. The animal’s owner has secured facilities at his home for the
animal which have been approved by the Animal Services Manager;
d. The Animal Services Manager or a licensed veterinarian must
observe the animal on at least the first and tenth days of the
quarantine period. All quarantined animals shall be separated from
all other animals in such a manner that there is no possibility of
physical contact between animals;
e. If the animal becomes ill during the observation period, the person
with possession of the animal must notify the Animal Services
Manager;
f. The owner must sign an agreement to abide by the quarantine
rules; and
g. At the end of the quarantine period, the animal shall be observed
by a licensed veterinarian and the veterinarian will generate a letter
authorizing the release of the animal from quarantine.
(2) The owner of an animal under home quarantine commits an offense if he
fails to comply with any requirement contained in the home quarantine
agreement.
(i) Release of Quarantined Animals. If a veterinarian determines that a quarantined animal
does not show the clinical signs of rabies, the animal shall be released to its owner following the
quarantine period if:
(1) The owner has an unexpired rabies vaccination certificate for the animal,
or
(2) The animal is vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian at the
owner's expense, and
(3) The animal is not the subject of a dangerous animal complaint.
(k) Costs. The owner of an animal that is quarantined under suspicion of rabies shall pay to
the City of Temple the reasonable costs of the quarantine and disposition of the animal, or the City
may bring suit to collect such costs.
(l) Unclaimed Animals. Animals that are not claimed on or before the third day following the
end of the quarantine period may be released to an animal shelter after vaccination for rabies, or
they may be humanely destroyed.
11
Sec. 6-11. Spaying and Neutering of Animals
All adopted animals are required to be spayed or neutered within fourteen (14) days of adoption,
unless, the animal is less than four (4) months of age. All pets reaching that age shall be spayed or
neutered. Proof of sterilization shall be provided to Animal Services in accordance with this
subsection. Failure to provide proof as required shall constitute an offense and a citation may be
issued.
Sec. 6-12. Disposal of Animals
(a) Contagious/Threat to Life or Health. It shall be the duty of every person keeping or
maintaining any animal which becomes infected or afflicted with disease which is contagious or a
threat to the life and health of other animals or to humans, to humanely destroy the animal(s) and
dispose of the remains as directed by an Animal Services officer.
(b) Dead Animal Disposed in 24 Hours. Except for animals kept by veterinarians or persons
engaged in medical or scientific research, or those mounted by a taxidermist, dead animals shall
be disposed of within twenty-four (24) hours of the time of death. The manner in which dead
animals are disposed of shall, at minimum, comply with established regulations and applicable
laws, specifically in accordance with subsections 6.11(c) and (d), as set forth below.
(c) Disposal on Public Property Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of
any dead animal or fowl upon public property within the City of Temple, other than the sanitary
landfill. Public property includes, but is not limited to: streets, alleys, parks, buildings, and grounds
owned, operated, or rented by any level of government, and drainage channels maintained by the
City of Temple.
(d) Disposal. Dead animals, excluding those intended for human or animal consumption, shall
be disposed of as follows:
(1) Animals weighing fifty (50) pounds or less may be buried on the owner’s
premises at a depth of at least twelve inches (12");
(2) Animals may be disposed of at the landfill, sold or given to a renderer, or
buried in a properly zoned pet cemetery;
(3) If requested by the owner, dogs and cats will be picked up by Animal
Services and disposed of at the landfill. The fee for this service shall be an
amount set by resolution of the City Council;
(4) The landfill manger shall have the right to refuse a dead animal if placing
such animal in the landfill would pose a health risk; and
(5) The Animal Services Manager shall have the right to refuse to accept any
dead animal if he determines that transporting such animal would cause a
health risk to humans or to animals at the Animal Services center.
12
Sec. 6-13. Sale of Animals
(a) Sale on Public Property. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give away, place for
adoption, or otherwise transfer a dog, cat or other live animal directly from public property or from
any other place to which the public has access that is not permanently used and maintained as a
private residence, pet shop, veterinarian office or hospital, a licensed animal shelter, hatchery,
livestock auction, or a business dealing in farm or ranch supplies.
(b) Exception for Non-Profit. A non-profit animal welfare organization may submit a petition
in writing to the Animal Services Manager requesting written authorization to conduct activities
encompassed by this section.
(c) Adoption Area. For the benefit of the citizens of Temple, the Animal Services Division
may make available to residents of Bell County an adoption area at the City’s Animal Services
facility or another location determined by the Animal Services Manager. Residents of Bell County
desiring to sell pets at a location designated by the Animal Services Manager must remain in
control of the animals brought for adoption until custody is taken by a purchaser who will then be
responsible for control of the animal. Participants must adhere to the general provisions for
adoption established by the City, including but not limited to, the sterilization policy and the
vaccination policy. The Animal Services Manager may establish all additional guidelines
necessary for the implementation of this ordinance, including fees and regulations for the use of
the area. The Animal Services Manager is authorized to refuse service to anyone for any reason,
and to declare any animal unsafe, unhealthy, unsanitary, or dangerous.
Sec. 6-14. Keeping of Certain Animals
(a) Restrictions on Keeping of Rabbits. No more than two (2) rabbits or hares may be kept as
pets, provided that they are kept in a clean, dry, sanitary, and odor free cage that is not closer than
twenty-five (25) feet to the nearest residence on which the cage is located, and that the feed is
stored in rodent-proof containers. Rabbits shall not be kept within twenty-five (25) feet of any
residence, excluding the residence of the animal’s owner or keeper.
(b) Keeping of Swine. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any swine within the limits
of the City of Temple, Texas, unless the swine are kept in a pen or enclosure on a tract of land at
least ten (10) acres in size, which is zoned as “agricultural,” and the pen or enclosure is located a
distance of at least five hundred (500) feet from the nearest residence.
(c) Keeping of Animals or Fowl Near Creeks and Streams. It shall be unlawful for any person
to keep or maintain any animal or fowl in a pen, cage or enclosure in, near, or on a creek or stream
within the City of Temple and permit drainage from said pens, cages or enclosures, fecal matter or
urine to enter a creek or stream. No pigs or hogs shall be permitted or allowed to have access to,
to enter, or to drink water from a creek or stream within the City of Temple.
13
(d) Regulation on Keeping Animals, Fowl and Bees.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any guinea fowl,
peacocks, horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, goats, sheep, chickens, turkeys,
geese, ducks or pigeons in any pen, yard, enclosure, barn, building or other
place that is located less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the residence
of any person other than the owner or keeper.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep bees and beehives in any pen,
yard, enclosure, barn, building or other place that is located less than three
hundred (300) feet of the residence of any person other than the owner or
keeper.
(3) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, in a residential zoning district,
no more than six (6) hens may be kept in a back yard, provided the pen or
enclosure for housing the hens is at least fifty (50) feet from the nearest
residence, and the pen or enclosure is clean, secure, ventilated, large enough
for the animal to move freely, and meets any applicable standards or permit
requirements found in the Unified Development Code. The accumulation of
waste creating an obnoxious odor and/or health hazard is prohibited.
Roosters are expressly prohibited.
(e) Exceptions. Sections 6-13(a) through 6-13(d) of this Chapter shall not apply to:
(1) Veterinarians keeping animals or fowl at the veterinarian's regular place of
business during periods of time said animals or fowl are being treated for
disease, or injury, or observed in the course of such treatment;
(2) Animals or fowl kept, maintained and used in the course of medical,
educational or scientific research at an established business location or
under conditions approved by the Division of Animal Services;
(3) Circuses, traveling shows, zoos and auction barns operating under permit or
sanction of the City of Temple;
(4) Animals or fowl which, because of injury or age, require temporary care,
provided that such animal or fowl shall not be kept for a period of time
exceeding thirty (30) days, and shall not be kept or raised for sale, barter or
consumption; provided, further, that this exemption shall not apply to wild
animals;
(5) Animals and fowl, such as baby chickens, rabbits, pigeons and ducks, kept
at an established place of business dealing in farm and ranch supply and
which animal or fowl are domesticated and marketable for human
consumption; provided, that said animals or fowl are kept and maintained
in an enclosure which is dry, sanitary, cleaned regularly and free of
accumulations of odor- causing debris and fecal matter.
14
Sec. 6.15. Additional Regulations
(a) Injury and Destruction of Wild Birds. Any person eleven (11) years of age, or older, who
willfully kills or injures any wild bird, removes the eggs or young from the nest of a wild bird, or
in any manner destroys the eggs or young of a wild bird, save and except pigeons, English
sparrows, grackles, and blackbirds, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(b) Tampering with Traps. It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, destroy, damage,
spring, or cause to malfunction any trap set by the division of Animal Services, or to release any
dog or cat from any such trap.
(c) Keeping in Unoccupied Residence. It shall be unlawful to keep, shelter or enclose any dog
or cat within any residential building which is not occupied as a residence by a person.
(d) Limitation on Number.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, or shelter more than
three (3) dogs, plus one litter to age of three (3) months, within the City of
Temple, Texas, without a written permit. Any person desiring to keep,
maintain, or shelter more than three (3) dogs plus one litter to age three (3)
months must make a written request to the Animal Services Manager for a
permit to keep a specified number of dogs, not to exceed five (5) adult dogs
at a specified location. Only one permit may be granted for a lot or parcel
of real property at least one (1) acre in size. The Animal Services Manager
may issue the permit if he determines that such person has a proper and
adequate enclosure in which to keep the dogs, and a proper and sanitary
shelter for the dogs.
(2) A permit may be revoked by the Animal Services Manager in the event
either of the above criteria is not maintained, if the permittee is convicted
of any violation of this chapter, if any one of the dogs is on two (2) separate
occasions found at large by an Animal Services officer, or if the Animal
Services Manager determines that the animals have become a nuisance.
(3) The provisions of this section shall apply equally to the keeping of cats. A
person may keep three (3) dogs and three (3) cats, plus a litter of each to
age three (3) months, without a permit and, with a permit, may keep a larger
specified number of dogs or cats.
(4) The fee for the permit shall be established by City Council.
(5) The limitations of this section shall not apply to dogs or cats kept upon the
business premises of any veterinarian, kennel, animal shelter, pet shop, nonprofit
animal welfare organization group, or scientific research institution
located in a zoning district zoned for such use.
(e) Vehicle Striking Animal. The driver of any vehicle which collides with or strikes any
domesticated animal shall stop the vehicle immediately at the scene of the accident, or as close as
15
possible without interfering with traffic, render reasonable assistance to the animal and either
locate and notify the owner of the animal or report the accident and the injury to the Division of
Animal Services or the Police Department. An injured animal may be delivered to its owner, a
veterinarian, an Animal Services employee or an Animal Services facility. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to any emergency vehicle or to a driver taking an ill or injured person to
medical care, nor shall it require assistance to an animal if providing such assistance would place
any person in danger from the animal or traffic.
(f) Destruction of Ill or Injured Animals by Animal Services. An animal that is severely
injured or ill may be destroyed by Animal Services in a humane manner if the animal is suffering
and is not expected to survive.
(1) An animal that exhibits symptoms of mange, distemper, parvovirus or other
communicable diseases may be destroyed in a humane manner. Animals
suspected of having a communicable disease shall not be confined with
healthy animals in the City animal shelter.
(2) If an injured or diseased animal in the custody of an employee of the
Division of Animal Services is wearing a current vaccination tag or other
identification, the custodian shall make every reasonable effort to notify the
owner of the animal's location and condition before destroying the animal.
Once notified, if the owner proceeds immediately to the location of the
injured animal, it shall be released to the owner without charge. Animals
that are not wearing any type of identification may be destroyed
immediately.
(3) The City of Temple shall not be responsible for obtaining veterinary
services for unclaimed diseased or injured animals. In the event a person
obtains veterinary services for a diseased or injured animal, a person
subsequently claiming ownership of the animal shall be liable for all
expenses of treatment. A person or entity that obtains veterinary services
for an animal may bring suit against the animal's owner to collect expenses
of treatment.
(4) The City of Temple, its officers, agents and employees, shall not be liable
in damages for the destruction of any animal accomplished in accordance
with the chapter.
Sec. 6-16. Dangerous Animals
(a) Vicious Dogs Prohibited in Public; Confinement to Private Property. No dog or any other
animal with aggressive or vicious propensities, nor a female dog in estrus (in heat) shall be allowed
upon any street, avenue, highway, alley, sidewalk, parkway, park or other public place in the city,
whether or not said dog is under control by means of a leash, chain or otherwise. A dog that has
16
attacked or bitten a human being or attacked another animal shall be considered aggressive or
vicious propensities.
(b) Dangerous Dogs and Wild Animals. The City of Temple expressly adopts Chapter 822 et
seq. of the Texas Health and Safety Code. The City further authorizes the Division of Animal
Services to administer the provisions of that Chapter. Such adoption should in no way be construed
to limit the authority of Animal Services to provide for the safety or citizenry of the City of Temple
in relation to its daily activities.
(c) Dangerous Animals. The City expressly adopts the same provisions for dangerous animals
as are used for dangerous dogs.
(d) Guard Dogs. Dogs maintained lawfully as guard dogs or attack dogs as defined herein,
shall not be included in the definition of "wild or dangerous animal." As used in this section the
term "guard dog or attack dog" means any dog intended to attack intruders, that has completed
professional training and is certified, or has been comparably trained, such that its attack can be
stopped on command. Display of such certificate shall be required on demand from an Animal
Services officer.
(e) Warning Signs Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any guard or attack
dog unattended in any place inside any building unless a warning sign has been placed in a clearly
visible location at the premises, located so that it can be seen by any person before entering the
place to which the dog has access, warning that a guard or attack dog is present. It shall be unlawful
for any person to leave any guard or attack dog unattended in any place outside a building except
in a fenced yard, with a fence adequate to prevent the dog from leaving the premises, and with a
warning sign placed in a clearly visible location at the premises, located so that it can be seen by
any person before entering the place to which the dog has access, warning that a guard dog or
attack dog is present.
Sec. 6-17. Additional Provisions Relating to Dangerous or Vicious Animals
(a) Change of Owner. If the owner of a registered dangerous animal sells or gives the animal
to another person, the owner shall notify the other person at the time of the sale or gift that the
animal is a registered dangerous animal.
(b) Registration by New Owner. If a new owner keeps the dangerous animal within the City
of Temple, he shall register the animal with the Animal Services Manager within ten (10) calendar
days after receiving it.
(c) Re-registration. When the owner of an animal registered as a dangerous animal in another
jurisdiction becomes a resident of Temple, he shall register the animal with the Animal Services
Manager within ten (10) calendar days after becoming a new resident.
(d) Validation of Re-registration. A re-registration shall be valid only for the time remaining
on the prior registration.
17
(e) Notification by Animal Services Manager. When the Animal Services Manager is informed
that a dangerous animal has been moved to another jurisdiction, or when the Animal Services
Manager registers a dangerous animal previously registered in another jurisdiction, he should
notify the Animal Services authority for such jurisdiction of this information.
(f) Notification of Attacks. The owner of a registered dangerous dog shall notify the Animal
Services Manager of all attacks made by the dog on domestic animals, domestic fowl, or humans.
Sec. 6-18. Impoundment and Reclamation of Dangerous Animals
(a) Impoundment Not Possible.
(1) If Animal Services attempts to impound a dangerous animal at a location
away from the premises of the owner and the impoundment cannot be made
with safety, the animal may be destroyed without notice to the owner or
harborer.
(2) If an attempt is made to impound a dangerous animal from the premises of
the owner or harborer and the impoundment cannot be made with safety,
the owner or harborer will be given twenty-four (24) hours’ notice that if
the animal is not surrendered to Animal Services within twenty-four (24)
hour period, then the animal will be destroyed wherever it is found. After
this notice, the dangerous animal may be destroyed during an attempt to
impound if impoundment cannot be made with safety, wherever the
impoundment is attempted. Notice under this section shall be in writing. A
written notice left at the entrance to the premise where the dangerous animal
is harbored will be considered valid notice as of the date and time of posting.
(3) In lieu of surrendering the animal to Animal Services, an owner may
permanently remove said animal from the City, if written proof of relocation
is provided to the Animal Services Manager and transport is made in
compliance with this ordinance.
(b) Dangerous Animal Not Reclaimed. A dangerous animal impounded pursuant to this section
and not reclaimed by its owner under the requirements of this section within ten (10) calendar days
from the date of notice of impoundment shall be deemed abandoned and, at the discretion of the
Animal Services Manager, euthanized in a humane manner.
(c) Return of Dangerous Animal. No dangerous animal shall be returned to its owner at any
time unless authorized by this Ordinance and the owner has fulfilled all requirements for
reclaiming the animal, as adopted by the City of Temple Animal Services Division and outlined
in Texas Health and Safety Code Chapter 822, as amended.
18
Sec. 6-19. Affirmative Defenses
Any exemptions or exceptions found in this Chapter shall be affirmative defenses and shall be
proven by the defendant. It shall not be necessary to list such exceptions or exemptions in the
charging instrument or in the prosecution by the City of the offense. It shall be the burden of the
person charged with the offense to prove that an exception or justification exists.
Sec. 6-20. Citations
An Animal Services officer or police officer is authorized to issue a citation to any person who
violates a provision of this chapter. The citation shall set forth the general nature of the violation
charged, and direct the violator to appear in the municipal court of the City of Temple, Texas, on
or before a certain day. When the violator is not present, the citation may be issued, a complaint
filed, and procedure followed as permitted by law. The violator shall be presumed to be the owner
or occupant of the location where an animal is found or located, or the keeper of the animal, when
the owner of the animal cannot be verified by a current license or tag.
Sec. 6-21. Penalty
Any person adjudged guilty of an offense under this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not to exceed Two Thousand Dollars and No Cents ($2,000.00). Each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 6-22. Culpability
If the definition of an offense under this Chapter does not prescribe a culpable mental state, then a
culpable mental state is not required and the offense is one of strict liability.
Revised September 3, 2014 by Ordinance No. 2015-4725
CHAPTER 7
BUILDINGS
ARTICLE I - ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 7-1. Building official.
Whenever reference is made to the duties of “certain officials” named within the 2009
International Building Code, the 2009 International Residential Code, the 2009 International
Plumbing Code, 2009 International Mechanical Code, 2009 International Fuel Gas Code, and the
2009 International Energy Conservation Code, adopted in this Chapter, that designated official of
Temple, Texas, who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said Codes shall
be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said Codes are
concerned.
Sec. 7-2. Building Board of Appeals.
(a) Creation and Appointment. A Board is hereby established to be called the Building
Board of Appeals (referred to in the 2009 International Building Code as the Building Board of
Adjustments and Appeals), which will consist of 13 members. The City Council must appoint all
Board members. The City Council must appoint, when possible, two architects or engineers, one
person from the mechanical or air conditioning trade, two master plumbers, two persons from the
building industry which may include a general contractor, engineer or other person at large from
the building industry, two licensed master electricians, one licensed journeyman electrician, one
representative of the electric distributor, and two persons at large representing no specific trade.
(b) Term of Office. All members shall be appointed for four year terms, except that the
two licensed master electricians, one licensed journeyman electrician, and one representative of
the electric distributor appointed in 2014 shall have an initial term of one year. After their initial
one year term, those Board members will be appointed for four year terms. The City Council
will fill vacancies by appointment. When any member of the Board has been absent from the
regular meeting of such Board for three (3) or more consecutive times, without just cause, as
determined by the Board or the City Council, the member’s office shall become vacant, and the
chairman or acting chairman of the Board must certify such record of absence and vacancy to the
City Council which will appoint a new member to fill the vacancy.
(c) Procedures and Quorum. Seven members of the Board constitute a quorum. In varying
the application of any provisions of this Code or in modifying an order of the Building Official,
Plumbing Official, or Electrical Official, affirmative votes of the majority present, but not less
than five affirmative votes, are required. A Board member is prohibited from taking any action
in a case in which he has a conflict of interest as that term may be defined in the City Charter, in
Chapter 171 of the Local Government Code, or in other applicable laws or statutes.
2
(d) Records. The Building Official will act as secretary of the Building Board of Appeals
and make a detailed record of all its proceedings. The record must set forth the reasons for the
Board’s decisions, the vote for each participating member, the absence of a member and any
failure of a member to vote.
(e) Procedure. The Board must establish rules and regulations for its own procedures not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter. The Board shall meet at regular intervals to be
determined by the chairman, or, in any event, the Board shall meet within ten (10) days after
notice of appeal has been received.
(f) Advisory Responsibility of the Board. The Board shall submit to the City Council such
recommendations for the improvement and revision of the 2009 International Building Code, the
2009 International Mechanical Code, the 2009 International One and Two Family Dwelling
Code, the 2009 International Plumbing Code, the 2009 International Gas Code, 2009
International Energy Code or the 2009 International Fire Code as it may deem necessary and
proper in light of the development of new materials, methods or techniques which would result
in better and more economical installations, and to keep abreast of new developments in
applicable portions of the 2009 International Building Code, the 2009 Mechanical Code, the
2009 One and Two Family Dwelling Code, the 2009 International Plumbing Code, the 2009
International Gas Code, the 2009 International Energy Code and the 2009 International Fire
Code. All requests for use of materials or methods not covered in this Code must be fully
supported by factual evidence, or prior approval from a recognized testing agency or such other
impartial qualified authority acceptable to the Board.
(g) The Building Board of Appeals must carry out all functions and responsibilities
assigned to the Board in Chapter 10 of the City Code. The process for appealing a decision of the
Electrical Official to the Building Board of Appeals is set forth in Chapter 10.
(h) All of the functions of the Historic Preservation Board as set forth in Chapter 17 of
the City Code are hereby assigned and must be performed by the Building Board of Appeals.
Sec. 7-3. Appeals; Time limit.
(a) Whenever the Building Official, or his designee, rejects or refuses to approve the mode or
manner of construction purposed to be followed, or materials to be used in the erection or
alteration of a building or structure, or when it is claimed that the provisions of this Code do not
apply, or that an equally good more desirable form of construction can be employed in any
specific case, or when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of this Code, or any of the
regulations thereunder have been misconducted or wrongly interpreted, the owner of such
building or structure, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal from the decision of the Building
Official or his designee to the Building Board of Appeals. Notice of appeal shall be in writing
and filed with the Building Official within ninety (90) days after decision is rendered by the
Building Official. A fee of ten dollars ($10.00) must accompany the notice of appeal.
3
(b) In case of a building or structure, which, in the opinion of the Building Official is unsafe
or dangerous, the Building Official may, in his order, limit the time for such appeal to a shorter
period. The Building Official will provide notice of appeal forms for use by the public.
Sec. 7-4. Decisions of the Building Board of Appeals.
(a) Variances and Modifications.
(1) The Building Board of Appeals, when so appealed to and after hearing, may grant a
variance to the application of any provision of the 2009 International Building Code, the 2009
International Residential Code, the 2009 International Plumbing Code, the 2009 International
Mechanical Code, the 2009 International Fuel Gas Code, and the 2009 Energy Conservation
Code to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest
injustice, and the interpretation of the Building Official or his designee should be modified or
reversed.
(2) A decision of the Building Board of Appeals to vary the application of any provision
of this Code or to modify an order the Building Official or his designee must specify the manner
in which the variance or modification is made, the conditions upon which it is made and the
reason for the variance or modification.
(b) Decisions.
(1) Every decision of the Building Board of Appeals is final, subject, however, to such
remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. The decision must be in writing
and must indicate the record vote of the Board members. Every decision must be promptly filed
in the Office of the Building Official, and will be open to public inspection; a certified copy must
be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy kept publicly posted in the Office of the
Building Official for two (2) weeks after filing.
(2) The Building Board of Appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without
unreasonable or unnecessary delay.
(3) If a decision of the Building Board of Appeals reverses or modifies a refusal, order or
disallowance of the Building Official or his designee, or varies the application of any provisions
of this Code, the Building Official or his designee must immediately take action in accordance
with such decision.
Sec. 7-5 – 7-20. Reserved.
4
ARTICLE II - ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 7-21. Building Code.
The City of Temple adopts, as part of its Building Regulations, the 2009 International
Building Code, as it now exists and as it may be revised from time to time, including appendices.
A copy of the International Building Code is maintained in the office of the Building Official.
Sec. 7-22. Amendments.
What follows are additions, deletions and amendments to the 2009 International Building
Code.
(a) Permits. Chapter 1, “Scope and Administration,” Section 105, “Permits,” Subsection
105.2 “Work exempt from a permit” is amended as follows:
Delete sections 1, 2, and 6.
(b) Temporary Structures and Uses. Chapter 1, “Scope and Administration,” Section 108
“Temporary Structures and Uses,” Subsection 108.3 “Temporary Power” is amended as
follows:
Delete the “ICC Electrical Code” and replace with 2008 National Electrical Code
and City of Temple Electrical Code.
(c) Fees. Chapter 1, “Scope and Administration,” Section 109 “Fees,” Subsection 109.1
“Permit Fees” shall be amended as follows:
109. Permit Fees.
The City Council must adopt by resolution a schedule of the permit fees required
or authorized by the 2009 International Building Code, a copy of which shall be
maintained in the office of the Building Official.
(d) Board of Appeals. Chapter 1, “Scope and Administration,” Section 113 “Board of
Appeals,” shall be deleted and replaced with Section 7-2, “Building Board of Appeals”
found within this document.
(e) Private garages. Chapter 4, “Special Detailed Requirements Based on Use and
Occupancy,” Section 406, “Motor-Vehicle-Related Occupancies,” Subsection 406.1
“Private garages and carports,” 406.1.2 (2) shall be amended as follows:
The fire separation distance shall be changed from 5 to 10 feet.
Sec. 7-23 – 7-40. Reserved
5
ARTICLE III - MECHANICAL CODE
Sec. 7-41. Adopted.
The City of Temple adopts as part of its buildings regulations the 2009 International
Mechanical Code as it now exists and as it may be revised from time to time. A copy of the
2009 International Mechanical Code is maintained in the office of the Building Official.
Sec. 7-42 – 7-60. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV - 2009 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE
FOR ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLINGS
Sec. 7-61. Adopted.
The City of Temple adopts as part of its building regulations the 2009 International
Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings as it now exists and as it may be revised
from time to time. A copy of the 2009 International Residential Code for One and Two Family
Dwellings is maintained in the office of the Building Official.
Sec. 7-62. Amendments.
The City of Temple adopts certain amendments to the 2009 International Residential Code
for One and Two Family Dwellings which amendments are maintained in the office of the
Building Official.
(a) Work exempted from permits. Chapter 1, “Scope and Administration,” Section R105,
“Permits,” R105.2 “Work exempt from permit” shall be amended as follows:
(1) Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 10 shall be deleted.
(2) R105.2(3) be amended as follows:
The reference to four feet shall be replaced with two feet.
(3) Any reference to the “ICC Electrical Code” is deleted and replaced with 2008
National Electrical Code and City of Temple Electrical Code, Chapter 10.
(b) Manufacturers installation instructions. Chapter 1, “Scope and Administration,” Section
R106, “Construction Documents,” R106.1.2. Manufacturer’s installation instructions
shall be amended by deleting the words “on the job site.”
(c) Manufacturer’s installation instructions. Chapter 1, “Scope and Administration,” Section
R106, “Construction Documents,” R106.3.1 “Approval of construction documents” shall
be amended to read as follows:
6
When the building official issues a permit, the construction documents shall be made
available and shall be open to inspection by the Building Official or his or her authorized
representative.
(d) Frame and Masonry Inspection. Chapter 1, “Scope and Administration,” Section R109
“Inspections,” R109.1.4 “Frame and masonry inspection” shall be amended by deleting
the word masonry throughout the entire section.
(e) Certificate of Occupancy, Chapter 1, “Scope and Administration,” Section R110,
“Certificate of Occupancy,” shall be amended by deleting Sections R110.1; R110.3;
R110.4; and R110.5
(f) Board of Appeals. Chapter 1, “Scope and Administration,” Section R112 “Board of
Appeals,” shall be deleted and replaced with Section 7-2, “Building Board of Appeals”
found within this document.
(g) Attics. Chapter 2, “Definitions,” “Attic, Habitable,” shall be amended by deleting the
reference to “unfinished.”
(h) Handrails. Chapter 3, “Building Planning,” Section R311, “Means of Egress,”
Subsection R311.8.3, “Handrails required,” R311.8.3.1, “Height,” shall be amended to
delete 34 and 38 inches and replace with 28 and 36 inches respectively.
(i) Foundation Anchorage. Chapter 4, “Foundations,” Section R403, “Footings,” Subsection
R403.1. “General,” R403.1.6, “Foundation anchorage,” shall be amended as follows:
Shall extend a minimum of 8” inches in length (178mm) into concrete or grouted cells of
concrete masonry units.
(j) Foundation Elevation. Chapter 4, “Foundations,” Section R403, “Footings,” Subsection
R403.1, “General,” R403.1.7 “Footing on or adjacent to slope,” R403.1.7.3, “Foundation
elevation,” shall be deleted and individuals must comply with the City’s drainage
ordinance.
(k) Truss design drawings. Chapter 5, “Floors,” Section R502, “Wood floor framing,”
Subsection R502.11, “Wood Trusses,” R502.11.4 “Truss design drawings,” shall be
amended by deleting the words “and approved,” and replaced with “on request.”
(l) Weepholes. Chapter 7, “Wall Covering,” Section R703, “Exterior Covering,” Subsection
R703.7, “Stone and masonry veneer, generally,” 703.7.6, “Weepholes” shall be amended
so as to delete the reference to “33 inches” and replace with “a maximum of 48 inches.”
(m) Energy Efficiency. Chapter 11, “Energy Efficiency,” Section N1104, “Lighting
System,” Subsection N1104.1, “Lighting Equipment,” shall be deleted until enforcement
is mandated by the State.
7
(n) Plumbing generally. Chapter 29, “Water Supply and Distribution,” In all instances, only
copper or pex-al-pex shall be used under a concrete slab.
(o) Water distribution pipe. Chapter 29 “Water Supply and Distribution,” Section P2905,
“Materials, joints and connections,” Subsection P2905.5, “Water Distribution Pipe” shall
be amended by deleting “Brass pipe, Polybutylene (PB) plastic pipe and tubing,
Polypropylene (PP) plastic pipe or tubing to be used for both hot and cold water,” and
adding “Aluminum Shielded pex pipe.”
(p) Electrical. Chapters 34-41 shall be deleted and all references shall be replaced with
Chapter 10, Electrical Code, of the City of Temple Code of Ordinances.
Sec. 7-63 – 7-80. Reserved.
ARTICLE V - PLUMBING CODE
Sec. 7-81. Adopted.
The City of Temple adopts as part of its building regulations the 2009 International
Plumbing Code as it now exists and as it may be revised from time to time. A copy of the 2009
International Plumbing Code is maintained in the office of the Building Official.
Sec. 7-82. Amendments.
The City of Temple adopts certain amendments to the 2009 International Plumbing Code,
which amendments are maintained in the Office of the Building Official.
(a) Appendix A. Plumbing Fees.
The City Council must adopt by resolution a schedule of the permit fees required
or authorized by the 2009 International Plumbing Code, a copy of which will be
maintained in the office of the Building Official.
(b) Table 906.1. The distance from water closet to vent stack is five feet (5’). If the depth
of the flow line of sewer yard is more than 24” at any point, double wyes or combination wyes &
1/8 bends are to be used. A sewer yard line clean out is to be installed at junction of sewer yard
line and City sewer.
TABLE 906.1 DISTANCE OF FIXTURE TRAP FROM VENT
Size of Fixture Size of Trap Falls Per Foot Distance from Trap
1 ¼” 1 ¼” ¼” 4’
8
1 ½” 1 ¼” ¼” 4’
1 ½” 1 ½” ¼” 4’
2” 1 ½” ¼” 5’
2” 2” ¼” 5’
*3” 3” 1/8 ” 5’
*4” 4” 1/8” 5’
* Floor Drains Only 10’ & 12’ on 3” and 4”
(c) Chapter 6, “Water Supply and Distribution,” Chapter 7, “ Sanitary Drainage,” and
Chapter 9, “Vents,” shall be amended as follows:
(1) All references to air admittance valves shall be deleted.
(2) All sinks and washer connections to have a cleanout at or near the foot of
each vented waste or soil stack.
(3) A dishwashing machine shall not be directly connected to a drainage
system.
(4) Cold water distribution ASTM D3309-85B may be used in readily
accessible places only, not in walls, in or under slab foundations, or in
attics.
Sec. 7-83. Plumbing Installation or Maintenance by Homeowner.
Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent a homeowner from installing or maintaining
plumbing within his own property boundaries, providing such plumbing work is done by himself
and is used exclusively by him or his family. Such privilege does not convey the right to violate
any of the provisions of this Chapter, nor is it to be construed as exempting any such property
owner from obtaining a permit and paying the required fees thereof.
Section 7-84. Who May Obtain a Permit.
Permits may be issued only to the following:
(a) Master plumber licensed by the State of Texas of Plumbing Examiners;
(b) Property owner, for plumbing work to be done by him in a building owned and occupied
by him as his home;
(c) Appliance dealer or dealer’s employee, for connecting appliances to existing piping
installation;
(d) Licensed landscape architects and irrigators.
Sec. 7-85 – 7-93. Reserved.
9
ARTICLE VI - GAS CODE
Sec. 7-94. Adopted.
The City of Temple adopts as part of its Building regulations, the 2009 International Fuel
Gas Code as it exists now and as it may be revised from time to time. A copy of the 2009
International Fuel Gas Code is maintained in the office of the Building Official.
Sec. 7-95. Amendments.
The City of Temple adopts certain amendments to the 2009 International Fuel Gas Code,
which amendments are maintained in the Office of the Building Official.
(a) The City Council shall adopt by resolution a schedule of the permit fees required or
authorized by the2009 International Fuel Gas Code, a copy of which shall be maintained in the
office of the Building Official.
(b) Air Testing Lines. Chapter 4, “Gas Piping Instillations,” Section 406, “Inspection, testing
and purging,” Subsection 406.4 “Test pressure measurement,” shall be amended as follows:
The test with a diaphragm gage on gas house piping and service lines shall be made by
closing all openings and subjecting the pipes to an air pressure of 3 to 5 ounces for at
least fifteen (15) minutes under a constant temperature, the piping shall be considered
sufficiently tight.
ARTICLE VII - ENERGY CODE
Sec. 7-96. Adopted.
The City of Temple adopts as part of its building regulations the 2009 International Energy
Code as it now exists and as it may be revised from time to time. A copy of the 2009
International Energy Code is maintained in the office of the Building Official.
Sec. 7-97 Amendments.
The City of Temple adopts certain amendments to the 2009 International Energy Code,
which amendments are maintained in the Office of the Building Official.
(a) Chapter 4, “Residential Energy Code,” Table 402.1.1, “Insulation and Fenestration
Requirements by Components,” shall be amended by deleting requirements found in the
“Glazed Fenestration SHGC” in “Climate Zone 2,” until the state mandates these
requirements.
Sec. 7-98 – 7-99. Reserved.
10
ARTICLE VIII - LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION STANDARDS
Sec. 7-100. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this ordinance, have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
(a) Air gap - A complete physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable
water supply pipeline and an open or non-pressure receiving vessel.
(b) Backflow prevention - The mechanical prevention of reverse flow, or back siphonage, of
nonpotable water from an irrigation system into the potable water source.
(c) Backflow prevention assembly - Any assembly used to prevent backflow into a potable water
system. The type of assembly used is based on the existing or potential degree of health hazard
and backflow condition.
(d) Completion of irrigation system installation - When the landscape irrigation system has been
installed, all minimum standards met, all tests performed, and the irrigator is satisfied that the
system is operating correctly.
(e) Consulting - The act of providing advice, guidance, review or recommendations related to
landscape irrigation systems.
(f) Cross-connection - An actual or potential connection between a potable water source and an
irrigation system that may contain contaminates or pollutants or any source of water that has
been treated to a lesser degree in the treatment process.
(g) Design - The act of determining the various elements of a landscape irrigation system that
will include, but not be limited to, elements such as collecting site specific information, defining
the scope of the project, defining plant watering needs, selecting and laying out emission
devices, locating system components, conducting hydraulics calculations, identifying any local
regulatory requirements, or scheduling irrigation work at a site. Completion of the various
components will result in an irrigation plan.
(h) Design pressure - The pressure that is required for an emission device to operate properly.
Design pressure is calculated by adding the operating pressure necessary at an emission device to
the total of all pressure losses accumulated from an emission device to the water source.
(i) Emission device - Any device that is contained within an irrigation system and that is used to
apply water. Common emission devices in an irrigation system include, but are not limited to,
spray and rotary sprinkler heads, and drip irrigation emitters.
(j) Employed - Engaged or hired to provide consulting services or perform any activity relating to
the sale, design, installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service to irrigation systems. A
11
person is employed if that person is in an employer-employee relationship as defined by Internal
Revenue Code, 26 U.S.C., §3212(d) based on the behavioral control, financial control, and the
type of relationship involved in performing employment related tasks.
(k) Head-to-head spacing - The spacing of spray or rotary heads equal to the manufacturer’s
published radius of the head.
(l) Health hazard - A cross-connection or potential cross-connection with an irrigation system
that involves any chemical additives that may, if introduced into the potable water supply, cause
death or illness, spread disease, or have a high probability of causing such effects or when an
irrigation system services property that is also served by an on-site sewage facility (septic
system).
(m) Hydraulics - The science of dynamic and static water; the mathematical computation of
determining pressure losses and pressure requirements of an irrigation system.
(n) Installer - A person who actually connects an irrigation system to a private or public raw or
potable water supply system or any water supply, who is licensed according to Title 30, Texas
Administrative Code, Chapter 30 (relating to Occupational Licenses and Registrations).
(o) Irrigation inspector - A person who inspects irrigation systems and performs other
enforcement duties for a municipality or water district as an employee or as a contractor and is
required to be licensed under Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30 (relating to
Occupational Licenses and Registrations).
(p) Irrigation plan - A scaled drawing of a landscape irrigation system which lists required
information, the scope of the project, and represents the changes made in the installation of the
irrigation system.
(q) Irrigation services - Selling, designing, installing, maintaining, altering, repairing, servicing,
permitting, providing consulting services regarding, or connecting an irrigation system to a water
supply.
(r) Irrigation system - An assembly of component parts that is permanently installed for the
controlled distribution and conservation of water to irrigate any type of landscape vegetation in
any location, and/or to reduce dust or control erosion. This term does not include a system that is
used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by Texas Agricultural Code, §251.002.
(s) Irrigation technician - A person who works under the supervision of a licensed irrigator to
install, maintain, alter, repair, service or supervise installation of an irrigation system, including
the connection of such system in or to a private or public, raw or potable water supply system or
any water supply, and who is required to be licensed under Title 30, Texas Administrative Code,
Chapter 30 (relating to Occupational Licenses and Registrations).
(t) Irrigation zone - A subdivision of an irrigation system with a matched precipitation rate based
on plant material type (such as turf, shrubs, or trees), microclimate factors (such as sun/shade
12
ratio), topographic features (such as slope) and soil conditions (such as sand, loam, clay, or
combination) or for hydrological control.
(u) Irrigator - A person who sells, designs, offers consultations regarding, installs, maintains,
alters, repairs, services or supervises the installation of an irrigation system, including the
connection of such system to a private or public, raw or potable water supply system or any
water supply, and who is required to be licensed under Title 30, Texas Administrative Code,
Chapter 30.
(v) Landscape Irrigation - The science of applying the necessary amount of water to promote or
sustain healthy growth of plant material or turf.
(w) License - An occupational license that is issued by the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality under Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30 to an individual that authorizes
the individual to engage in an activity that is covered by Title 30, Texas Administrative Code,
Chapter 30.
(x) Mainline - A pipe within an irrigation system that delivers water from the water source to the
individual zone valves.
(y) Maintenance checklist - A document made available to the irrigation system's owner or
owner's representative that contains information regarding the operation and maintenance of the
irrigation system, including, but not limited to: checking and repairing the irrigation system,
setting the automatic controller, checking the rain or moisture sensor, cleaning filters, pruning
grass and plants away from irrigation emitters, using and operating the irrigation system, the
precipitation rates of each irrigation zone within the system, any water conservation measures
currently in effect from the water purveyor, the name of the water purveyor, a suggested seasonal
or monthly watering schedule based on current evapotranspiration data for the geographic
region, and the minimum water requirements for the plant material in each zone based on the soil
type and plant material where the system is installed.
(z) Major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service - Any activity that involves opening to the
atmosphere the irrigation main line at any point prior to the discharge side of any irrigation zone
control valve. This includes, but is not limited to, repairing or connecting into a main supply
pipe, replacing a zone control valve, or repairing a zone control valve in a manner that opens the
system to the atmosphere.
(aa) Master valve - A remote control valve located after the backflow prevention device that
controls the flow of water to the irrigation system mainline.
(bb) Matched precipitation rate - The condition in which all sprinkler heads within an irrigation
zone apply water at the same rate.
(cc) New installation - An irrigation system installed at a location where one did not previously
exist.
13
(dd) Pass-through contract - A written contract between a contractor or builder and a licensed
irrigator or exempt business owner to perform part or all of the irrigation services relating to an
irrigation system.
(ee) Potable water - Water that is suitable for human consumption.
(ff) Pressure Vacuum Breaker - An assembly containing an independently operating internally
loaded check valve and an independently operating loaded air inlet valve located on the
discharge side of the check valve. Also known as a Pressure Vacuum Breaker Back-siphonage
Prevention Assembly.
(gg) Reclaimed water - Domestic or municipal wastewater which has been treated to a quality
suitable for beneficial use, such as landscape irrigation.
(hh) Records of landscape irrigation activities - The irrigation plans, contracts, warranty
information, invoices, copies of permits, and other documents that relate to the installation,
maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of a landscape irrigation system.
(ii) Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assembly - An assembly containing two
independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating
mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the two check valves
and below the first check valve.
(jj) Static water pressure - The pressure of water when it is not moving.
(kk) Supervision - The on-the-job oversight and direction by a licensed irrigator who is fulfilling
his or her professional responsibility to the client and/or employer in compliance with local or
state requirements. Also a licensed installer working under the direction of a licensed irrigator or
beginning January 1, 2009, an irrigation technician who is working under the direction of a
licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair or service an irrigation system.
(ll) Water conservation - The design, installation, service, and operation of an irrigation system
in a manner that prevents the waste of water, promotes the most efficient use of water, and
applies the least amount of water that is required to maintain healthy individual plant material or
turf, reduce dust, and control erosion.
(mm) Zone flow - A measurement, in gallons per minute or gallons per hour, of the actual flow of
water through a zone valve, calculated by individually opening each zone valve and obtaining a
valid reading after the pressure has stabilized. For design purposes, the zone flow is the total
flow of all nozzles in the zone at a specific pressure.
(nn) Zone valve - An automatic valve that controls a single zone of a landscape irrigation system.
14
Sec. 7-101. Valid license required.
(a) Any person who connects an irrigation system to the water supply within the City or the
City’s extraterritorial jurisdiction, commonly referred to as the ETJ, must hold a valid license, as
defined by Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30 and required by Chapter 1903 of the
Texas Occupations Code, or as defined by Title 22 of the Texas Administrative Code, Chapter
365 and required by Chapter 1301 of the Texas Occupations Code.
(b) Exemptions. A property owner is not required to be licensed in accordance with Texas
Occupations Code, Title 12, §1903.002(c)(1) if he or she is performing irrigation work in a
building or on a premises owned or occupied by the person as the person’s home. A home or
property owner who installs an irrigation system must meet the standards contained in Title 30,
Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 344 regarding spacing, water pressure, spraying water over
impervious materials, rain or moisture shut-off devices or other technology, backflow prevention
and isolation valves. A home or property owner must obtain a permit from the City, submit an
irrigation plan, use an individual with a valid license to install backflow prevention devices, and
submit test results of the backflow prevention device to the City. The City may, at any point,
adopt more stringent requirements for a home or property owner who installs an irrigation
system. See Texas Occupations Code §1903.002 for other exemptions to the licensing
requirement.
Sec. 7-102. Permit required.
(a) Any person installing an irrigation system within the territorial limits or
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City is required to obtain a permit from the City. Any applicant
must submit a plan with the application demonstrating that the plan and irrigation system meet
the requirements of this Chapter. Any plan approved for a permit must be in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter. Construction Safety administers the permit program in conjunction
with the Water Department’s approval of tested systems. Permit formats and processes are
amended from time to time by the Construction Safety Department.
(b) A person is exempt from the requirement set forth in subsection (a) if the person is
installing any of the following:
(1) An irrigation system that is an on-site sewage disposal system, as defined by
Section 366.002, Health and Safety Code;
(2) An irrigation system used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by
Section 251.002, Agriculture Code; or
(3) An irrigation system connected to a groundwater well used by the property
owner for domestic use.
Sec. 7-103. Backflow prevention methods and devices.
(a) Any irrigation system that is connected to the potable water supply must be connected
through a backflow prevention method approved by the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality (TCEQ). The backflow prevention device must be approved by the American Society of
Sanitary Engineers, the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research,
15
University of Southern California, the Uniform Plumbing Code, or any other laboratory that has
equivalent capabilities for both the laboratory and field evaluation of backflow prevention
assemblies. The backflow prevention device must be installed in accordance with the laboratory
approval standards or if the approval does not include specific installation information, the
manufacturer's current published recommendations.
(b) In new installations of landscape irrigation systems one of the following methods
must be used to prevent backflow:
(1) Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies may be used if:
a. the device is installed at a minimum of 12 inches above ground in a
location that will ensure that the assembly will not be submerged; and
b. drainage is provided for any water that may be discharged through the
assembly relief valve.
(2) Pressure vacuum breakers may be used if:
a. no back-pressure condition will occur; and
b. the device is installed at a minimum of 12 inches above any sprinklers
as measured from the retracted position from the top of the sprinkler.
(c) Existing irrigation systems which are not of the type listed in 7-103(b) may remain,
however upon replacement, homeowner must comply with the required devices listed in 7-
103(b).
(d) Backflow prevention devices used in applications designated as health hazards must
be tested upon installation and annually thereafter. The following situations have been deemed
by the City to create a health hazard:
(1) When chemicals are added to an irrigation system which is connected to the
potable water supply; or
(2) When an irrigation system services property that is also served by an on-site
sewage facility (septic system).
(e) If an irrigation system is connected to a potable water supply through a pressure
vacuum breaker or reduced pressure principle backflow assembly and includes an automatic
master valve on the system, the automatic master valve must be installed on the discharge side of
the backflow prevention assembly.
(f) The irrigator shall ensure the backflow prevention device is tested by a licensed
Backflow Prevention Assembly Tester prior to being placed in service and the test results
16
provided to the local water purveyor and the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative
within ten business days of testing of the backflow prevention device.
Sec. 7-104. Specific conditions and cross-connection control.
(a) Before any chemical is added to an irrigation system connected to the potable water
supply, the irrigation system must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention assembly.
(b) Connection of any additional water source to an irrigation system that is connected to
the potable water supply can only be done if the irrigation system is connected to the potable
water supply through a reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.
(c) Irrigation system components with chemical additives induced by aspiration,
injection, or emission system connected to any potable water supply must be connected through
a reduced pressure principle backflow device.
(d) If any new irrigation system is designed or installed on a property that is served by an
on-site sewage facility, as defined in Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 285, then:
(1) all irrigation piping and valves must meet the separation distances from the
On-Site Sewage Facilities system as required for a private water line in Title
30, Texas Administrative Code, Section 285.91(10);
(2) any connections using a private or public potable water source that is not the
City’s potable water system must be connected to the water source through a
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly as defined in Title
30, Texas Administrative Code, Section 344.50; and
(3) any water from the irrigation system that is applied to the surface of the area
utilized by the On-Site Sewage Facility system must be controlled on a
separate irrigation zone or zones so as to allow complete control of any
irrigation to that area so that there will not be excess water that would prevent
the On-Site Sewage Facilities system from operating effectively.
Sec. 7-105. Water conservation.
All irrigation systems shall be designed, installed, maintained, altered, repaired, serviced,
and operated in a manner that will promote water conservation as defined in Section 7-100.
Sec. 7-106. Irrigation plan design: minimum standards.
(a) An irrigator shall prepare an irrigation plan for each site where a new irrigation system
will be installed. A paper or electronic copy of the irrigation plan must be on the job site at all
times during the installation of the irrigation system. A drawing showing the actual installation
of the system is due to each irrigation system owner after all new irrigation system installations.
17
During the installation of the irrigation system, variances from the original plan may be
authorized by the licensed irrigator if the variance from the plan does not:
(1) diminish the operational integrity of the irrigation system;
(2) violate any requirements of this ordinance; and
(3) go unnoted in red on the irrigation plan.
(b) The irrigation plan must include complete coverage of the area to be irrigated. If a system
does not provide complete coverage of the area to be irrigated, it must be noted on the irrigation
plan.
(c) All irrigation plans used for construction must be drawn to scale. The plan must include,
at a minimum, the following information:
(1) the irrigator's seal, signature, and date of signing;
(2) all major physical features and the boundaries of the areas to be watered;
(3) a North arrow;
(4) a legend;
(5) the zone flow measurement for each zone;
(6) location and type of each:
a. controller; and
b. sensor (for example, but not limited to, rain, moisture, wind, flow, or
freeze);
(7) location, type, and size of each:
a. water source, such as, but not limited to a water meter and point(s) of
connection;
b. backflow prevention device;
c. water emission device, including, but not limited to, spray heads, rotary
sprinkler heads, quick-couplers, bubblers, drip, or micro-sprays;
d. valve, including but not limited to, zone valves, master valves, and
isolation valves;
18
e. pressure regulation component; and
f. main line and lateral piping.
(8) the scale used; and
(9) the design pressure.
Sec. 7-107. Design and installation: minimum requirements.
(a) No irrigation design or installation shall require the use of any component, including the
water meter, in a way which exceeds the manufacturer's published performance limitations for
the component.
(b) Spacing.
(1) The maximum spacing between emission devices must not exceed the
manufacturer's published radius or spacing of the device(s). The radius or spacing is
determined by referring to the manufacturer's published specifications for a specific
emission device at a specific operating pressure.
(2) New irrigation systems shall not utilize above-ground spray emission devices
in landscapes that are less than 48 inches not including the impervious surfaces in either
length or width and which contain impervious pedestrian or vehicular traffic surfaces
along two or more perimeters. If pop-up sprays or rotary sprinkler heads are used in a
new irrigation system, the sprinkler heads must direct flow away from any adjacent
surface and shall not be installed closer than four inches from a hardscape, such as, but
not limited to, a building foundation, fence, concrete, asphalt, pavers, or stones set with
mortar.
(3) Narrow paved walkways, jogging paths, golf cart paths or other small areas
located in cemeteries, parks, golf courses or other public areas may be exempted from
this requirement if the runoff drains into a landscaped area.
(c) Water pressure. Emission devices must be installed to operate at the minimum and not
above the maximum sprinkler head pressure as published by the manufacturer for the nozzle and
head spacing that is used. Methods to achieve the water pressure requirements include, but are
not limited to, flow control valves, a pressure regulator, or pressure compensating spray heads.
(d) Piping. Piping in irrigation systems must be designed and installed so that the flow of
water in the pipe will not exceed a velocity of five feet per second for polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
pipe.
(e) Irrigation Zones. Irrigation systems shall have separate zones based on plant material
type, microclimate factors, topographic features, soil conditions, and hydrological requirements.
19
(f) Matched precipitation rate. Zones must be designed and installed so that all of the
emission devices in that zone irrigate at the same precipitation rate.
(g) Irrigation systems shall not spray water over surfaces made of concrete, asphalt, brick,
wood, stones set with mortar, or any other impervious material, such as, but not limited to, walls,
fences, sidewalks, streets, etc.
(h) Master valve. When provided, a master valve shall be installed on the discharge side of
the backflow prevention device on all new installations.
(i) PVC pipe primer solvent. All new irrigation systems that are installed using PVC pipe and
fittings shall be primed with a colored primer prior to applying the PVC cement in accordance
with the Uniform Plumbing Code (Section 316) or the International Plumbing Code (Section
605).
(j) Rain or moisture shut-off devices or other technology. All new automatically controlled
irrigation systems must include sensors or other technology designed to inhibit or interrupt
operation of the irrigation system during periods of moisture or rainfall. Rain or moisture shutoff
technology must be installed according to the manufacturer's published recommendations.
Repairs to existing automatic irrigation systems that require replacement of an existing controller
must include a sensor or other technology designed to inhibit or interrupt operation of the
irrigation system during periods of moisture or rainfall.
(k) Isolation valve. All new irrigation systems must include an isolation valve between the
water meter and the backflow prevention device.
(l) Depth coverage of piping. Piping in all irrigation systems must be installed according to
the manufacturer's published specifications for depth coverage of piping.
(1) If the manufacturer has not published specifications for depth coverage of piping,
the piping must be installed to provide minimum depth coverage of six inches of select
backfill, between the top of the pipe and the natural grade of the topsoil. All portions of
the irrigation system that fail to meet this standard must be noted on the irrigation plan. If
the area being irrigated has rock at a depth of six inches or less, select backfill may be
mounded over the pipe. Mounding must be noted on the irrigation plan and discussed
with the irrigation system owner or owner's representative to address any safety issues.
(2) If a utility, man-made structure, or roots create an unavoidable obstacle, which
makes the six-inch depth coverage requirement impractical, the piping shall be installed
to provide a minimum of two inches of select backfill between the top of the pipe and the
natural grade of the topsoil.
(3) All trenches and holes created during installation of an irrigation system must be
backfilled and compacted to the original grade.
(m) Wiring irrigation systems.
20
(1) Underground electrical wiring used to connect an automatic controller to any
electrical component of the irrigation system must be listed by Underwriters
Laboratories as acceptable for burial underground.
(2) Electrical wiring that connects any electrical components of an irrigation system
must be sized according to the manufacturer's recommendation.
(3) Electrical wire splices which may be exposed to moisture must be waterproof as
certified by the wire splice manufacturer.
(4) Underground electrical wiring that connects an automatic controller to any
electrical component of the irrigation system must be buried with a minimum of six
inches of select backfill.
(n) Water contained within the piping of an irrigation system is deemed to be non-potable.
No drinking or domestic water usage, such as, but not limited to, filling swimming pools or
decorative fountains, shall be connected to an irrigation system. If a hose bib (an outdoor water
faucet that has hose threads on the spout) is connected to an irrigation system for the purpose of
providing supplemental water to an area, the hose bib must be installed using a quick coupler key
on a quick coupler installed in a covered purple valve box and the hose bib and any hoses
connected to the bib must be labeled "non potable, not safe for drinking." An isolation valve
must be installed upstream of a quick coupler connecting a hose bib to an irrigation system.
(o) Beginning January 1, 2010, either a licensed irrigator or a licensed irrigation technician
shall be on-site at all times while the landscape irrigation system is being installed. When an
irrigator is not onsite, the irrigator shall be responsible for ensuring that a licensed irrigation
technician is on-site to supervise the installation of the irrigation system.
Sec. 7-108. Completion of irrigation system installation.
Upon completion of the irrigation system, the irrigator or irrigation technician who provided
supervision for the on-site installation shall be required to complete four items:
(a) a final "walk through" with the irrigation system's owner or the owner's representative to
explain the operation of the system;
(b) The maintenance checklist on which the irrigator or irrigation technician shall obtain the
signature of the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative and shall sign, date, and seal
the checklist. If the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative is unwilling or unable to
sign the maintenance checklist, the irrigator shall note the time and date of the refusal on the
irrigation system's owner or owner's representative's signature line. The irrigation system owner
or owner's representative will be given the original maintenance checklist and a duplicate copy of
the maintenance checklist shall be maintained by the irrigator. The items on the maintenance
checklist shall include but are not limited to:
21
(1) the manufacturer's manual for the automatic controller, if the
system is automatic;
(2) a seasonal (spring, summer, fall, winter) watering schedule based on either
current/real time evapotranspiration or monthly historical reference evapotranspiration
(historical ET) data, monthly effective rainfall estimates, plant landscape coefficient
factors, and site factors;
(3) a list of components, such as the nozzle, or pump filters, and other such
components that require maintenance and the recommended frequency for the service;
and
(4) the statement, "This irrigation system has been installed in accordance
with all applicable state and local laws, ordinances, rules, regulations or orders. I have
tested the system and determined that it has been installed according to the Irrigation Plan
and is properly adjusted for the most efficient application of water at this time."
(c) A permanent sticker which contains the irrigator's name, license number, company name,
telephone number and the dates of the warranty period shall be affixed to each automatic
controller installed by the irrigator or irrigation technician. If the irrigation system is manual, the
sticker shall be affixed to the original maintenance checklist. The information contained on the
sticker must be printed with waterproof ink.
(d) The irrigation plan indicating the actual installation of the system must be provided to the
irrigation system's owner or owner representative.
Sec. 7-109. Maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of irrigation systems.
(a) The licensed irrigator is responsible for all work that the irrigator performed during
the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system during the warranty period.
The irrigator or business owner is not responsible for the professional negligence of any other
irrigator who subsequently conducts any irrigation service on the same irrigation system.
(b) All trenches and holes created during the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of
an irrigation system must be returned to the original grade with compacted select backfill.
(c) Colored PVC pipe primer solvent must be used on all pipes and fittings used in the
maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system in accordance with the Uniform
Plumbing Code (Section 316) or the International Plumbing Code (Section 605).
(d) When maintenance, alteration, repair or service of an irrigation system involves
excavation work at the water meter or backflow prevention device, an isolation valve shall be
installed, if an isolation valve is not present.
22
Sec. 7-110. Reclaimed water.
Reclaimed water may be utilized in landscape irrigation systems if:
(a) there is no direct contact with edible crops, unless the crop is pasteurized before
consumption;
(b) the irrigation system does not spray water across property lines that do not belong to the
irrigation system's owner;
(c) the irrigation system is installed using purple components;
(d) the domestic potable water line is connected using an air gap or a reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device, in accordance with Title 30, Texas Administrative Code,
Section 290.47(i) (relating to Appendices);
(e) a minimum of an eight inch by eight inch sign, in English and Spanish, is prominently
posted on/in the area that is being irrigated, that reads, "RECLAIMED WATER – DO NOT
DRINK" and "AGUA DE RECUPERACIÓN – NO BEBER"; and
(f) backflow prevention on the reclaimed water supply line shall be in accordance with the
regulations of the City’s water provider.
Sec. 7-111. Advertisement requirements.
(a) All vehicles used in the performance of irrigation installation, maintenance, alteration,
repair, or service must display the irrigator's license number in the form of "LI________" in a
contrasting color of block letters at least two inches high, on both sides of the vehicle.
(b) All forms of written and electronic advertisements for irrigation services must display the
irrigator's license number in the form of "LI___________." Any form of advertisement,
including business cards, and estimates which displays an entity's or individual's name other than
that of the licensed irrigator must also display the name of the licensed irrigator and the licensed
irrigator's license number. Trailers that advertise irrigation services must display the irrigator's
license number.
(c) The name, mailing address, and telephone number of the TCEQ must be prominently
displayed on a legible sign and displayed in plain view for the purpose of addressing complaints
at the permanent structure where irrigation business is primarily conducted and irrigation records
are kept.
Sec. 7-112. Contracts.
(a) All contracts to install an irrigation system must be in writing and signed by each party
and must specify the irrigator's name, license number, business address, current business
telephone numbers, the date that each party signed the agreement, the total agreed price, and
must contain the statement, "Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas Commission on
23
Environmental Quality (TCEQ), MC-178, P.O. Box 13087, Austin, Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ's
website is: www. tceq.state.tx.us." All contracts must include the irrigator's seal, signature, and
date.
(b) All written estimates, proposals, bids, and invoices relating to the installation or repair of
an irrigation system(s) must include the irrigator's name, license number, business address,
current business telephone number(s), and the statement: "Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the
Texas Commission On Environmental Quality (TCEQ) (MC-178), P.O. Box 13087, Austin,
Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ's web site is: www.tceq.state.tx.us."
(c) An individual who agrees by contract to provide irrigation services as defined in Title 30,
Texas Administrative Code, Section 344.30 (relating to License Required) shall hold an irrigator
license issued under Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30 (relating to Occupational
Licenses and Registrations) unless the contract is a pass-through contract as defined in Title 30,
Texas Administrative Code, Section 344.1(36) (relating to Definitions). If a pass-through
contract includes irrigation services, then the irrigation portion of the contract can only be
performed by a licensed irrigator. If an irrigator installs a system pursuant to a pass-through
contract, the irrigator shall still be responsible for providing the irrigation system's owner or
owner's representative a copy of the warranty and all other documents required under this
chapter. A pass-through contract must identify by name and license number the irrigator that will
perform the work and must provide a mechanism for contacting the irrigator for irrigation system
warranty work.
(d) The contract must include the dates that the warranty is valid.
Section 7-113. Warranties for Systems.
(a) On all installations of new irrigation systems, an irrigator shall present the irrigation
system's owner or owner's representative with a written warranty covering materials and labor
furnished in the new installation of the irrigation system. The irrigator shall be responsible for
adhering to terms of the warranty. If the irrigator's warranty is less than the manufacturer's
warranty for the system components, then the irrigator shall provide the irrigation system's
owner or the owner's representative with applicable information regarding the manufacturer's
warranty period. The warranty must include the irrigator's seal, signature, and date. If the
warranty is part of an irrigator's contract, a separate warranty document is not required.
(b) An irrigator's written warranty on new irrigation systems must specify the irrigator's
name, business address, and business telephone number(s), must contain the signature of the
irrigation system's owner or owner's representative confirming receipt of the warranty and must
include the statement: "Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality (TCEQ), MC-178, P.O. Box 130897, Austin, Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ's
website is: www.tceq.state.tx.us."
(c) On all maintenance, alterations, repairs, or service to existing irrigation systems, an
irrigator shall present the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative a written document
that identifies the materials furnished in the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service. If a
24
warranty is provided, the irrigator shall abide by the terms. The warranty document must include
the irrigator's name and business contact information.
Sec. 7-114. Duties and responsibilities of city irrigation inspectors.
A licensed irrigation inspector shall enforce the ordinance of the City, and shall be responsible
for:
(a) verifying that the appropriate permits have been obtained for an irrigation system and that
the irrigator and installer or irrigation technician, if applicable, are licensed;
(b) inspecting the irrigation system;
(c) determining that the irrigation system complies with the requirements of this chapter;
(d) determining that the appropriate backflow prevention device was installed, tested, and test
results provided to the City;
(e) investigating complaints related to irrigation system installation, maintenance, alteration,
repairs, or service of an irrigation system and advertisement of irrigation services; and
(f) maintaining records according to this chapter.
Sec. 7-115. Items not covered by this ordinance.
Any item not covered by this ordinance and required by law shall be governed by the
Texas Occupations Code, the Texas Water Code, Title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code, and
any other applicable state statute or Texas Commission on Environmental Quality rule.
Sec. 7-116. Fees.
The City Council may create a schedule of fees for obtaining and renewing an irrigation
permit. These fees will be in amounts sufficient to cover the City’s costs in issuing and renewing
the permits, including, but not limited to, staff time and other overhead costs. The City Council
shall adopt by resolution a schedule of the permit fees required or authorized. This schedule of
fees is entitled Construction Permit Fees and is updated from time to time by Resolution. It is
kept at City offices and also available online.
ARTICLE IX - ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 7-117. Enforcement.
(a) The City shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this Chapter as
may be required by governing law. Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a
provision of this Code, or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, is
25
subject to suit for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Any violation of
the ordinance codified in this Chapter is declared to be a nuisance.
(b) Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum
not exceeding $2000.00. Each day that a provision of this Chapter is violated shall constitute a
separate offense. An offense under this Chapter is a Class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine
of up to $2000.00.
(c) Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as a waiver of the City’s right to bring a civil
action to enforce the provisions of this Chapter and to seek remedies as allowed by law,
including, but not limited to the following:
(1) Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates the ordinance or to require
specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with the ordinance; and
(2) Other available relief.
Chapter 8
CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER RELIEF
Sec. 8-1. Emergency management director.
Sec. 8-2. Duties and responsibilities of the emergency management
director.
Sec. 8-3. Participation in county-wide program.
Sec. 8-4. Emergency management organization.
Sec. 8-5. Simulation of warning signal prohibited.
Sec. 8-6. Emergency orders, rules and regulations to supersede existing
ordinances; construction of chapter.
Sec. 8-7. Immunity from liability for activities under chapter.
Sec. 8-8. Expenditure of public funds.
Sec. 8-9. Interference with emergency management organization
personnel; impersonation of personnel.
Sec. 8-10. Oath.
Sec. 8-11. Reserved.
Chapter 8
CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER RELIEF
Sec. 8-1. Emergency management director.
(a) Office created. There exists the office of emergency management director of the City
of Temple, Texas, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law.
(b) Appointment of emergency management coordinator. An emergency management
coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director.
(c) Responsibilities generally. The director shall be responsible for conducting a program
of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and
responsibilities set forth in section 8-2 of this chapter. He may delegate authority for
execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution
shall remain with the director.
(d) Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the director shall include an on-going
survey of actual or potential major hazards which threaten life and property within the city;
and an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of
measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if
a disaster did occur. As part of his responsibility in hazard mitigation, the director shall
supervise the development of an emergency management plan for the City of Temple, and
shall recommend that plan for adoption by the city council along with any and all mutual aid
plans and agreements which are deemed essential for the implementation of such emergency
management plan. The powers of the director shall include the authority to declare a state of
disaster, but such action may be subject to confirmation by the city council at its next
meeting. The duties of the director shall also include the causing of a survey of the
availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used
during a disaster, as provided for herein, as well as a continuing study of the need for
amendments and improvements in the emergency management plan.
Sec. 8-2. Duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director.
The duties and responsibilities of the emergencies management director shall include the
following:
(1) The direction and control of the actual disaster operations of the Temple
Emergency Management Organization as well as the training of emergency
management personnel.
(2) The determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise
within the emergency management organization of the city.
(3) The maintenance of necessary liaison with other municipal, county, district, state,
regional, federal, or other emergency management organizations.
(4) The marshaling, after declaration of a disaster as provided for above, of all
necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid
in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(5) The issuance of all necessary proclamations as to the existence of a disaster and
the immediate operational effectiveness of the city management plan.
(6) The issuance of reasonable rules, regulations or directives which are necessary for
the protection of life and property in the city. Such rules and regulations shall be
filed in the office of the city secretary and shall receive widespread publicity
unless publicity would be of aid and comfort to the enemy.
(7) The supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in
cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political
subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an
agreement with the county in which said city is located and with other
municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of emergency
management efforts.
(8) The supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary
supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may
be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city.
(9) The authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of
private property for public shelter and other purposes.
Sec. 8-3. Participation in county-wide program.
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge of the County of Bell and
the mayors of the other cities in said county in the formation of an emergency management
council for the County of Bell and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of
a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency
management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide
program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect the City of Temple.
Sec. 8-4. Emergency management organization.
The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the
officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency
management plan, as well as all organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this
organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the
terms of the emergency management plan. Such plan shall set forth the form of the
organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign tasks, duties and powers,
and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter. Insofar as
possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the
recommendations of the state division of emergency management and of the federal
government.
Sec. 8-5. Simulation of warning signal prohibited.
Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a
warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this
chapter and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this chapter.
Sec. 8-6. Emergency orders, rules and regulations to supersede existing ordinances;
construction of chapter.
(a) at all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to
this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances,
orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith.
(b) This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or
with any military or naval order, rule or regulation.
Sec. 8-7. Immunity from liability for activities under chapter.
(a) Agents or representatives of city government. This chapter is an exercise by the city of
its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and
neither the City of Temple, the agents and representatives of said city, nor any individual,
receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof,
in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or
regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any
damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity.
(b) Property owners granting license of privilege. Any person owning or controlling real
estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a
license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or
any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during
an actual, impending or practice enemy attach shall, together with his successors in interest,
if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real
estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage
to, the property of such person.
Sec. 8-8. Expenditure of public funds.
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any
emergency management activity authorized by this chapter without prior approval of the city
council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or
otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council.
Sec. 8-9. Interference with emergency management organization personnel;
impersonation of personnel.
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of
the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued
pursuant to this chapter, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant
to the authority contained in this chapter. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear,
carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the
emergency management organization of the City of Temple, unless authority to do so has
been granted to such person by the proper officials.
Sec. 8-10. Oath.
Each employee or any individual that is assigned a function or responsibility shall
solemnly swear or affirm to support and defend the Constitution of the United States, laws of
the State of Texas and the ordinances of the City of Temple, Texas.
Sec. 8-11. Reserved.
Chapter 10
TEMPLE ELECTRICAL CODE
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 10-1. Short Title.
Section 10-2. Purpose.
Section 10-3. Electrical Code Adoption.
Section 10-4. Definitions.
ARTICLE II – ELECTRICAL OFFICIAL
Section 10-5. Designated officials.
Section 10-6. Qualifications and appointment of the electrical official.
Section 10-7. Authority of electrical official.
ARTICLE III – ADMINISTRATION OF CODE
Section 10-8. Application of code.
Section 10-9. Standards and requirements.
Section 10-10. Electrical inspectors.
Section 10-11. Authority to inspect.
Section 10-12. Appeals; Interpretation of code.
ARTICLE IV – AMENDMENTS TO NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE 2008
Section 10-13. Conductors.
Section 10-14. Wiring methods.
Section 10-15. Receptacles and switches.
Section 10-16. Fireplaces with electric blowers.
Section 10-17. Grounding electrode system.
Section 10-18. Grounding.
Section 10-19. Service requirements
Section 10-20. Lighting and appliance panel boards
Section 10-21. Fusible disconnects.
Section 10-22. Swimming pools, fountains and similar installations.
ARTICLE V - LICENSES
Section 10-23. Licenses required.
ARTICLE VI – TYPES OF LICENSES AND REQUIREMENTS
Section 10-24. Electrical contractor.
Section 10-25. Electrical sign contractor.
Section 10-26. Master electrician.
Section 10-27. Master sign electrician.
Section 10-28. Journeyman electrician.
Section 10-29. Journeyman sign electrician.
Section 10-30. Residential wireman.
Section 10-31. Apprentice electrician.
Section 10-32. Maintenance electrician.
ARTICLE VII – PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS
Section 10-33. Permits Required.
Section 10-34. Application requirements.
Section 10-35. Cancellation of permit.
Section 10-36. Permits not transferable.
Section 10-37. Revocation of permit.
Section 10-38. Duration of permit.
Section 10-39. Extension of time.
Section 10-40. Certificate of approval.
Section 10-41. Issuance of permit not allowed.
Section 10-42. Type of inspections.
ARTICLE VIII - RESERVED
Section 10-43. Permit Fees.
Section 10-44. Investigation fee.
ARTICLE IX - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 10-45. In general.
Section 10-46. Suspension or revocation of permit and permitting privileges.
Section 10-47. Decision in writing
Section 10-48. Decision to be prompt.
Section 10-49. Action in accordance with decision.
Section 10-50. Electrical board may propose amendments.
Section 10-51. Appeal from board action.
ARTICLE IX - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 10-52. Mobile homes.
Section 10-53. Prefabricated buildings.
Section 10-54. Liability for damages.
Chapter 10
TEMPLE ELECTRICAL CODE
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 10-1. Short title.
This ordinance shall be known as the "Temple Electrical Code," hereafter referred
to as "code" or "this code."
Sec. 10-2. Purpose.
This code is hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the
beneficial interest and purpose thereof, which are the public safety, health, and general
welfare, through proper and safe electrical construction and repair and safety to life and
property from fire and other hazards incident to faulty electrical construction, alteration
and repair which occurs within the city limits.
Sec. 10-3. Electrical Code adoption.
There is hereby adopted by the city, the National Fire Protection Association,
National Electrical Code, NFPA No. 70, 2008, except such portions as are hereinafter
modified and amended, of which not less than three (3) copies are filed in the office of
the chief building official and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if
set out at length herein, and from the date of which this article shall take effect, the
provisions thereof shall be controlling within the city limits.
Sec. 10-4. Definitions.
Electrical work shall mean any labor or material used in installing, maintaining,
or extending an electrical wiring system and the appurtenances, apparatus, or equipment
used in connection with the use of electrical energy in, on, outside, or attached to a
building, residence, structure, property, or premises. The term includes service entrance
conductors as defined by the National Electrical Code.
Feeder panel or sub panel is any panel located after the main service disconnect
consisting of circuit breakers or fuses which provide protection for the branch circuits.
Mobile home is a movable or portable dwelling constructed to be towed by a
motor vehicle on its chassis over Texas roads and highways under special permit,
connected to utilities, and designed without a permanent foundation for year-round
living. It may consist of one or more units that can be telescoped when towed and
expanded later for additional capacity, or of two or more units, separately towable but
designed to be joined into one integral unit.
NEC means the National Electrical Code published by the National Fire Protection
Association as adopted by the city in section 10-3.
Prefabricated home is a structure intended for residential occupancy which is
connected as a whole or in sections at a point other that its final location and which is
moved from such point to a site where it is placed on a foundation as a whole or in
sections and when finished constitutes an entire structure intended for residential use, and
which is neither a residence constructed in a place, a mobile home or a house which is
moved.
Residential wiring is the wiring of any dwelling, whether single or two family
within the limits of the city.
TDLR is the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation, or a successor
agency.
ARTICLE II - ELECTRICAL OFFICIAL
Sec. 10-5. Designated officials.
Within this code when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named
herein, that designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the
named official in this code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as
enforcing the provisions of this code is concerned.
Sec. 10-6. Qualifications and appointment of the electrical official.
(a) The office of electrical official is hereby created to administer and enforce this
code. The chief building official shall appoint the electrical official and any assistants
necessary to aid him in the discharge of his duties. The person chosen to fill this office
shall have the following qualifications:
1) Good moral character;
2) Ability, training and experience as is required for the performance of his
duties in the enforcement of this code;
3) Have thorough knowledge of electrical materials approved by the
Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc., and the methods used in the installation of
electrical equipment;
4) Be well versed in approved electrical construction for safety to persons and
property, and the NEC; and
5) Have at least five (5) years of experience as a journeyman; be a graduate in
electrical or mechanical engineering from a recognized university or
college; have two (2) years study in college level electrical courses and
three (3) years experience as a journeyman; or be a certified electrical
inspector with three (3) years practical experience.
(b) The electrical official shall execute and deliver to the city a surety bond in the
principal amount of One Thousand and No/100ths ($1,000.00) Dollars conditioned upon
the diligent and honest performance of the duties required by this code, or any other
ordinance or law. The bond premium shall be paid by the city and the bond shall be
satisfactory to the city attorney.
(c) Where used in this article, the term authority having jurisdiction shall refer to the
electrical official.
Sec. 10-7. Authority of electrical official.
(a) In General.
1. The authority having jurisdiction shall be permitted to investigate the cause,
origin, and circumstances of any fire, explosion, or other hazardous
condition.
2. The authority having jurisdiction shall be permitted to require plans and
specifications to ensure compliance with this code.
(b) Authority to waive specific requirements.
1. The authority having jurisdiction shall be permitted to waive specific
requirements in this code or permit alternative methods where it is assured that
equivalent objectives can be achieved by establishing and maintaining
effective safety. Technical documentation shall be submitted to the authority
having jurisdiction to demonstrate equivalency and that the system, method, or
device is approved for the intended purpose.
2. Each application for a waiver of a specific electrical requirement shall be filed
with the authority having jurisdiction and shall be accompanied by such
evidence, letters, statements, results of tests, or other supporting information as
required to justify the request. The authority having jurisdiction shall keep a
record of actions on such applications, and a signed copy of the authority
having jurisdiction’s decision shall be provided for the applicant.
ARTICLE III ADMINISTRATION OF CODE
Sec. 10-8. Application of code.
(a) New Installations. Buildings with construction permits dated after the adoption of
this code shall comply with its requirements.
(b) Existing Installations. Existing electrical installations that do not comply with the
provisions of this code shall be permitted to be continued in use unless a certified
electrical inspector determines that the existing installations are damaged or if the lack of
conformity with this code presents an imminent danger to occupants of the structure or
surrounding property. Where changes are required for correction of hazards, a reasonable
amount of time shall be given for compliance, depending on the degree of the hazard.
Any damaged wiring must be removed and replaced with wiring which meet standards
for new work.
(c) Additions, Alterations, or Repairs. Additions, alterations, or repairs to any
building, structure, or premises shall conform to that required of a new building without
requiring the existing building to comply with all the requirements of this code.
Additions, alterations, installations, or repairs shall not cause an existing building to
become unsafe or to adversely affect the performance of the building as determined by a
certified electrical inspector. Electrical wiring added to an existing service, feeder, or
branch circuit shall not result in an installation that violates the provisions of the code in
force at the time the additions are made. On any structure which is renovated, remodeled
or relocated, a certified electrical inspector shall have the right of inspection as set out
elsewhere herein, and if, upon inspection, a certified electrical inspector shall discover
electrical conditions hazardous to health, safety or welfare, he may cause corrections to
be made.
(d) Changes in Building Occupancy. Electrical systems and equipment that are part of
any building or structure undergoing a change in use or occupancy, as defined in the
International Building Code, shall comply with all requirements of this code that may be
applicable to the new use or occupancy.
(e) Moved Building. Electrical systems and equipment that are a part of buildings or
structures moved into or within the city shall comply with the provisions of this code for
new installations.
(f) Abandoned Electrical Equipment. All unused electrical equipment such as panel
boards, service equipment, raceways, boxes or other devices within or on public or
private building premises shall be removed if any such equipment, in the opinion of a
certified electrical inspector, constitutes a hazard or danger to life or property.
(g) Abandoned wiring. Whenever new wiring is replacing old wiring, the old wiring
shall be completely removed where possible. Abandoned wiring that cannot be removed
shall be rendered unusable for future use before final approval shall be given for the new
wiring.
Sec. 10-9. Standards and requirements.
(a) Compliance. All electrical construction and all materials and appliances used in
connection with the installation, maintenance, and operation of electrical wiring,
apparatus or equipment for the utilization of electrical energy for light, heat or power,
inside the city, shall conform to the rules and regulations of the this code, the NEC, and
the meter installation specifications of the electrical utility company, and as they may be
revised from time to time.
(b) Governing Regulations. Where, in any specific case, different sections of the
this code, the International Building Code, the NEC, Energy Delivery Company
Specifications and UL-Listings and manufacture’s specifications specify different
materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive, as
determined by the electrical official, shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a
general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be
applicable.
(c) Fees. No person, firm or corporation shall install or cause to be installed
electrical conductors/equipment including the installation of electric signs unless they
have complied with in Article VIII of this code.
(d) Violations. Violations of this code by any owner(s), lessee or renters may be
charged with violating this code and that charge could result in penalties set forth.
Sec. 10-10. Electrical inspectors.
(a) This code shall be administered and enforced by all certified electrical inspectors,
who shall have the authority to:
1. Render interpretations of this code in order to provide clarification to its
requirements, as permitted by NEC 90.4 “Enforcement.” In the event of a
difference in interpretation, a final decision shall be rendered by the
building official after consultation with the electrical officer;
2. Order the immediate evacuation of any occupied building deemed unsafe
when such building has hazardous conditions that present imminent danger
to building occupants;
3. To have the premises disconnected from its source of electric supply when
the use of any electrical equipment or its installations is found to be
dangerous to human life or property. Once such equipment or installation
has been so condemned or disconnected, the certified electrical inspector
shall place thereon a listing of the causes for the condemnation, the
disconnection, or both. Within 24 hours, the certified electrical inspector
shall give written notice of such condemnation or disconnection and the
causes therefore to the owners, the occupant, or both, of such building,
structure, or premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove said
notice, to reconnect the electric equipment to its source of electric supply,
or to use or permit to be used electric power in any such electric equipment
until such causes for the condemnation or disconnection have been
remedied to the satisfaction of the inspection authorities;
4. When conditions hazardous to life and property exist, he or she shall be
permitted to require that such hazardous conditions in violation of this code
be corrected;
5. To delegate to other qualified individuals such powers as necessary for the
proper administration and enforcement of this code; and
6. Police, fire, and other enforcement agencies shall have authority to render
necessary assistance in the enforcement of this code when requested to do
so by the authority having jurisdiction.
Sec. 10-11. Authority to inspect.
(a) To the full extent permitted by law, any certified electrical inspector engaged in
inspection work shall be authorized at all reasonable times to enter and examine any
building, structure, or premises for the purpose of making electrical inspections.
(b) Before entering premises, a certified electrical inspector shall obtain the consent of
the occupant thereof or obtain a court warrant authorizing entry for the purpose of
inspection, except in those instances where an emergency exists. As used in this section,
emergency means circumstances that the certified electrical inspector knows, or has
reason to believe, exist and that reasonably can constitute immediate danger to persons or
property. In an emergency a certified electrical inspector may enter a home without
consent or warrant.
(c) The certified electrical inspector may order any person(s) to remove or remedy
such dangerous or hazardous condition or equipment. Any person(s) failing to comply
with such order shall be in violation of this code.
(d) A certified electrical inspector shall identify themselves with proper credentials
issued by this governing authority before entering and inspecting a building. It is a
violation of this chapter to impersonate a city employee by using a badge, uniform, or
other credentials.
(e) It is a violation of this chapter for persons to interfere with certified electrical
inspector carrying out any duties or functions prescribed by this code.
(f) A certified electrical inspector is permitted to require that whenever any
installation subject to inspection prior to use is covered or concealed without having first
been inspected, that such work be exposed for inspection. Once notified the installation is
ready for inspection, a certified electrical inspector shall conduct the inspection within 72
hours.
Sec. 10-12. Appeals; Interpretation of code.
(a) Review of Decisions. Any person aggrieved by any final decision of any official
responsible for administration, interpretation, or enforcement of this ordinance may
appeal to the electrical board. An appeal may be filed within fifteen (15) days after the
electrical official’s final decision. The electrical official shall transmit all papers dealing
with his action to the electrical board. The board shall hold a public hearing within
fifteen (15) days after receipt of the appeal, proceed to determine whether the action
complies with this law and, shall make a timely decision in accordance with its findings.
(b) Conditions for appeal. Any person may appeal a decision of the authority having
jurisdiction to the board when any one or more of the following conditions exist:
1. An incorrect interpretation of the code’s true intent;
2. The provisions of the codes or ordinances do not fully apply; or
3. A decision is unreasonable or arbitrary as it applies to alternatives or new
materials.
ARTICLE IV AMENDMENTS TO NATIONAL ELECTRIC CODE 2008
Sec. 10-13. Conductors.
(a) Conductor material and size. NEC, Section 110.5, “Conductors,” is amended by
deleting the section in its entirety and replacing with the following:
1. Copper conductors required.
a. Conductors used to carry current shall be of copper, and all
references to other conductor materials throughout the NEC shall be
deleted.
b. Exception. Conductors of aluminum or copper clad aluminum #1
AWG and larger may be used for the following and the conductors
sizes shall be changed accordingly:
i. Service entrance conductors where they terminate in
approved service equipment. (REF. NEC, Sec. 230,
“Services” and Article 338, “Service-Entrance Cable.”)
ii. Feeder conductors where they terminate in approved panel
boards and or service equipment. (REF. NEC, Article 215,
“Feeders.”)
The conductors shall be terminated according to manufacturer's
recommendations and have a coating of oxidation inhibitor applied:
(REF. NEC, Sec. 310-14, “Aluminum Conductor Material.”)
Fine Print Note: For aluminum and copper-clad aluminum conductors, see
NEC, Section 310.15, “Ampacities for Conductors Rated 0-2000 Volts.”
2. All conductors shall be size number Twelve (12) AWG or Larger,
except in the following situations:
a. For dwelling units only, number Fourteen (14) AWG conductors
may be used for lighting switch legs if the branch circuit is protected
with a 15 amp breaker.
b. For dwelling units only, number Fourteen (14) AWG conductors
may be used for smoke detector circuits if the branch circuit is
protected with a 15 amp breaker.
c. Control circuits operating line voltage contactors, relay and the like.
d. Fixture wires in UL or other listed fixtures.
(b) Color coding of conductors. Colors shall be consistent throughout each system
and shall be as follows:
1. Single phase 120/240 volt wiring systems.
(A) (B) (N)
Black Red White
2. Three phase four wire 120/208 volt wiring systems.
(A) (B) (C) (N)
Black Red Blue White
3. Three phase three and four wire 120/240 volt delta wiring systems.
(A) (B) (C) (N)
Black Orange Blue White
4. 277-480 wye or 480 volt delta wiring systems.
(A) (B) (C) (N)
Brown Orange Yellow Gray
Sec. 10-14 Wiring methods.
(a) Fixed wiring methods. In addition to the minimum standards found in the NEC,
Articles 320 through 402, the following shall apply:
1. The fixed wiring methods for commercial buildings shall be enclosed in an
approved raceway, MC Cable when installed per 10-14(b) of this code, power
and Control Tray Cable (TC) or Flat conductor cable (FCC);
2. The fixed wiring methods for residential buildings over 3-stories tall shall be
enclosed in an approved raceway or MC Cable when installed per 10-14(b) of
this code;
3. The fixed wiring methods for residential buildings 3-stories or less shall be
Nonmetallic-sheathed cable, SE cable, Type UF, MC Cable when installed per
10-14(b) of this code, or in an approved raceway; and
4. The fixed wiring methods for industrial shall be enclosed in an approved
raceway or cable tray system.
(b) MC Cable.
1. Must be concealed within walls, ceilings and c-channel. NEC, Section 310.10,
“Uses Permitted,” Subsection (4), is amended by deleting the reference to
“Exposed,” except in the following situations:
a. When fixture whips not over 6 foot.
b. When hanging equipment and fixture whips over 6 foot when preapproved.
c. When supported under and within counters and cabinets where not
subject to physical damage.
2. Equipment grounding conductor. NEC, Section 330.108, “Equipment
Grounding Conductor,” is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and
replacing with the following:
Type MC Cable shall have an insulated copper grounding conductor of a
size equivalent to the other conductors in the assembly.
3. Special installation requirements. NEC, Article 330, “Metal-Clad Cable: Type
MC,” is amended by adding the following Section:
(4) Special Installation Requirements.
a. Type MC Cable outer jacket shall only be cut with an approved rotarytype
cutting tool that is calibrated to the manufacture’s specifications.
b. An approved anti-short shall be used with MC Cable connectors or be
manufactured with anti-short as an integral part of the connector.
c. The end of MC Cable where it terminates in approved connectors shall
not be taped or painted.
(c) Cable Connectors. The number of NM cables (romex) installed per connector
shall be calculated per the UL-listing or manufacture’s instructions. If there is no
requirement, the number of cables per connector shall be as follows:
1. Quantity of 14/2, 14/3, 12/2, 12/3, 10/2 and 10/3 NM Cables (romex)
per connector.
a. 3/8”- one 14 AWG through 12 AWG.
b. 1/2”- two 14 AWG through 12 AWG, or one 10 AWG.
c. 3/4”- three 14 AWG through 12 AWG, or two 10 AWG.
2. 8 AWG and larger cables shall be installed one per an appropriate sized
cable connector.
3. Service Entrance Cable shall be installed with an appropriate sized cable
connector and there shall be no other cables installed in the connector.
Sec. 10-15. Receptacles and switches.
1) Receptacle ratings. NEC, Section 210.21, “Outlet Devices,” Subsection (B),
“Receptacles, Part (3), “Receptacle Ratings,” is amended by deleting the section in its
entirety and replacing with the following:
1. Receptacles in commercial buildings shall be rated at 20 ampere or
greater.
2. The following areas in a dwelling unit shall have receptacles rated at 20
Ampere or greater:
a. Kitchen, pantry, breakfast room, dining room or similar areas.
b. Laundry, garage, bath and utility rooms.
3. All other receptacles shall conform to the values listed in Table
210.21(B)(3), or where larger than 50 amperes, the receptacle rating
shall not be less than the branch circuit rating.
2) Individual appliance branch circuits required. NEC, Section 210.52, “Dwelling
Unit Receptacle Outlets,” Subsection (B), “Small Appliances,” is amended by adding the
following subsection:
(4) Separate 20 ampere circuit required.
For dwelling units, an individual 20 ampere branch circuit is required for
each refrigerator, freezer, dishwasher, disposal, trash compactor, built in
microwave, vent hood or any other fixed appliance. The individual branch
circuits shall be provided with a single receptacle rated 20 ampere or
greater.
3) Washing machine receptacle. NEC, Section 210.52, “Dwelling Unit Receptacle
Outlets,” Subsection (F), “Laundry Areas,” is amended to include the following sentence:
The washing machine shall be provided with a single receptacle rated 20 ampere
or greater.
4) Individual 20 ampere circuits required. Section 210.52, “Dwelling Unit
Receptacle Outlets,” is amended by adding the following subsection:
(I) Other locations.
A separate 20 ampere circuit provided with a single receptacle rated 20
ampere or greater is required for all other fixed appliances with loads that
exceed six (6) amperes. This requirement excludes garage door opener
receptacles. The single receptacle is not required when a GFCI duplex is
installed.
5) Maximum number of receptacles in a branch circuit. NEC, Section 220.14,
“Other Loads-All Occupancies,” Subsection (J), “Dwelling Occupancies,” is amended by
adding the following subsection:
(4) The number of receptacles in a residential branch circuit shall be limited as
follows:
1. No more than 8 receptacles in a single general purpose branch circuit;
provided, however, in no case shall a general purpose branch circuit
exceed 80 percent of the over-current protection (OCP) device rating.
Exception: On rewire of one and two family dwellings, general purpose
branch circuits shall have a maximum of ten (10) receptacles; provided,
however, in no case shall a general purpose branch circuit exceed 80
percent of the over-current protection (OCP) device rating.
2. No more than 4 receptacles in a single kitchen, pantry, breakfast room,
dining room or similar area branch circuit.
6) Receptacles in a wet location. NEC, Section 406.8, “Receptacles in Damp or Wet
Locations,” Subsection (B), “Wet Locations,” Part (1), “15- and 20- Ampere Receptacles
in a Wet location,” is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing with
the following:
15- and 20- Ampere Receptacles Installed in a Wet Location.
15- and 20- Ampere, 125- and 250- volt receptacles installed in a wet
location, including under porches, shall have an enclosure that is
weatherproof whether or not the attachment plug cap is inserted. All 15-
and 20- ampere, 125- and 250- volt nonlocking receptacles installed in wet
locations, including under porches, shall be listed weather-resistant type.
7) GFCI protection required. NEC, Section 210.8, “Grount-Fault Circuit-Interrupter
Protection for Personnel,” Subsection (B), “Other Than Dwelling Units,” is amended by
adding the following subsection:
(6) Other Fixtures with Standing or Running Water.
In other than dwelling units, all 125- volt, single phase, 15- and 20- ampere
receptacles installed within 6 foot of the outside edge of a fixture with
standing or running water shall have ground-fault circuit-interrupter
protection for personnel.
8) GFCI receptacle identification. The following NEC, Section 210.8, “Ground-Fault
Circuit-Interrupter Protection for Personnel,” is amended by adding the following
subsection:
(D) Identification.
All receptacles protected by one (1) or more ground-fault circuit-interrupter
(GFCI) devices shall be identified with the manufactures labels.
9) Attic light switch location. Switches for residential attic lighting shall be located
at the nearest point of entry to the attic.
(j) Garage Door Opener Receptacles. NEC Section 210.8(A)(2), “Garages,” is
amended to include the following sentences:
A garage door opener receptacle(s) shall be protected by a dead front GFCI that is
located next to the garage door opener. This dead front GFCI shall be permanently
labeled “garage door”. The garage door receptacle(s) shall be a single 20 amp rated
receptacle.
Sec. 10-16. Fireplaces with electric blowers. Prior to the electrical rough-in inspection,
instillation and connection of fireplaces with blower motors shall occur.
Sec. 10-17. Grounding electrode system
(a) Minimum of two grounding electrodes. NEC, Section 250.50, “Grounding
Electrode System and Grounding Electrode Conductor,” is amended to include the
following sentence:
All new buildings or structures, service upgrades and repairs, shall have a
minimum of two grounding electrodes.
(b) Concrete-encased electrode.
1. NEC, Section 250.52, “Grounding Electrodes,” Subsection (A), “Electrodes
Permitted for Grounding,” Part (3), “Concrete-encased Electrode,” is
amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing with the
following:
Concrete-encased Electrode.
All new buildings or structures having a concrete footing or
foundation shall have a concrete encased electrode as the primary
grounding system, and shall comply with all the requirements of
NEC, Article 250, “Grounding and Bonding.” The concrete encased
electrode shall be installed by the electrical contractor prior to the
foundation inspection. The electrode shall conform to one or more
of the following:
a. A minimum of 20 feet of bare copper conductor sized in accordance
with NEC, Table 250.66, “Size of Alternating-Current Grounding
Electrode Conductors” and not smaller than #4 AWG, encased by at
least 2” of concrete, and located within and near the bottom of a
concrete footing (primary location) or foundation (location where
there is no footing) that is in direct contact (no plastic below or
above grounding electrode conductor) with the earth. The grounding
electrode conductor shall not be allowed to lie in the dirt on the
bottom of a beam or foundation. A non-metallic sleeve shall protect
a grounding conductor where it exits the concrete. If steel
reinforcing bar is present in a footing or foundation, the copper
grounding electrode conductor shall be bonded to the reinforcing
bar. Connection shall be made using listed and approved clamps; or
b. Reinforcing bar that is at least ½” in diameter, twenty feet in length,
encased by at least 2” of concrete and located within and near the
bottom of a concrete footing (primary location) or foundation
(location where there is no footing) that is in direct contact (no
plastic below or above grounding electrode conductor) with the earth
that is present in a foundation, this portion of the reinforcing bar is
permitted to replace the required minimum 20 feet of bare #4 or
larger copper conductor. The reinforcing bar shall not be allowed to
lie in the dirt on the bottom of a beam or slab. A non-metallic sleeve
shall protect a grounding electrode conductor where it exits the
concrete.
A ½” or larger steel reinforcing bar in addition to the required 20
foot can be turned up (90 degree bend) where it will be within a wall
if the following requirements are met:
i. The reinforcing bars shall overlap each other a minimum of 2
feet.
ii. The reinforcing bars shall be permitted to be bonded together
by the usual steel tie wires or other effective means where
they create a tight connection.
iii. The connection point of the stubbed up reinforcing bar and
the grounding electrode conductor shall be accessible.
iv. The stubbed up portion of the bar shall be painted fluorescent
orange at the time of installation for identification purposes.
The connection point shall have the paint removed.
v. The copper grounding electrode conductor sized in
accordance with NEC, Table 250.66, “Size of Alternating-
Current Grounding Electrode Conductors” and NEC, Section
250.66, “Size of Alternating-Current Grounding Electrode
Conductor,” Subsection (B), “Connections to Concrete-
Encased Electrodes,” shall be connected to the bar using
listed and approved clamps.
2. Requirements if the concrete encased electrode was not installed.
a. If reinforcing bar was installed in the footing or foundation of a nonpost
tension slab, the slab shall be busted and the reinforcing bar in
the footing (primary location) or foundation (location where there is
no footing) shall be bonded to a copper conductor sized in
accordance with NEC, Table 250.66, “Size of Alternating-Current
Grounding Electrode Conductors” and NEC, Section 250.66, “Size
of Alternating-Current Grounding Electrode Conductor,” Subsection
(B) “Connections to Concrete-Encased Electrodes.” Connection
shall be made using listed and approved clamps.
b. In addition to the requirement above, a plate electrode shall be
installed and shall comply with all the requirements of NEC, Article
250, “Grounding and Bonding.”
c. These requirements must be completed before a rough-in inspection,
and shall be inspected at the same time as the rough-in inspection.
(c) Rod and pipe electrode. NEC, Section 250.53 (G), “Rod and Pipe Electrodes,” is
amended to include the following sentence:
A rod or pipe electrode shall be installed in the general vicinity of the service
equipment.
(d) Splicing of a grounding electrode conductor. NEC, Section 250.64, “Grounding
Electrode Conductor Installation,” Subsection (C), “Continuous,” Part (1) is amended by
deleting the section in its entirety and replacing with the following:
Grounding electrode conductor splicing shall be permitted only by installing a
split-bolt in conjunction with an irreversible compression type C- crimp, line tap
or equivalent. Splicing components shall be installed per their UL-Listing and
manufacturer’s instructions.
(e) Bonding and grounding conductors. NEC, 250.4, “General Requirements for
Grounding and Bonding,” Subsection (A), “Grounded Systems,” Fine Print Note, an
important consideration for limiting the imposed voltage is the routing of bonding and
grounding conductors so that they are not any longer than necessary to complete the
connection without disturbing the permanent parts of the installation and so that
unnecessary bends and loops are avoided.
Sec. 10-18. Grounding. In addition to the minimum standards found in the NEC, Article
250, “Grounding and Bonding,” the following shall apply:
(a) All raceways shall have an insulated wire, sized and installed per the requirements
of NEC, Article 250, “Grounding and Bonding,” to satisfy grounding requirements.
(b) Exception: Service entrance and feeder raceways that are rigid metallic conduit
that have threaded fittings and made wrench tight are permitted to be used as a grounding
device when installed per the requirements of NEC, Article 250, “Grounding and
Bonding.”
Sec. 10-19. Service requirements.
(a) Number of services. NEC, Section 230.2, “Number of Services,” is amended by
deleting the section in its entirety and replacing with the following:
Number of services.
A building or other structure served shall be supplied by only one electrical
service unless permitted in the NEC, Section 230.2, “Number of Services,”
Subsections (A) through (D). For clarification the code does not accept the
portion of 230.2 of the NEC which states: “For the purpose of 230.40,
Exception No. 2 only, underground sets of conductors, 1/0 AWG and
larger, running to the same location and connected together at their supply
end but not connected at their load end shall be considered to be supplying
one service.”
Note: All buildings or structures shall consist of not more than six switches or sets
of circuit breakers, or a combination of not more than six switches and sets of
circuit breakers, mounted in a single enclosure, in a group of separate enclosures,
or in or on a switchboard. There shall be not more than six sets of disconnects per
service grouped in any one location. (REF. NEC, Section 230.71, “Maximum
Number of Disconnects.”)
(b) Minimum building service. In addition to the minimum standards found in the
NEC, Article 230, “Services,” and Article 220, “Branch-Circuit, Feeder, and Service
Calculations,” the city requires that all non-dwelling buildings shall have a minimum of a
two hundred (200) ampere service, or be pre-approved by the electrical official.
(c) Main exterior disconnecting means.
1. NEC, Section 230.70, “General,” is amended by adding the following
subsection:
(D) All new buildings, service upgrades, renovations, etc shall require a
main exterior disconnect, manual shunt-trip device, or knox box located
outside the building or structure, and shall be pre-approved by the
Electrical Official.
2. Exception. A single family residential occupancy does not require a main
exterior disconnecting means if the main panel and meter enclosure are
back to back.
Note: Please review Section 10-21 Fusible Disconnects, of this code.
(d) Shunt-trip button. In addition to the minimum standards found in the NEC, Section
230.70, “General,” Subsection (A), “Location,” Part (3) “Remote Control,” the city
requires that when a remote shunt-trip button is installed, it shall be located on the
exterior of the building or structure and shall have a visual indication that the service has
been disconnected when the trip has been activated. The shunt-trip button shall be in a
sturdy, exterior cabinet that can be secured with a padlock. The cabinet shall be
permanently marked on the exterior, stating "shunt-trip disconnect.”
(e) Service conductor size. In addition to the minimum standards found in the NEC,
Article 220, “Branch-Circuit, Feeder, and Service Calculations,” single family residential
service conductors (riser) shall be sized based on the main breaker size or service size
and not the calculated load.
(f) Service mast. In addition to the minimum standards found in the NEC, Section
230-28, “Services Masts as Supports,” a minimum size of two (2) inches rigid conduit
shall be used for service mast. E.M.T. and I.M.C are not acceptable for service masts
supports.
(g) Flexible raceways not permitted at service locations.
1. The following NEC sections are amended by adding the following
subsections:
a. Section 350.12, “Uses Not Permitted,” is amended by adding
the following subsection: (3) shall not be used at services.
b. Section 356.12, “Uses Not Permitted,” is amended by adding
the following subsection: (6) shall not be used at services.
c. Section 360.12, “Uses Not Permitted,” is amended by adding
the following subsection: (7) shall not be used at services.
d. Section 362.12, “Uses Not Permitted,” is amended by adding
the following subsection: (11) shall not be used at services.
2. Exceptions.
a. Connection of transformers.
b. Temporary services.
c. Pre-approved by the electrical official.
(h) Electrical service upgrade required. The electrical service shall be upgraded on a
building or structure when electrical power is disconnected for any of the following
conditions:
1. Dangerous or unsafe electrical hazards;
2. Substantial damage over 50%; or
3. Change in the occupancy classification of the building.
(i) Plaque or Directory. A plaque or directory is required for the following:
1. NEC Section 230.2, “Number of Services,” Subsection E, “Identification,”
is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing with the
following:
Identification. Where a building or structure is supplied by more than
one service, or any combination of branch circuits, feeders, and
services, a permanent plaque or directory that is of contrasting in color
and a minimum of eight inches square shall be installed at each service
disconnect location denoting all other services, feeders, and branch
circuits supplying that building or structure and the area served by each.
2. In addition to the minimum standards found in the NEC, Article 700
“Emergency Systems,” Part III, Section 700.12, “General Requirements,”
the city requires that when a building or structure is supplied by an
alternative power source such as generator sets, storage batteries, fuel cells,
uninterruptible power supplies, solar power, wind turbines, a permanent
plaque or directory that is of contrasting in color and a minimum of eight
inches square shall be installed at each service disconnect location and
alternative power source location denoting all other services and alternative
power sources. The plaque or directory shall include the following
information:
a. Number and location of other services,
b. Number, location and description of other alternative power sources,
and
c. Any special disconnecting requirements.
Sec. 10-20. Lighting and appliance panel boards.
(a) Spare conduit riser. In addition to the minimum standards found in the NEC,
Article 408, “Switchboards and Panelboards,” lighting and appliance panelboards
installed in one and two family dwellings shall have a one inch conduit riser installed
from the panel into an accessible space above the panel. (The intent here is to make it
possible to add a circuit at a later date.)
(b) Spare poles. In addition to the minimum standards found in the NEC, Article 408,
“Switchboards and Panelboards,” new lighting and appliance panel boards shall have two
(2) spare poles for future use in one and two family dwellings.
Sec. 10-21. Fusible disconnects. Fusible disconnects that are installed in locations that
are accessible to the public or unqualified persons, the fusible disconnects shall be of the
heavy duty type.
Sec. 10-22. Swimming pools, fountains and similar installations. NEC, Section 680.26
(B)(1)(a), “Structural Reinforcing Steel,” is amended by deleting the section in its
entirety and replacing with the following:
Structural Reinforcing Steel. Unencapsulated structural reinforcing steel shall be
bonded together by steel tie wires or the equivalent. A solid, bare, copper
conductor, 8 AWG or larger, shall be installed continuously around the pool
perimeter approximately two foot from the top and at least once down the center
of the bottom. The copper conductor shall be bonded to the rebar grid at a
minimum of every fifteen feet and shall be bonded to the parts specified in NEC,
Section 680.26(B)(2) through (B)(7). Where structural reinforcing steel is
encapsulated in a nonconductive compound, a copper conductor grid shall be
installed in accordance with 680.26(B)(1)(b).
ARTICLE V – LICENSES
Sec. 10-23. Licenses required.
(a) State of Texas issued license required. Except those persons who perform the type
of electrical work that is exempt from the requirement for licensure in this state, a person
may not perform electrical work in this city unless the person holds an appropriate license
issued or recognized by the State of Texas. Such license shall be on file in the electrical
official's office, together with the firm's address, telephone number and copy of
insurance, before proceeding with any work. All persons performing electrical work
shall obtain the necessary permits for such work and shall have all work inspected by the
city in accordance with this code. This section shall not apply to a person to whom a
homeowner's permit has been issued in accordance with Section 10-32(b).
(b) Unlicensed electricians. Any person, firm or corporation who knowingly employs
or allows an unlicensed contractor or electrician to perform work or install electrical
conductors/equipment or apparatus shall be guilty of violation of this chapter and subject
to the penalties set forth.
ARTICLE VI TYPES OF LICENSES AND REQUIREMENTS.
Sec. 10-24. Electrical contractor.
(a) Authority. An electrical contractor's license shall entitle the holder thereof to
contract for and engage in the business of designing, installing, erecting, repairing or
altering electrical wires or conductors to be used for light, heat, power, or signaling
purposes. The term installation includes the installation or repair of ducts, raceways, or
conduits for the reception or protection of wires or conductors and the installation or
repair of any electrical machinery, apparatus, or system used for electrical light, heat,
power, or signaling.
(b) Duties.
1. To provide licensed supervision of construction, installation, maintenance and
repair of electrical conductors and equipment installed within or on public or
private buildings or other structures.
2. To employ licensed master, journeyman, residential wireman and apprentice
electricians only to perform electrical work, unless an exception is granted by the
Electrical Board.
3. An electrical contractor may not work more than four (4) apprentices for each
journeyman or residential wireman on a job.
4. The electrical contractor must employee each person he assigns work to, meaning
that he must pay their wages, deduct the required social security and federal
income taxes from their pay. An employee may be full time, part time or seasonal.
5. An electrical contractor may not sub-contract or assign any electrical work or
contract to any person, firm or corporation except in the following situations:
a. When trenching and other dirt work, or
b. When wiring methods associated with Chapter 6, Chapter 7, and Chapter 8
of the 2008 NEC.
6. An electrical contractor MAY sub-contract or assign any electrical work to other
state-licensed electrical contractors
Sec. 10-25. Electrical sign contractor.
(a) Authority. An electrical sign contractor's license shall entitle the holder thereof to
engage in the business of designing, manufacturing, installing, connecting, reconnecting,
or servicing an electric sign, cold cathode, neon gas tubing, or altering electric sign
wiring or conductors either inside or outside a building.
(b) Duties.
1. To provide licensed supervision of the manufacture, maintenance,
installation, wiring of signs or outline lighting.
2. To employ licensed master or master sign, journeyman or journeyman sign
and apprentice sign electricians only to perform electrical work, unless an
exception is granted by the Electrical Board.
3. To install the conductors for the electrical circuits to the sign or outline
lighting. Existing circuits may be used for signs or outline lighting only with
approval of the electrical official.
4. An electrical sign contractor may not work more than an average of four (4)
apprentices for each sign journeyman.
5. The electrical contractor must employee each person he assigns work to,
meaning that he must pay their wages, deduct the required social security and
federal income taxes from their pay. An employee may be full time, part
time or seasonal.
6. An electrical sign contractor may not subcontract or assign any electrical
work or contract to any person, firm or corporation except that an electrical
sign contractors may sub-contract to other state-licensed electrical sign
contractors, and when trenching or performing other dirt work.
Sec. 10-26. Master electrician.
(a) Authority. The master electrician's license shall entitle the holder thereof to, on
behalf of an electrical contractor, to supervise and perform all electrical work.
(b) Duties.
i. To personally supervise the electrical work performed by an electrical
contractor within the city. The master electrician shall be personally
responsible for all electrical code violations.
ii. To pay all re-inspection fees in-person when requested by the city.
(c) License required. A master electrician must have a current license on his/her
person at all times while performing electrical work.
Sec. 10-27. Master sign electrician.
(a) Authority. The master sign electrician's license shall entitle the holder thereof to
supervise all electrical sign installations under the holder of an electrical sign contractor's
license according to the provisions of this article. The holder of a master sign
electrician's license shall be entitled to be in general charge and supervision of the
business of designing, manufacturing, installing, connecting, reconnecting, or servicing
an electric sign, cold cathode, neon gas tubing, or outline gals tubing, or altering electric
sign wiring or conductors either inside or outside of a building.
(b) Duties.
i. To personally supervise of the electrical work performed by an electrical
sign contractor within the city. The master sign electrician shall be
personally responsible for all electrical code violations.
ii. To pay all re-inspection fees in-person when requested by the city.
(c) License required. A master sign electrician must have a current license on his/her
person at all times while performing electrical work.
Sec. 10-28. Journeyman electrician.
(a) Authority. A journeyman electrician's license shall entitle the holder to do work as
an electrician for and under the general supervision of the holder of a responsible master
electrician's license, on behalf of an electrical contractor, according to the provisions of
this article.
(b) License required. A journeyman electrician must have a current license on his/her
person at all times while performing electrical work.
Sec. 10-29. Journeyman sign electrician.
(a) Authority. A journeyman sign electrician's license shall entitle the holder thereof to
do work as a sign electrician for and under the general supervision of the holder of a
responsible master sign electrician's license, on behalf of a master sign electrician
according to the provisions of this article.
(b) License requirement. A journeyman sign electrician must have a current license on
his/her person at all times while performing electrical work.
Sec. 10-30. Residential wireman.
(a) Authority. The holder of a residential wireman license shall be entitled to perform
electrical installations in single-family, two-family, three-family, and four-family
dwellings under the general supervision of the holder of a responsible master electrician's
license, on behalf of an electrical contractor, according to the provisions of this article.
(b) License requirement. A residential wireman must have a current license on his/her
person at all times while performing electrical work.
Sec. 10-31. Apprentice electrician.
(a) Authority. An apprentice electrician's license shall entitle the holder thereof to
work under the direct supervision of a master electrician, a journeyman electrician, or a
residential wireman, on behalf of an electrical contractor performing electrical work as
defined by this article. The phrase "direct supervision" when used herein shall mean that
the apprentice electrician shall work under the direct authority of a master electrician,
journeyman electrician, residential wireman who will be on the job site at all times
directly supervising the apprentice electrician's work.
(b) License requirement. An apprentice electrician must have a current license on
his/her person at all times while performing electrical work.
Sec. 10-32. Maintenance electrician.
(a) Authority. The holder of a maintenance electrician's license, who works under the
general supervision of a master electrician, on behalf of an electrical contractor shall be
entitled to engage in the business of replacing, repairing, calibrating, inspecting, or
testing of existing electrical appurtenances, apparatus, equipment, machinery, or controls
used in connection with the use of electrical energy in, on, outside, or attached to a
building, residence, structure, property, or premises. All replacements or repairs must be
of the same rating and type as the existing installation. No improvements may be made
that are necessary to comply with applicable codes under Texas Occupations Code,
Chapter 1305.
(b) License required. A maintenance electrician must have a current license on his/her
person at all times while performing electrical work.
(c) Prohibited work. “Electrical maintenance work” does not include the replacement
of any raceways, conductors, disconnecting means, or service feeder components. It also
does not include the installation of any new electrical appurtenances, apparatus,
equipment, machinery, or controls beyond the scope of any existing electrical installation.
The term does not include work exempted by Texas Occupations Code, Chapter
1305.003.
ARTICLE VII - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS
Sec. 10-33. Permits Required.
(a) Generally. No electrical wiring/equipment shall be installed, including the
installation of signs, or electrical work done within or on any building, structure or
premises, public or private, nor shall any alterations or additions be made to any such
existing equipment or electrical system without a permit first being secured from the
construction safety department except in the following situations:
1. Minor repair work such as repairing or replacing flush and snap switches,
receptacles and lamp sockets, or minor repairs on permanently connected
electrical equipment, apparatus, appliances, lighting fixtures;
2. The installation, maintenance, or alteration of wiring apparatus, devices,
appliances or equipment for telegraph, telephone, signal service or central
station protective service used in conveying signals or intelligence, except
where electrical work is done on the primary side of the source of power at
a voltage exceeding fifty (50) volts AC; and
3. In case of an extensive project, the code in effect at the date of
building/electric permit shall prevail until completion.
Note: Even though no permit is required under Exception 1 and 2, such
installations or repairs shall be performed in conformity with the provisions of this
code, if applicable.
(b) Homeowner exception. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the owner of a
dwelling in which he resides or will reside and is his homestead by Texas law from
personally performing electrical work within or on such home; provided that the owner
shall apply to the construction safety department for homeowner's electrical permit and
file approved plans and specifications that satisfy the electrical official as to his/her
ability to satisfactorily perform the work in accordance with this code. The homeowner
shall not pay anyone to assist him/her in such work. However, he shall indicate all
persons who will help with wiring on the application and apply for and receive a
certificate of approval.
(c) Compliance. Activity authorized by a permit issued under this code shall be
conducted by the permittee or the permittee’s agents or employees in compliance with all
requirements of this code applicable thereto and in accordance with the approved plans
and specifications. No permit issued under this code shall be interpreted to justify a
violation of any provision of this code or any other applicable law or regulation. Any
addition or alteration of approved plans or specifications shall be approved in advance by
the authority having jurisdiction, as evidenced by the issuance of a new or amended
permit.
Sec. 10-34. Application requirements.
(a) Generally. Applications for permits or inspections required by this article shall be
made to the construction safety department by a master electrician or his designated
representative, in the name of an electrical contractor, electrical sign contractor, or a
homeowner, as the case may be.
(b) Description of work. The application shall include a general description of the
work to be done, and such plans, specifications and schedules as may be necessary to
determine whether or not the work will be in conformity with the requirements of this
code.
(c) Issuance of permit. If it is found that the installations as described will conform to
the requirements of this code, a permit for such installation shall be issued; provided,
however, that the issuance of a permit will not be construed as permission or a license to
violate any of the requirements of this code or any other ordinance of the city.
(d) Rejection of application. If an application for a permit is rejected by the authority
having jurisdiction, the applicant shall be advised of the reasons for such rejection.
(e) Insurance. Permits shall not be issued unless proof of insurance, as required by
the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulating, is furnished
Sec. 10-35. Cancellation of permit. Permits may be canceled by the master electrician
upon written request to the construction safety department for a terminating inspection.
Sec. 10-36. Permits not transferable. Each permit issued under this code shall be
personal to the permittee, whether person, firm or corporation. No such permit shall be
assigned or transferred to another person, firm, or corporation, and no person shall allow
another person to obtain a permit in his name, or allow any electrical work to be
performed under his permit by any person other than a person authorized to do the same.
Sec. 10-37. Revocation of permit.
(a) Generally. Any attempt to defraud or otherwise deliberately or knowingly design,
install, service, maintain, operate, sell, represent for sale, falsify records, reports, or
applications, or other related activity in violation of the requirements prescribed by this
code shall be a violation of this code. Such violations shall be cause for immediate
suspension or revocation of any related licenses, certificates, or permits issued by this
jurisdiction. In addition, any such violation shall be subject to any other criminal or civil
penalties as available by the laws of this jurisdiction.
(b) Notification of revocation. Revocation shall be constituted when the permittee is
duly notified by the authority having jurisdiction.
(c) Continuation of work after revocation. Any person who engages in any business,
operation, or occupation, or uses any premises, after the permit issued therefore has been
suspended or revoked pursuant to the provisions of this code, and before such suspended
permit has been reinstated or a new permit issued, shall be in violation of this code.
Sec. 10-38. Duration of permit. Every permit issued under the provisions of this code
shall expire ninety (90) days after the date thereof unless the work authorized by such
permit shall have commenced within such time; and every permit shall expire if the work
authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for as long as ninety (90) days after
it has been commenced. In every case where a permit is permitted to expire, a new permit
shall be obtained before any work is resumed.
Sec. 10-39. Extension of time. The authority having jurisdiction shall be permitted to
grant an extension of the permit time period upon presentation by the permittee of a
satisfactory reason for failure to start or complete the work or activity authorized by the
permit
Sec. 10-40. Certificate of approval.
(a) Upon inspection. When any electrical wiring, apparatus or fixtures covered by a
permit shall be found on inspection by a certified electrical inspector to conform with the
rules and regulations set out in this code, the certified electrical inspector shall issue a
final certificate of inspection that the wiring, apparatus or fixtures have been found to
comply with this code. However, a certificate of approval shall not constitute a waiver of
responsibility for or approval of defective workmanship or installation.
(b) Temporary certificate. A certified electrical inspector may also, before the final
certificate of approval is issued, give thirty (30) days temporary permission to connect
and furnish electric current to any wiring, apparatus or fixture if, in the inspector’s
opinion, such wiring, apparatus or fixture is in such condition that current may be safely
connected therewith. Valid extensions will be granted upon request by the Master
Electrician.
Sec. 10-41. Issuance of permit not allowed. Any person or firm who violates this code
and who refuses to correct such violations within five (5) days after notice shall not be
issued a permit for other work at that location until the violation is corrected.
Sec. 10-42. Type of inspections.
(a) Mandatory inspections. The following are the mandatory inspections:
1. TBM: Temporary Building Meter (Electric power service for construction
purposes only);
2. Concrete encased electrode and under slab raceways. This inspection is
usually performed during the slab inspection;
3. Rough-In, wall and above Ceiling: Inspection made prior to covering or
concealment (including insulation) of electric equipment/wiring. One
siding of walls shall be pre-approved by a certified electrical inspector;
4. Temporary final (power release). The electrical installation shall be 100
percent completed before a temporary final, except in the following
situations:
i. Residential-when approved by a certified electrical inspector.
ii. Commercial- when approved by a certified electrical inspector
and when the following are met:
a. Electrical distribution equipment shall be protected from
unqualified individuals by the installation of fencing with a
locked gate, wooden walls with a locked door, electrical
rooms with a locked door, etc, and the following shall apply:
1. Doors and gates shall be locked at all times when
qualified personnel are not present and protecting the
entry of unqualified personnel.
2. The electrician responsible for the project shall be the
only individual with the key to the locks.
3. If a violation of 10-40(a)(4)(ii)(a.) or other unsafe
conditions exist, the electrical official may have the
electrical service disconnected.
b. A letter of liability shall be signed by the general contractor.
5. Shop inspection. All work performed and all material, apparatus, devices,
appliances, fixtures or equipment used shall conform to the requirements of
this code. Any electrical sign or portable building which has not be
inspected by the state which is to be installed within the city shall be
subject to inspection by the electrical official before the sign is installed;
and
6. Final: Inspection made after the electrical installation is completed, hot
checked and the building is ready to be occupied.
ARTICLE VIII – FEES
Sec. 10-43. Permit Fees.
The city council shall adopt by resolution a schedule of the permit and inspection
fees required or authorized by this code, a copy of which shall be maintained in the
construction safety department.
Sec. 10-44. Investigation fee.
When electrical work requiring a permit is found to be in progress or completed
and no permit has been issued for such work, an Investigation Fee of double the amount
of the Inspection Fee shall be charged to the master electrician doing all or part of the
work in addition to such fees as are required by this code.
ARTICLE IX - ELECTRICAL BOARD
Sec. 10-45. In general.
(a) Created. There is hereby created an electrical board, which shall consist of seven
(7) members appointed by the city council. The board shall be composed of two (2)
masters and one journeyman electrician licensed by the state, one representative of the
electric distributor, one person from the construction industry, and one member who is
either an architect, engineer, or from the insurance industry, and one attorney. The
quorum shall consist of four (4) members. The city council shall appoint all members for
a three (3) year period. At no time shall any two (2) members be members of the same
firm or business organization. Any member of the board shall be subject to removal at the
will of the city council and shall not receive compensation for their services. Members of
the electrical board shall be selected from the businesses and professions in the
proportion stated above. If it is not possible to obtain the exact balance from the above
professions as indicated, the city council shall appoint members to the board from the
following businesses and professions, insofar as is practicable: building trade, insurance,
legal, electrical contractors, architects, master electricians, journeyman electricians,
representatives of the electric distributor, and engineers. Members that require licenses
(such as legal, architects, engineers, journeyman, master, and electrical contractors) shall
be licensed within the state.
(b) Meetings of the board. The Board shall meet as needed to resolve business
requirements scheduled on the agenda. When requirements permit, these meetings will be
scheduled on the first Tuesday of each month. If there are no items on the agenda, a
meeting will not be called. If there is a coard meeting time more appropriate than the first
Tuesday of each month, as dictated by business requirements, then the board meeting will
be scheduled at that time. Appropriate items may be placed on the agenda for resolution
by contacting the construction safety department.
Sec. 10-46. Suspension or revocation of permit and permitting privileges.
(a) Generally. Any permit or permitting privileges may be suspended or revoked,
or a fine may be imposed by the electrical board should the holder violate any provisions
of this code.
(b) Opportunity to appear before electrical board. No permit or permitting
privileges shall be suspended or revoked until the permittee shall have been given an
opportunity to appear at a meeting of the electrical board and be heard, of which meeting
the permittee must have had at least ten (10) days written notice by certified mail at the
address provided per 10-22(a) Any such revocation or suspension shall not affect any
criminal prosecution hereunder or prevent punishment by fine for violation hereof.
(c) Length of revocation. Any person whose permit or permitting privileges has
been revoked shall not again be permitted within a period of one (1) year from the date of
such action, and then only be re-examined where such is required by this code.
Sec. 10-47. Decision in writing.
A decision of the electrical board to vary the application of any provision of this
code, or to reverse or modify an order of a certified electrical inspector shall specify in
writing in what manner such variation or modification is made, the conditions upon
which it is made, and the reasons therefore.
Sec. 10-48. Decision to be prompt.
The electrical board shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or
unnecessary delay. Every decision of the electrical board shall be in writing and shall
indicate the vote upon the decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in the
construction safety department and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy
shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the applicant and a copy shall be kept publicly
posted in the construction safety department.
Sec. 10-49. Action in accordance with decision.
If a decision of the electrical board reverses or modifies a refusal, order or
disallowance of a certified electric inspector or varies the application of any provision of
this code, the certified electric inspector shall take action immediately in accordance with
such decision or may promptly appeal the decision to the city council.
Sec. 10-50. Electrical board may propose amendments.
The electrical board may propose to the city council, amendments, alterations,
changes, additions to, or deletions from this code.
Sec. 10-51. Appeal from board action.
Any person aggrieved by action of the electrical board may within fifteen (15)
days after such action, file an appeal in writing for a review by the city manager's office.
The decision of the electrical board shall remain effective until a decision is made by the
city manager's office.
ARTICLE X - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Sec. 10-52. Mobile homes.
All electrical systems installed in mobile homes constructed after March 1, 1970,
and used for residential office purposes within the limits of the city shall meet the
electrical standards for mobile homes set out in Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann. art. 221f, being
those "standards approved by the United States of America Standards Institute" for
installation of electrical systems in mobile homes in Book A-119.1 - 1963, approved
March 12, 1963, for mobile homes, and as may be from time to time changed by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics, or as may be changed, amended, or modified by the State
Legislature from time to time. On all other mobile homes, a certified electrical inspector
shall have the right of inspection as set out elsewhere herein, and if, upon inspection, a
certified electrical inspector shall discover electrical conditions hazardous to health,
safety or welfare, he may cause corrections to be made.
Section 10-53. Prefabricated buildings.
(a) For prefabricated buildings constructed outside the city limits, before final
assembly of the prefabricated building at its final location, a certified electric inspector
shall inspect the electrical installations of such building, which inspections shall be as
complete as is allowed by the methods of construction without disassembly of the unit or
any of its component parts. In addition, the owner of the prefabricated structure shall
furnish the electrical official a manufacturer's certificate that the wiring and electrical
components of the prefabricated structure meet the requirements of the NEC.
(b) The electrical installations of the prefabricated buildings constructed within the
city limits shall meet the standards set out for residential construction in the city.
Manufacturers shall afford a certified electrical inspector an opportunity to make a
"rough-in" inspection and a final inspection.
Section 10-54. Liability for damages.
This ordinance shall not be construed to affect the responsibility or liability of any
party owning, designing, operating, controlling, or installing any electric equipment for
damages to persons or property caused by a defect therein, nor shall the city or any of its
employees be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection, reinspection,
or other examination authorized.

Page 1 of 10
Chapter 11
CEMETERIES
Sec. 11-1. Definitions.
In this Chapter:
Block or Section means a subdivided land area within the cemetery consisting of a systematic
layout of lots, further subdivided into individual plots.
City means the City of Temple, Texas, the City Council of Temple, Texas, or its representatives,
employees, agents, or designees.
Cemetery means any cemetery owned by the City.
Cemetery business office means the cemetery business office as defined by the City's cemetery
policies.
City Council means the City’s elected governing body.
Cremains means the ashes of a cremated human body.
Disinterment means to dig up or exhume a body for medical investigation or for other purposes.
Grave means a space of ground within a plot that is used or is intended to be used for interment.
Grave liner means a burial receptacle placed in the ground in a cemetery that is designed and built
to support the weight of the earth and standard cemetery maintenance equipment and to prevent a
grave from collapsing.
Interment means the entombment or burial of remains.
Lot means a subdivided area of land within a Block or Section consisting of a specified number of
plots.
Memorial means a headstone, tombstone, gravestone, monument, or other marker denoting a
grave.
Plot means a parcel of property specified as a plot on the official plat maps of a cemetery held by
the City that is intended for the burial of:
(a) One (1) casketed burial;
(b) One (1) casketed burial and one (1) cremains; or
Page 2 of 10
(c) Four (4) cremains.
Plot owner or owner means a person who holds a deed to a plot in a city cemetery and who is
listed in the City's records as the owner of the plot or their lawful heirs.
Remains mean either a deceased human body or human cremains.
Temporary marker means a non-permanent memorial that identifies the grave of a recently
deceased person until a permanent memorial is installed.
Vault means a container, formerly made of wood or brick but more often today made of concrete,
that encloses a coffin to help prevent a grave from sinking.
Sec. 11-2. Rights reserved to the City; cemetery policies.
(a) Under this Chapter, the City perpetually reserves the right to:
(1) Enlarge, reduce, replat, and change the boundaries or grading of the cemetery, including
changing the locations of and adding, removing, and regrading roads, drives, and walks;
(2) Lay, maintain, operate, alter, and change any parts or equipment necessary for sprinkler
systems or drainage;
(3) Use cemetery property, not sold to individual plot owners, for cemetery or other official
City purposes;
(4) Ingress and egress over plots for the purposes of care and maintenance of the cemetery
and passage to or from other plots;
(5) Close any road, walk, or drive at any time; and
(6) Landscape the cemetery, including the planting and cultivating of any flowers, shrubs, or
trees.
(b) The City may promulgate cemetery policies for City cemeteries and amend these policies from
time to time. Failure of a person to obey any cemetery policy promulgated by the City is an
offense.
Sec. 11-3. Hours of operation.
(a) The cemetery will be open to the public daily according to posted hours of operation, which
will be posted on the cemetery's main gate. 
Page 3 of 10
(b) It is unlawful for any person, other than the City or with the City's written approval, to enter
or be in the cemetery at any time when the cemetery is not open to the public.
(c) It is unlawful for any person, other than the City or with the City's written approval, to enter
or leave the cemetery at any location other than through the public gates.
Sec. 11-4. Purchase of plots.
(a) Plots may be purchased from the City as provided by the City's cemetery policies.
(b) Upon payment of the full purchase price, the City will provide the plot owner(s) the original
deed that conveys the plot to the owner(s).
(1) Only one original deed will be issued per a plot. If there are multiple plot owners, the plot
owners must specify in writing which plot owner will be provided the original deed.
(2) The City will keep a copy of the original deed in its records.
(3) The City Manager may waive the costs or reduce the price of plots and any cemetery fees for
the burial of indigent persons at their discretion.
(4) All deeds will grant to the plot owner(s) the right to use the plot for interment of remains,
subject to the requirements of this Chapter, the City’s cemetery policies, and applicable State
law.
Sec. 11-5. Transfer of plots.
(a) The transfer of ownership or interest in a plot may only be made on forms provided by the
City.
(b) No transfer of ownership or interest in a plot will be effective without the written approval of
the City.
(c) The City may refuse to approve a transfer of ownership or interest in a plot at its discretion.
The City may require a proposed transferee of a plot to assume responsibility for an unpaid
amount of the purchase price of the plot as a condition of approving the transfer.
(d) The City will issue a new deed that transfers ownership to the new plot owner when a transfer
request is approved by the City and the purchase price for the plot is paid in full. 
Page 4 of 10
Sec. 11-6. Records of plots; plot owner's address.
(a) The official record of plot owners will be maintained by the City.
(b) A plot owner, or their surviving family members or heirs, is responsible for ensuring their
mailing address on file with City is current. All notices sent by the City related to the owner's
plot will be deemed sufficient if sent to the most recent mailing address on file with the City.
Sec. 11-7. No easements or right-of-ways created.
No easement or right-of-way is granted to any plot owner in any road, drive, or alley within the
cemetery, but such easement or right-of-way, when dedicated to public use, may be used for access
to the grounds and buildings of the cemetery.
Sec. 11-8. Repurchase of plot.
A plot owner may request to sell their plot(s) back to the City. The City may, at its discretion,
repurchase the plot(s) at the prices set by the City Manager.
Sec. 11-9. Interment and disinterment.
(a) In addition to being subject to this Chapter and any City cemetery policies, interments and
disinterments are subject to all local, state, and federal laws, rules, and regulations regarding
the same.
(b) All excavations of plots for interment or disinterment of remains must be completed by a
person approved, in writing, to perform this work by the City. The City may require a person
to carry insurance to perform this work.
(c) The City has the authority to correct errors in interment or disinterment or in the transfer or
conveyance of a plot, either by cancellation and conveyance of a plot of equal value (as
established by the City) and similar location as may be practicable or, at the sole discretion of
the City, by refunding all sums paid for the plot.
(1) If an error involves the interment of remains, the City may remove and reinter the remains
as provided by the Texas Health & Safety Code § 711.004, as amended. Once the remains
are removed from the original plot and reinterred in a new plot, the City will convey
ownership of the new plot to the owner of the original plot.
(d) Written authorization is required from the City before any work may commence for an
interment or disinterment. 
Page 5 of 10
(1) A person may perform a disinterment without written authorization of the City if they are
authorized to perform the disinterment by an order of a court or person who conducts
inquests or as otherwise authorized by Texas Health and Safety Code §711.004, as
amended.
(e) Any work performed related to a disinterment or interment will be subject to inspection by
the City.
(f) The City will not be liable for the accuracy of the information provided on a request for
interment or disinterment authorization or the verification of the identity of the person for
whom the interment or disinterment is sought.
(g) Interment.
(1) The City requires a minimum 24 hours' notice prior to interment.
(2) The person performing interment services for any casketed remains must use a grave liner.
(3) The person performing interment services must secure the gravesite and provide for the
immediate cleaning of the gravesite and removal of all debris, fill, and equipment resulting
from the interment or used by the person performing the interment.
(4) The maximum number of burials allowed per plot is:
(A) One (1) casketed burial;
(B) One (1) casketed burial and one (1) cremains; or
(C) Four (4) cremains.
(5) No cremains may be spread anywhere in the cemetery.
(6) No interment is permitted in a plot unless the purchase price for the plot has been fully
paid, except by the written consent of the City.
(7) All vaults must be placed no less than one and one-half (1 1/2) feet below the surface of
the ground. Exposed vaults are prohibited.
(8) A casket containing remains may not be opened within the cemetery by anyone without
the consent of a legal representative of the deceased, by order of a court of competent
jurisdiction, or as otherwise provided by state law.
(9) No animals may be interred at the cemetery. 
Page 6 of 10
(h) Disinterments.
(1) The City requires a minimum 24 hours' notice prior to disinterment.
(2) Disinterments must be performed in accordance with Texas Health and Safety Code
§711.004, as amended.
(3) A person performing a disinterment must secure the gravesite and provide for the
immediate cleaning of the gravesite and removal of all debris, fill, and equipment resulting
from the disinterment or used by the person performing the disinterment.
Sec. 11-10. Memorials.
(a) A person must receive written authorization from the City before beginning any work to erect
a memorial in the cemetery. City authorization is not required to erect a temporary marker.
The City may remove any memorial erected without written City authorization. The City may
bill any cost incurred by the City for the removal of a memorial under this Subsection to the
plot owner or the owner's surviving family members or heirs, if known.
(b) Persons erecting memorials must verify the location where a memorial will be placed with the
City before the installation of any memorial foundation on a cemetery plot. The City will not
be not responsible for memorials erected in the wrong location or placed incorrectly.
(c) No memorial, except a temporary marker, is allowed on any plot until the purchase price for
the plot has been fully paid, except by written consent of the City. The City may remove any
memorial erected in violation of this Subsection.
(d) The City reserves the authority and has the right to correct any error in the location or
placement of a memorial or marker in the cemetery. The City may bill any cost incurred by
the City to correct a memorial or marker location or placement error to the plot owner or the
owner's surviving family members or heirs, if known.
(e) All foundations for memorials must adhere to cemetery policies and be of sufficient depth and
stability to support the memorial and are subject to inspection and approval by the City.
(f) Memorial location and placement on a plot, as well as a memorial's dimensions and materials,
must conform with the City's cemetery policies regarding memorials.
(g) All flush memorials must be flush with the ground.
(h) Memorials that contain niches for cremains are not permitted. 
Page 7 of 10
(i) Persons installing memorials must remove all trash, rubbish, debris, and materials from such
work immediately.
(j) All memorial work is subject to the inspection, control, and direction of the City.
(k) Wooden planks must be used for placing and rolling heavy memorials on rocks or grass.
(l) All memorials must be maintained. The maintenance of all memorials in the cemetery is the
responsibility of the plot owner or the owner's surviving family members or heirs. This
maintenance will include, but is not limited to, the following:
(1) The cleaning of the memorial;
(2) Ensuring that the memorial is seated properly, except that the City is responsible for
leveling and straightening markers and memorials as provided by Texas Health & Safety
Code § 713.011, as amended; and
(3) Repairing any damage to the memorial or the structure of the memorial, including
replacement, if necessary.
(m) In the event that a memorial needs maintenance or repair, the City may send a letter requesting
the plot owner, or the owner's surviving family members or heirs, if known, to perform the
necessary maintenance or repair. If the plot owner or the owner's surviving family members
or heirs cannot be located, then the City may publish a newspaper notice to request the plot
owner or the owner's surviving family members or heirs to perform the necessary maintenance
or repair. If the maintenance or repair is not performed within the time period prescribed by
the notice, then the City may initiate action to have the maintenance or repair performed or
the memorial removed.
(1) In the event of an emergency or if there is an imminent threat to public safety, the City
may perform maintenance on or repair or remove a memorial without providing notice to
the plot owner or the owner's surviving family members or heirs.
(2) The City may bill any cost incurred by the City for the maintenance or repair or removal
of a memorial to the plot owner or the owner's surviving family members or heirs, if
known.
Sec. 11-11. Benches.
(a) Benches that were placed or installed by a private party prior to the adoption of this Chapter
are permitted if the bench is:
(1) Placed entirely within a plot;
Page 8 of 10
(2) Not encroaching on a maintenance easement, public area, or a plot owned by another
person without the consent of the other plot owner or their surviving family members or
heirs;
(3) Kept in a safe and stable condition and in a good state of repair; and
(4) Not interfering with an interment or setting of a memorial.
(b) Any bench that does not meet the criteria of Subsection (a) may be removed by the City
without liability to the City.
(c) A person must obtain written authorization from the City prior to beginning any work to
replace or install a bench removed under Subsection (b) or to place or install a new bench in
the cemetery. The City may authorize the placement or installation of a bench at its discretion.
Failure to obtain written authorization from the City under this Subsection is an offense.
Benches placed without prior written authorization of the City may be removed by the City.
Sec. 11-12. Damage to cemetery property.
A person performing an interment or disinterment or installing a memorial or placing or installing
a bench is responsible for any damage done by them to any property in the cemetery, including
grass, trees, and any other landscaping, and any damage caused by the person's work must be
repaired at the person's expense and to the satisfaction of the City.
Sec. 11-13. Enclosure of plots.
(a) It is unlawful for a person, apart from the City, to place or construct an enclosure including a
fence, coping, hedge, border, edging, or ditch around any plot, lot, block, or section in the
cemetery.
(b) Existing enclosures are permitted to remain in the cemetery if they were in place prior to the
enactment of this ordinance and are in safe and stable condition and in a good state of repair.
Sec. 11-14. Stones and slabs.
(a) It is unlawful for any person, apart from the City, to place, lay, or install slabs, ledgers,
concrete, gravel, rocks, stones, or other ground coverings on the top of any plot, lot, block, or
section in the cemetery.
(b) Existing ground coverings are permitted to remain in the cemetery if they were in place prior
to the enactment of this ordinance and are in safe and stable condition and in a good state of
repair. 
Page 9 of 10
Sec. 11-15. Decorative items.
(a) No person, apart from the City, may plant any flower, shrub, tree, grass, or any other type of
vegetation in the cemetery. This subsection will not apply to vegetation planted by the public
prior to the enactment of this ordinance, except that any vegetation, regardless of when
planted, that interferes, or by its maintenance or cultivation interferes, with another memorial,
plot, easement, driving path, walkway, roadway, parking area, or cemetery operations may be
removed by the City.
(b) Fresh flowers, floral arrangements, potted plants, artificial flowers, sprays, and wreaths may
be placed on any plot, but may be removed by the City if:
(1) Fresh, are dead or dying; or
(2) Artificial, are weathered, severely sun faded, torn, or broken.
(c) Vases and other decorative items must adhere to the City's cemetery policies.
(d) The City is not responsible for the vandalism or theft of any permitted or unpermitted object
left in a cemetery.
Sec. 11-16. Removal.
(a) The City may remove:
(1) Trash, rubbish, and debris;
(2) Deteriorated and broken decorative items;
(3) Enclosures in an unsafe or unstable condition or in disrepair, including fences, coping,
hedges, or edging around a plot, lot, block, or section;
(4) Ground coverings, including stones or slabs, on the top of any plot in an unsafe or unstable
condition or in disrepair;
(5) Any object that violates the City's cemetery policy or any other local, state, or federal law,
rule, or regulation; and
(6) Any object from the cemetery that poses a direct or foreseeable threat to the safety, health,
or welfare of the public. 
Page 10 of 10
Sec. 11-17. Prices, costs, and fees.
The City Manager has the authority to set cemetery prices, costs, and fees, including the price of
cemetery plots.
Sec. 11-18. Penalty.
(a) A person violating a provision of this Chapter or failing to perform a duty required under this
Chapter, obtain any City authorization required under this Chapter, abide by the terms and
conditions of any written City authorization issued under this Chapter, or comply with the
City's cemetery policies commits a Class C misdemeanor. Each offense under this Chapter is
punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). A culpable mental state is
hereby not required to prove an offense under this Chapter.
(b) The City may seek all available civil remedies in a court of competent jurisdiction for
violations of this Chapter.
(c) The remedies provided for in this Section are not exclusive. The City may take any, all, or
any combination of these remedies against a person who violates this Chapter or the cemetery
policies.
Sec. 11-19. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Chapter is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such holding will not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
this Chapter. 

Chapter 12
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 12-1. Appointment qualifications, general powers, and duties of the
fire chief.
Sec. 12-2. Appointment qualification, general powers, and duties of the
fire code official.
Sec. 12-3. Definitions.
ARTICLE II. ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE
Sec. 12-4. Adoption of fire prevention code.
ARTICLE III. EXCLUSIONS OF INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE 2009
ARTICLE IV. REVISIONS OF INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE 2009
Sec. 12-5. Adjustment to Chapter 1, “Administration.”
Sec. 12-6. Replace Table 906.3(1), “Fire Extinguishers for Class A Fire
Hazards,”
Sec. 12-7. Replace Table 906.3(2), “Flammable or Combustible Liquids
with Depths of Less than or Equal to 0.25- inch,”
Sec. 12-8. Adjustment to Chapter33, “Explosives and Fireworks,”
Section 3307 “Blasting,” Subsection 3307.1 “General,”
Sec. 12-9. Adjustment to Chapter 38, “Liquefied Petroleum Gases,”
Section 3801, “General,” 3801.1 “Scope,”
Sec. 12-10. Adjustment to Appendix D, “Fire Apparatus Access Roads.”
ARTICLE V. ADDITIONS TO INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE 2009
Sec. 12-11. Fireworks.
Sec. 12-12. Controlled Burning
Sec. 12-13. Private Fire Apparatus Access Road and Fire Lanes.
Sec. 12-14. Fire Hydrants
Sec. 12-15. Extraction Operations Regulations
Sec. 12-16. Business Registration.
ARTICLE VI. MICELLANEOUS
Sec. 12-17. Establishment of limits of the fire district.
Sec. 12-18. Unauthorized use of fire apparatus.
Sec. 12-19. Injuring or driving over fire hose.
Sec. 12-20. Reward for arrest and conviction of arsonists.
Sec. 12-21. New Materials, processes or occupancies which may require
permits.
Sec. 12-22. Exemptions.
Sec. 12-23. Permit Fees.
Sec. 12-24. Enforcement.
Chapter 12
Fire Prevention and Protection
Article I. In General
Sec. 12-1. Appointment qualifications, general powers, and duties of the fire chief.
a) The fire chief of Temple Fire & Rescue shall be appointed by the city manager, with
approval of the city council. The fire chief shall be skilled in the management of the
department and in the conduct thereof, and in the fighting and control of fires and
conflagrations, and shall devote his entire time to the services of the department under
such rules and regulations as may be laid down by the city manager and/or city
council from time to time.
b) The chief, under the direction of the city manager, shall have control of all fire
stations and apparatus in the city, shall direct the department and preside over same in
its efforts to extinguish all fires and conflagrations, and shall at all times be ready with
his department for all the services which are usually expected of an efficient
department.
c) Wherever fire chief appears in this chapter, it shall mean the fire chief or his designee.
Sec. 12-2. Appointment qualifications, general powers, and duties of the fire code
official
a) The fire prevention division is hereby created. Such division shall be in Temple Fire
& Rescue with the fire code official being a member of that division and reporting
directly to the chief.
b) The fire code official shall be appointed by the fire chief. The fire code official shall
be skilled in investigations, inspections, management and shall devote his time to
educating the public in fire safety while enforcing federal, state, and local laws as they
pertain to fire prevention. The fire code official must be a licensed peace officer, in
accordance with 2.12 of the Code of Criminal Procedures, unless otherwise approved
by the Fire Chief.
c) Wherever fire code official appears in this chapter, it shall mean the fire code official
or his designee.
d) When, in the opinion of the fire code official, further investigation of a fire is
necessary, he shall take or cause to be taken the testimony on oath of all persons
supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the
matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing.
e) The fire code official shall have the power to summons witness before him to testify
in relation to any matter which is, by the provisions of this chapter, a subject of
inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper,
document, or information deemed pertinent thereto. The fire code official is hereby
authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmation to any persons
appearing as witnesses before him.
f) All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire code official may, in his
discretion, be private, and persons other than those required to be present may be
excluded from the place where such investigation is held, and witnesses may be kept
separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other
until they have been examined.
g) Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear to testify, or who
disobeys any lawful order of the fire code official, or who fails or refuses to produce
any book, paper, document or information touching any matter under examinations, or
who commits any contemptuous conduct during an investigation or inquiry, after
being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as
provided in this article, may be charged with a misdemeanor, and it shall be the duty
of the fire code official to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted.
h) When the fire code official determines that the condition of any premises creates a
serious fire hazard dangerous to human life, he may order the utility company or
companies to disconnect the utility service until the hazardous condition is removed.
In cases of emergency or in situations where a utility company does not respond to or
comply with the order of the fire code official shall have the authority to immediately
disconnect or cause the disconnection of utility service. Any person whose property is
affected by the act or order of the fire code official shall have the right of direct
appeal to the city manager.
Sec. 12-3. Definitions.
In this chapter:
Fire Lane shall mean an off-street area that is accessible to the public and is to remain
free and clear of parked and standing vehicles in order to provide access to commercial
buildings for emergency response purposes. This term includes specifically marked areas
in public parking lots.
Private Fire Apparatus Access Road shall mean a road that extends from the property line
of a private property to within 150 feet of all points on a commercial building located on
that property, to include private streets and access roadways.
The route that a fire hose would be laid shall mean the routing of fire hose from either a
public or approved on-site fire hydrant to the fire apparatus along the length of the public
roadway and/or approved private fire lanes.
Article II. Adoption of Fire Prevention Code
Sec. 12-4. Adoption of fire prevention code.
There is hereby adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions
hazardous to life and property from fire and explosion, that certain code known as the
International Fire Code 2009, International Code Council, as well as Appendices B, D, E, F,
G, H, I, and J as it now exists and as it may be revised from time to time, and the whole
thereof, save and except:
A. Exclusions as noted in Article III of this chapter;
B. Revisions as noted in Article IV of this chapter;
C. Additions as noted in Article V of this chapter; and
D. Such portions as are hereinafter modified and amended, of which code not less than
three (3) copies have been and now are filed in the Office of the Building Official and
the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein,
and from the date of which this article shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be
controlling within the limits of the City of Temple, Texas.
Article III. Exclusions of International Fire Code 2009
The following provisions of the International Fire Code 2009 are excluded:
A. Exclude Chapter 3, “General Precautions Against Fire,” Section 307, “Open Burning
and Recreation Fires,” but see Section 12-14, “Controlled Burning,” herein.
B. Exclude Chapter 5, “Fire Service Features,” Section 505, “Premises Identification,”
Subsection 505.1, “Address Numbers,” but see Chapter 32, “Streets and Sidewalks,”
Section 32-9, “Residence and Building Address Numbering,” from the city code.
C. Exclude Chapter 33, “Explosives and Fireworks,” in its entirety, but see Section 12-
13, “Fireworks,” herein.
D. Exclude Chapter 5, “Fire Service Features,” Section 507, “Fire Protection Water
Supplies”, Subsection 507.5, “Fire Hydrant Systems,”, but see Section 12-16, “Fire
Hydrants,” herein.
E. Exclude Chapter 1, “Administration,” Section 105, “Permits,” Subsection 105.6,
“Required operational permits,” Part 105.6.35, “Private Fire Hydrant Exception,” but
see Section 12-16, “Fire Hydrants,” herein.
F. Exclude Chapter 3, “General Requirements,” Section 308, “Open Flames,” Subsection
308.3, “Open Flames,” Subsection 308.3, “Open Flames,” Part 308.4, “Open-flame
Cooking Devices Exception,” but see Section 12-14 b, “Recreational Fires and
Outside Fires for Domestic Purposes,” herein.
G. Exclude Chapter 9, “Fire Protection Systems,” Section 906, “Portable Fire
Extinguishers,” Subsection 906.1, “Where Required Exception,” but see Section 12-9,
Table 906.3 (1), “Fire Extinguishers for Fire Hazards,” and Section 12-10, Table
906.3 (2) “Flammable or Combustible Liquids with Depths of less than or equal to
0.25-inch.”
Article IV. Revisions of International Fire Code 2009
Sec. 12-5. Adjustment to Chapter 1, “Administration.”
a) Adjustment to Chapter 1, “Administration,” Section 101, “General,” Subsection
101.1, “Title,” amended to read as follows:
1) In the title insert “The City of Temple.”
2) Replace all references to “the ICC Electrical Code” with “the currently
adopted edition of the City of Temple Electric Code.”
b) Adjust Chapter 1, “Administration,” Section 105, “Permits,” Subsection 105.1,
“General,” Part 105.1.1, “Permits Required,” amend to read as follows:
Permits required by this code shall be obtained from the construction safety division
of the city. Permit fees, if any, shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit. Issued
permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all times and shall be
readily available for inspection by the fire code official.
c) Adjustment to Chapter 1, “Administration,” Section 108, “Board of Appeals,”
Subsection 108.1, “Board of Appeals Established,” amended to read as follows:
Refer to Chapter 7, “Buildings,” of the City of Temple Code of Ordinances.
Sec. 12-6. Replace Table 906.3(1), “Fire Extinguishers for Class A Fire Hazards,” with
the following table:
Fire Extinguisher Requirement Based on Square Footage
LIGHT (LOW)
HAZARD
OCCUPANCY
ORDINATRY
(Moderate)
HAZARD
OCCUPANCY
EXTRA (High)
HAZARD
OCCUPANCY
Minimum
Rated Single
Extinguisher
5 lb. ABC 5 lb. ABC 5 lb. ABC
Maximum Floor
Area Per Unit
3,000
square feet
1,500
square feet
1,000
square feet
Maximum
Travel Distance
to Extinguisher
75 feet 75 feet 75 feet
Sec. 12-7. Replace Table 906.3(2), “Flammable or Combustible Liquids with Depths of
Less than or Equal to 0.25-inch,” with the following table:
Sec. 12-8. Adjustment to Chapter 33, “Explosives and Fireworks,” Section 3307,
“Blasting,” Subsection 3307.1, “General,” amend to read as follows:
Blasting operations shall be conducted only by approved, competent operators familiar with
the required safety precautions and the hazards involved and in accordance with the
provisions of NFPA 495 and Section 12-23, “Extrication Operations Regulations.”
Sec. 12-9. Adjustment to Chapter 38, “Liquefied Petroleum Gases,” Section 3801,
“General,” 3801.1 “Scope,” amend to read as follows:
Storage handling and transportation of liquefied petroleum gas (LP-gas) and the installation
of LP-gas equipment pertinent to systems for such use shall comply with this chapter, the
TYPE OF
HAZARD
BASIC MINIMUM
EXTINGUISHER
RATING
MAXIMUM TRAVEL
DISTANCE TO
EXTINGUISHERS
(FEET)
Light (Low) 5 lb, ABC 75 feet
Ordinary
(Moderate) 5 lb, ABC 75 feet
Extra (High) 5 lb, ABC 75 feet
Texas Railroad Commission Rules governing LP-gas and NFPA 58. Properties of LP-gases
shall be determined in accordance with Appendix B of NFPA 58.
Sec. 12-10. Adjustment to Appendix D, “Fire Apparatus Access Roads.”
a) Section D103, “Minimum Specifications,” amended as follows:
1) Exclude Table D103.4, “Requirements for Dead-end Fire Apparatus Roads.”
2) Subsection D103.4, “Dead-ends,” amend to read as follows:
Public Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet
(45,720 mm) in length shall be designed in accordance with the City of
Temple Design and Development Manual.
3) Subsection D103.5, “Fire apparatus road gates,” amended to read as follows
5. The minimum gate width shall be 20 feet for gates serving as
entrance and exit. Gates that are paired and separated by an island are
permitted to be a minimum of 16 feet each (one for exit and one for
entrance). All electric gates shall be equipped with a device approved
by the Fire Code Official to be operated by a designated emergency
radio frequency and have a separate manual release. This release will
be used by Temple Fire & Rescue personnel for emergency access in
the event of a power failure. Any manual release devices used for
emergency access to a property shall be approved by the fire code
official. Gates that are manned 24 hours a day and 7 days a week are
exempt from the radio frequency device, however must have a Fire
Department emergency manual release. All existing gates not in
compliance with this standard must meet the standard by May 2nd 2014
or be locked in the open position until such time as it can comply with
the standard.
4) Adjustment to Section D103.6 Signs amended to read as follows:
Where required by the fire code official, private fire apparatus access
roads shall be marked with permanent NO PARKING—FIRE LANE
signs complying with Figure D103.6. Signs shall have a minimum
dimension of 12 inches (305 mm) wide by 18 inches (457 mm) high
and have red letters on a white reflective background. Signs shall be
posted on both sides of the private fire apparatus road, where the width
of the road surface is less than 28 feet. Obstructions to a fire access
roadway such as traffic calming devices may be approved by the fire
code official when; such traffic calming devices as lane separating
islands, boulevards, and roundabouts have a minimum back of curb to
back of curb distance of 18 feet on each side of the obstruction with
signs placed along the obstruction. When approved by the fire code
official, fire apparatus access roads may be designated by painting the
curb or roadway with a 6-inch red strip with white 4 inch lettering of
NO PARKING FIRE LANE every 30 - 40 feet.
b) Section D106, “Multiple-Family Residential Developments,” amend to read as
follows:
1) D106.1, “Projects having 1-75 dwelling units.” Multiple-family residential
projects having 1-75 dwelling units shall have residenti8al subdivision
Entrance/Access roads designated as required by the city’s Design &
Development Standards Manual.
2) D106.2, “Projects having 75-150 dwelling units.” Multiple-family residential
projects having more than 75-150 dwelling units shall have residential subdivision
Entrance/Access roads designated as required by the City of Temple Design &
Development Standards Manual. The exception to this sub-section is excluded.
See Article II of this chapter.
3) D106.3, “Projects having 151-300 dwelling units.” Multiple-family residential
projects having more than 151-300 dwelling units shall have residential
subdivision Entrance/Access roads designated as required by the City of Temple
Design & Development Standards Manual.
4) D106.4, “Projects having 301 or more dwelling units.” Multiple-family residential
projects having 301 or more dwelling units shall have residential subdivision
Entrance/Access roads designated as required by the City of Temple Design &
Development Standards Manual.
c) Adjustment to Section D107, “One- or Two- Family Dwelling Residential
Developments” amend to read as follows:
1) D107.1, “Developments having 1-75 dwelling units.” One- or Two-family
dwelling residential development having 1-75 dwelling units shall have residential
subdivision Entrance/Access roads designated as required by the City of Temple
Design & Development Standards Manual.
2) D107.2, “Development having 76-150 dwelling units.” One- or Two- Family
residential having 76-150 dwelling units shall have residential subdivision
Entrance/Access roads designated as required by the City’s Design &
Development Standards Manual. The exception to this subsection is excluded. See
Article II of this chapter.
3) D107.3, “Developments having 151-300 dwelling units.” One- or Two- Family
residential having more than 151-300 dwelling units shall have residential
subdivision Entrance/Access roads designated as required by the City’s Design &
Development Standards Manual.
Article V. Additions to International Fire Code 2009
Sec. 12-11. Fireworks
A. Definitions:
Distributor means a person who:
a. imports fireworks into this state; or
b. sells fireworks to:
1. a jobber, retailer, or other distributor for resale; or
2. a holder of a single public display permit, a multiple public display
permit,
or another fireworks permit.
Fireworks means a composition or device:
1. designed for entertainment to produce a visible or audible effect by
combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation; and
2. defined by 49 C.F.R. Section 173.56(j)(1996).
Fireworks 1.3G means a large fireworks device:
1. primarily designed to produce visible or audible effects by
combustion, deflagration, or detonation; and
2. classified as a 1.3G explosive by the department in 49 C.F.R. Part 173
(1996).
Fireworks 1.4G means a small fireworks device:
1. primarily designed to produce visible or audible effects by
combustion,
deflagration, or detonation;
2. that complies with the construction, labeling, and chemical
composition
requirements of the United States Consumer Product Safety
Commission in
16 C.F.R. Part 1507 (1996), or the most recently adopted version of
that
rule; and
3. that is classified by the department in 49 C.F.R. Part 173 (1996).
Illegal fireworks means a fireworks device possessed, sold, manufactured, discharged,
or transported in violation of this chapter.
Jobber means a person who purchases fireworks only for resale to retailers.
Manufacturer means a person, firm, corporation, or association who makes fireworks.
Person means an individual or entity, including an owner, manager, officer,
employee, or occupant.
Public display means the igniting of Fireworks 1.3G for public or private amusement.
Pyrotechnic operator means an individual who, by experience, training, and
examination, has demonstrated the necessary skill and ability for safely assembling,
discharging, and supervising public displays of Fireworks 1.3G or Fireworks 1.4G.
Pyrotechnic special effects operator means an individual who, by experience,
training, and examination, has demonstrated the necessary skill and ability for safely
assembling, discharging, and supervising proximate displays of Fireworks 1.3G or
Fireworks 1.4G.
Retailer means a person who purchases fireworks for resale only to the general public.
B. Exemptions:
This article does not apply to:
a. a toy pistol, toy cane, toy gun, or other device that uses paper or plastic caps in
sheets, strips, rolls, or individual caps that contain not more than an average of
25 hundredths of a grain of explosive composition per cap and that is packed
and shipped under 49 C.F.R. Part 173 (1996).
b. a model rocket or model rocket motor designed, sold, and used to propel
recoverable aero models.
c. the sale or use of, in emergency situations, pyrotechnic signaling devices or
distress signals for marine, aviation, or highway use;
d. the use of a fusee or a railway torpedo by a railroad;
e. the sale of blank cartridges for:
1. use in a radio, television, film or theater production;
2. a signal or ceremonial purpose in an athletic event; or
3. an industrial purpose; or
f. the use of a pyrotechnic device by a military organization.
C. General prohibition against possession, sale, manufacture, discharge, or
transportation. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, it shall be
unlawful for any person to possess, sell, manufacture, discharge, transport, or
otherwise assemble, store, receive, keep, offer or have in his possession with intent to
posses, sell, manufacture, transport, discharge, cause to be discharged, ignite,
detonate, fire or otherwise set in action any fireworks of any description.
D. Permitted transportation. It shall be lawful for any distributor, jobber, manufacturer,
pyrotechnic operator, pyrotechnic special effects operator, or retailer to transport
fireworks in accordance with the interstate commerce commission regulations
regarding the transportation of explosives and other dangerous articles by motor, rail,
and water.
E. Illegal fireworks as a nuisance; seizure and destruction, etc. The presence of any
fireworks within the jurisdiction of the city in violation of this section is hereby
declared to be a common and public nuisance. The fire code official is directed and
required to seize and cause to be safely destroyed any fireworks found in violation of
this article and any member of the fire prevention division of the Temple Fire &
Rescue Department or any police officer of the city or any other duly constituted
peace officer is empowered to stop the transportation of and detain any fireworks
found being transported illegally or to close any building where any fireworks are
found stored illegally until the fire code official can be notified in order that such
fireworks may be seized and destroyed in accordance with the terms of this section.
Notwithstanding any penal provision of this article, the city attorney is authorized to
file suit on behalf of the city or the fire code official, or both, for such injunctive relief
as may be necessary to prevent unlawful storage, transportation, keeping or use of
fireworks within the jurisdiction of the city and to aid the fire code official in the
discharge of his duties and to particularly prevent any person from interfering with the
seizure and destruction of such fireworks, but it shall not be necessary to obtain any
such injunctive relief as a prerequisite to such seizure and destruction.
F. Section provisions to apply within five thousand feet of the city limits. This section
shall also be applicable and in force within the area immediately adjacent and
contiguous to the city limits of the City of Temple and extending for a distance
outside the city limits for a total of five thousand (5,000) feet, and it shall be unlawful
to do or perform any act in violation of this Article within such area of five thousand
(5,000) feet outside the city limits; provided that this Article shall not apply within
any portion of such five thousand-foot area which is contained within the territory of
any other municipal corporation.
G. Right of entry to enforce section. The fire code official is hereby authorized to enter
any building where the unlawful presence of fireworks is suspected in order to inspect
the same for the presence of such fireworks; but such authority does not include the
right to enter a private dwelling or apartment.
H. Public displays; when permitted. A public display of fireworks shall be permitted
when made in compliance of the terms and conditions of this article.
I. Application for permit. Any adult person or any firm, co-partnership, corporation or
association planning to make a public display of fireworks shall first make written
application for a permit to the fire code official at least seventy-two (72) hours in
advance of the date of the proposed display. No city permit shall be issued until a
permit for said purposes has been issued by the State of Texas.
J. Issuance or denial and term of permit; permit non-transferable. It shall be the duty of
the fire code official or his designee to make an investigation as to whether the display
as proposed by the applicant for a permit under this article shall be of such a character
that it may be hazardous to property or dangerous to any person, and he shall, in the
exercise of reasonable discretion, grant or deny the application, subject to the
conditions prescribed in this section. In the event the application is approved, a permit
shall be issued for the public display by the fire code official. The fire code official
shall determine what fire protection safety measures will be required before, during
and after the display and it is the responsibility of the permittee to make sure the fire
protection measures are enforced, such permit shall be for a period of time designated
on the permit but can be extended by the fire code official. The permit is nontransferable
and shall only be good for one display. In the event the permit is denied
by the fire code official, he shall notify the applicant of the denial, in writing.
K. Insurance or bond required. The applicant for a display permit under this section
shall, at the time of making application, furnish proof that he carries compensation
insurance for his employees, as provided by the laws of this state, and he shall file
with the fire code official a certificate of insurance evidencing the carrying of public
liability insurance in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000) issued
by an insurance carrier authorized to transact business in the state, for the benefit of
the person named therein as assured, as evidence of ability to respond to damages in
at least the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000), such policy to be approved by
the City of Temple. In lieu of insurance, the applicant may file with the fire code
official, a bond in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000) issued by an
authorized surety company approved by the City of Temple, conditioned upon the
applicant’s payment of all damages to persons or property which shall or may result
from or be caused by such public display of fireworks, or any negligence on the part
of the applicant or his agents, servants, employees, or subcontractors in the
presentation of the public display. The City of Temple shall also be designated as an
insured by the insurance policy and bonded by the bond.
L. Only aerial displays permitted. Any fireworks display authorized under this article
shall be limited to an aerial display.
M. Storage of material prohibited in the city. The material to be used for a public display
authorized by this article shall not be stored within the city limits, but shall be brought
in on the date of the public display and then shall be taken immediately to the place of
display for further handling and storage; except that such materials may be stored
within the city limits in a secured storage area designated by the fire code official.
N. Hazardous conditions prohibited. Any persons overseeing a display of fireworks
under this article shall be a competent, adult person, an experienced pyrotechnic
operator, and approved by the fire code official. No person shall handle fireworks at a
public display unless such person has been approved by to do so by the fire code
official. The names of all experienced pyrotechnic operators shall be designated on
the permit issued for the public display.
O. Firefighter to be present. For each public display of fireworks under this section, not
less than two (2) firefighters of the city shall be in attendance during the display. The
expense of such firefighters at the display shall be borne by the applicant for the
permit.
Sec. 12-12. Controlled Burning
a) Burning of debris and other inflammable materials, generally.
1) Permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn trash, brush, tree limbs, grass,
trees, leaves, paper, boards, planks, lumber, or any other character of debris or
inflammable materials whatsoever in the city, except in an incinerator or container
which has been approved, in writing, by the fire code official or his designee. An
exception shall be considered by the fire code official on an individual basis when
and after the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (T.C.E.Q.) has issued,
in writing, a permit to so burn debris and other inflammable materials.
i. A copy of the T.C.E.Q. letter of determination or permission to conduct a
controlled burning must be presented to the fire code official or his designee.
ii. The fire code official or his designee shall inspect the location of a controlled
burn and shall determine if the burn can be safely conducted before any actual
burning occurs.
iii. The fire code official may require the following, depending on conditions
found during the controlled burn site inspection:
a. A specified number of individuals be present with fire extinguishing
devices and appliances;
b. Fire breaks to be cut around the area to be burned;
c. A trench to be dug and any burning be conducted in the trench; or
d. Any other requirements that the fire code official may be deem necessary
to safely conduct the controlled burn.
2) A controlled burn that the T.C.E.Q. has authorized and that has been approved by
the fire code official must meet criteria as outlined in the remainder of this
chapter.
3) Burning shall be commenced when the wind will carry smoke and other pollutants
away from the city or any residential, recreational, commercial, or industrial area,
navigable water, public road, or landing strip which may be affected by the smoke.
Burning shall not be conducted when a shift in wind direction is predicted which
could produce adverse effects to persons, animals, or property during the burning
period. If at any time the burning causes or may tend to cause smoke to blow onto
or across a road or highway, it is the responsibility of the person initiating the burn
to post a flag person on affected roads in accordance with the requirements of the
Department of Public Safety.
4) Burning must be conducted downwind of or at least 300 feet from any structure
located on adjacent properties unless prior written approval is obtained from the
adjacent occupant with possessory control.
5) Burning shall be conducted in compliance with the following meteorological and
timing considerations:
i. The initiation of burning shall commence no earlier than one hour after
sunrise. Burning shall be completed on the same day not later than one hour
before sunset, and shall be attended by a responsible party at all times during
the active burn phase when the fire is progressing. In cases where residual fires
and/or smoldering objects continue to emit smoke after this time, such areas
shall be extinguished if the smoke from these areas has the potential to create a
nuisance or traffic hazard conditions. In no case shall the extent of the burn
area be allowed to increase after this time.
ii. Burning shall not be commenced when surface wind speed is predicted to be
less than six miles per hour (mph) (five knots) or greater than 23 mph (20
knots) during the burn period. This information can be obtained by contacting
the Draughon-Miller Central Texas Regional Airport or the National Weather
Service.
6) Per T.C.E.Q. Rules & Regulations, heavy oils, asphaltic materials, items
containing natural or synthetic rubber, or any material which may produce an
unreasonable amount of smoke must not be burned.
7) Incinerator or container for fire. An incinerator or container used for burning of
any material mentioned in this section (12-20) shall be located so that smoke will
not become a nuisance to occupants of surrounding building and such incinerator
or container shall not create a hazard to surrounding property. All incinerators
must meet any regulation set forth by the T.C.E.Q.
8) Any and all burning of debris and other inflammable materials will be
extinguished immediately if determined by the fire code official to be unsafe or
constituting a hazard to the environment or interferes with the reasonable use of
any properties.
9) The fire code official is authorized to order the extinguishment by the permit
holder, another person responsible or the fire department of open burning that
creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation.
b) Recreational Fire and Outside fires for domestic purposes.
1) Open burning in approved containers shall be allowed without a permit at singlefamily
homes, duplexes, and town homes, subject to the regulations contained
herein.
2) Fires shall be limited to a maximum 3 feet diameter and 2 feet in height, must be
contained in a non-combustible chimenea, outdoor fireplace, fire pit, or other
method approved by the fire code official.
3) All openings in the container or fire pit must be covered with wire mesh or other
screening materials that will prevent the passage of sparks and ember.
4) Fires must be kept at least 10 feet from any structure or combustible exterior wall.
5) Fires must be constantly attended.
6) No such fire or container used for an open burning may be used on any porch,
deck, balcony, or other portion of a building; within any room space; or under any
building overhang.
7) The burning of yard waste, leaves, brush, vines, evergreen needles, branches
smaller than 3 inches in diameter, untreated lumber, garbage, paper products, or
anything other than firewood as set forth herein is prohibited.
8) The fire code official, police officer, or code enforcement officer may order any
open fire, or use of a chimenea, outdoor fireplace, or fire pit which creates a
nuisance to be extinguished.
9) All chimineas must be extinguished by 1:00 A.M.
c) Burning of garbage, petroleum products and motor vehicles prohibited. The burning
of garbage in any form, or petroleum products, or automobiles or other motor vehicles
or any part thereof for wrecking or salvage purposes in or on any lot or other premises
within the city limits is hereby prohibited.
d) Fire prohibited in streets, alleys and on or in public property. It shall be unlawful for
any person to light or have lighted any fire in or on any street, alley, thoroughfare, or
public property.
Sec. 12-13. Private Fire Apparatus Access Road and Fire Lanes
a) Maintenance
1) A property owner shall at all times maintain and keep in good repair all private
apparatus access roads and fire lanes on the premises.
2) The owner shall maintain all signs and/or markings in good condition and legible
at all times.
b) Abandonment of Private Fire Apparatus Access Roads and Fire Lanes. No owner or
person in charge of any premises served by a private fire apparatus access road shall
abandon or close any such fire apparatus access road without complying with the
following procedure:
1) A request to the fire code official shall be made in writing by the owner stating the
reason for abandonment of the private fire apparatus access road;
2) The fire code official shall determine if said property is no longer subject to the
requirements of this code;
3) The fire code official shall either approve or deny the request for abandonment
and notify the owner in writing within 10 days of receiving the request; and
4) No private fire apparatus access road may be abandoned until the fire code official
has approved the abandonment, in writing.
c) Authority to Determine Location. The locations of fire lanes/private apparatus access
roads shall be determined by the fire code official of the City of Temple or his
designated representative, hereinafter called “the authority,” in conformity with the
provisions of this article.
d) Location of Private Fire Apparatus Access Roads and Fire Lanes. No building, other
than single-family or two-family dwellings, shall be constructed so that any part of the
perimeter of the building is greater than one hundred and fifty (150) feet from a public
way or public place unless the owner or property manager constructs and maintains a
private apparatus access road or fire lane having a minimum width of twenty (20) feet
and a minimum overhead clearance throughout of no less than thirteen (13) feet six
(6) inches and terminating within one hundred and fifty (150) feet from the
furthermost point of said building. The same being reflected on the first plat of the
property.
e) Restrictions.
1) Private apparatus access road or fire lanes shall not be used as loading zones.
2) There shall be no parking in any private apparatus access road or fire lane at any
time.
f) Posting of Signage and Markings for Fire Lanes.
1) All required fire lanes shall be conspicuously marked and shall have signage
posted that shall read “NO PARKING FIRE LANE,” and all required fire
hydrants on private property shall be marked “Fire Hydrant—Do Not Block.”
2) Signage can be either rectangular signs or red striping; this to be determined by
fire code official.
i) Rectangular signs shall be a minimum of 12” width x 18” height. They will
have a white background with red lettering and be made of reflective material.
ii) Striping will consist of a 6” wide red strip with 4” high white letters.
3) Required fire lane signage shall be placed no less than thirty (30) feet and no
greater than forty (40) feet apart.
4) Required fire hydrant markings shall be placed on both sides of a hydrant and at a
distance of no less than fifteen (15) feet from the hydrant.
g) Private Dead-end Fire Apparatus Access Roads. Private dead-end fire apparatus
access roads in excess of 150 feet (45 720mm) in length shall be provided with a 120
foot hammerhead, 60 foot “Y”, or 94 foot diameter cul-de-sac in accordance with
figure D103.1 of the 2009 International Fire Code.
Sec. 12-14. Fire Hydrants
A. Authority to determine location. The fire chief or his designee, hereinafter called “the
authority,” shall determine the location of fire hydrants in conformity with the
provisions of this article.
B. Fire hydrants; location.
(1) As residential zoned property is developed, fire hydrants shall be located at a
maximum spacing of six hundred (600) feet as measured along the length of
the roadway and no part of any structure shall be farther than five hundred
(500) feet from the fire hydrant as measured by the route that a fire hose would
be laid.
(2) As non-residential zoned property is developed, fire hydrants shall be located a
maximum spacing of three hundred (300) feet as measured along the length of
the roadway and no part of any structure shall be further than five hundred
(500) feet from the fire hydrant as measured by the route that a fire hose is
laid.
(3) Spacing of hydrants along roadways designated by the City of Temple as
expressways and major arterials will be required on both sides of the roadway
with the maximum distance of 600 feet for residential and 1200 feet for nonresidential
zoned properties, on each side of the roadway. No part of any
structure shall be further than five hundred (500) feet from the fire hydrant as
measured by the route that a fire hose is laid.
C. Restrictions.
(1) Type of fire hydrants. All required fire hydrants shall be of the national
standard three-way breakaway type no less than five and one-fourth (5 ¼)
inches in size and shall conform to the provisions of the latest American Water
Works Association (A.W.W.A.) specifications C-502 and shall be placed upon
approved water mains of no less than six (6) inches in size.
(2) Valves shall be placed on all fire hydrant leads.
(3) Required fire hydrants shall be installed in such a manner that the breakaway
point will be more than three (3) inches, and not greater than five (5) inches,
above the ground surface.
(4) A spacing of no less than eighteen (18) inches shall be provided between
center of the barrel of the large steamer connection and the finished grade
surface.
(5) No fire hydrant located on a six-inch (6 inch) dead-end water main shall be
located more than 1,800 ft. from a six-inch (6 inch) or greater main.
(6) No six-inch looped water main shall exceed three thousand five hundred
(3,500) feet in length.
(7) Fire hydrants shall be installed on a water main that is separate from the
domestic water supply, except when it is determined by the fire code official
that the required maximum one (1) hour demand plus the needed minimum fire
flow of one thousand (1,000) gallons per minute will be met by alternate
installation.
(8) Fire hydrants located on public property shall be located a minimum of two (2)
feet and a maximum of four (4) feet behind the curb line.
(9) Protection of fire hydrants. All fire hydrants placed on private property shall be
adequately protected by either curb stops or concrete posts or other methods,
as approved by the fire code official. Such stops or posts shall be maintained
by the property owner or manager
(10)All fire hydrants shall be installed so that the steamer connection faces the fire
lane or street.
(11) Fire hydrants, when placed at intersections or access drives to parking lots,
when practical, shall be placed so that no part of a fire truck connected to the
hydrant will block the intersection or parking lot access.
(12) Obstructions. Post, fences, vehicles, growth, trash, storage and other
materials or objects shall not be placed or kept near fire hydrants, fire
department inlet connections or fire protection system control valves in a
manner that would prevent such equipment or fire hydrant from being
immediately discernible. The fire department shall not be deterred or hindered
from gaining immediate access to fire protection equipment or fire hydrants.
(13) Fire hydrants located on private property shall be accessible to the fire
department at all times and free of any type of obstruction that would hinder
their use (i.e. vegetation). A 3-foot clear space shall be maintained around the
circumference of fire hydrants.
(14) The fire code official shall have the authority to approve a variance of up to
10 percent of the footage requirements found at Sec. 12-23.B. parts (a) and (b).
D. Maintenance
(1) All fire hydrants shall be inspected, flushed and painted at least once annually
and such inspections, flushing and painting shall be the responsibility of
Temple Fire & Rescue. Fire hydrants shall be color coded as follows:
i. Less than 500 gpm – Red Bonnet
ii. 500-999 gpm – Yellow Bonnet
iii. 1000-1499 gpm – Green Bonnet
iv. Over 1500 gpm – Blue Bonnet
(2) Any maintenance or repairs required to keep a fire hydrant in proper working
order, other than the maintenance found at a subsection above, shall be the
responsibility of the property owner, or manager of the property on which the
fire hydrant is located.
E. Use; opening and closing. The chief or his designee shall prescribe the manner in
which all fire hydrants shall be opened or closed. No person shall open or close any
fire hydrant unless authorized to do so by the chief or his designee.
Sec. 12-15. Extraction Operations Regulations
(a) Purpose.
(1) In order to promote the health, safety, and welfare of those who work or reside
near extraction operations, and to protect air quality and the water resources of
the city, the regulations in this section are applicable to extraction operations.
(2) This section shall apply to all extraction operations conducted within the
territorial limits of the city and in the extraterritorial jurisdiction within 5000
feet of said territorial limits.
(b) Definitions.
In this section:
Blasting shall mean the practice or occupation of extracting heavy masses of
rock, or other materials imbedded in the ground, by means of explosives or
blasting agents.
Extraction operations shall mean the use of a lot or tract of land primarily for
extraction of materials (including, but not limited to, limestone, rock, sand,
gravel, or soil, but not oil or natural gas).
Extraction site shall mean the location of materials or rock removal or
extraction operations as delineated by a site plan or a certificate of occupancy.
Regulatory authority shall mean The Temple Fire & Rescue Department
(c) Blasting. All blasting activity that falls within the scope of this Article shall comply
with the following provisions;
(1) Permit required.
i. An appropriate blasting or explosives permit must be acquired from the
regulatory authority prior to any blasting activity or preparation for
blasting
activity at an extraction site.
ii. A blasting or explosives permit will authorize blasting for the
extraction of materials (e.g., rock or stone) only at the extraction site
designated on the permit.
iii. The extraction site operator, or designated representative, may apply for
a blasting or explosives permit in accordance with the following
procedures:
1. The applicant shall submit a completed permit application form
and fee, as required by the regulations contained in the 2009
International Fire Code, as adopted and amended by the City
Council. The permit fee shall be in an amount set by resolution
of the City Council.
2. The fire code official shall have thirty (30) days in which to
approve or deny a permit application.
3. Any party aggrieved by the denial of a permit or inaction by the
fire code official may appeal such decisions to the Building
Board of Appeals, in writing. Upon receipt of an appeal
notification, the Board shall take the actions required to review
the appeal, in accordance with the 2009 International Fire Code.
4. The application shall contain the following information:
1. Name of the operator(s) conducting the blasting;
2. Identification of extraction site;
3. Description of conditions, if any, which may cause
possible adverse blasting effects;
4. Normal extraction operations schedule;
5. Type of explosives or blasting agents to be used;
6. Type of stemming;
7. Name(s) of licensed blasters on the job;
8. Copy of Mine Safety Health Administration (MSHA)
Certificate of Training (Form 5000-23) for all personnel
involved in the extraction operations.
9. Copy of Insurance Certificate of Blasting Liability
Coverage
(2) Insurance required.
i. Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall obtain and maintain
general liability insurance having limits of not less than one million
dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence for bodily injury and property
damage combined with one million dollars ($1,000,000) or greater
annual aggregate throughout the permitted period for the purpose of the
payment of all damages to persons or property which arise, or are
caused by, the conduct of any act or omission authorized by the permit.
The general liability insurance shall name the City of Temple as an
additional insured with a waiver of subrogation in favor of the City of
Temple. The policy shall contain a provision requiring the insurance
company to furnish the City of Temple with written notification on any
cancellation of nonrenewal of the policy thirty (30) days prior to the
cancellation date or inception date, which ever the case may be.
ii. Evidence of compliance with this requirement shall be
considered as having been met when the policy, a copy thereof, or a
certificate of insurance has been filed with, and approved by, the fire
code official. Such policy shall include an endorsement that the fire
code official shall be notified at least thirty (30) days in advance in the
event the policy or policies are canceled. The City may cancel a permit
for any violation of this section.
(3) Regulatory Compliance. All blasting operations located within an extraction
site shall comply with the applicable provisions of the 2009 International Fire
Code and with this section, as well as all applicable local, state, and federal
regulations concerning industrial noise and dust levels and applicable drainage,
water and air standards.
(4) Annual permit renewal required.
i. In addition to compliance with local, state, or federal regulations, the
operator shall be required to comply with the provisions of this
section by renewing a permit annually before the anniversary date of
the permit.
ii. Upon renewal, the extraction site operator shall:
1. certify in writing that the blasting activities at the permitted
extraction site are anticipated to remain materially unchanged
from the activities described on the permit application; or
2. provide all relevant information relating to material changes at
the permitted extraction site to the fire code official for review;
3. pay the annual permit fee; and
4. file a current certificate of insurance which complies with this
section.
iii. A blasting permit will remain in force and effect, provided that the
blasting activities at the extraction site specified in the permit are
anticipated to remain materially unchanged, the permittee has complied
with the requirement of this section during the preceding permit year,
and the annual renewal requirements have been met.
(5) Hours of operation. The hours during which extraction operations may take
place by blasting shall be at any time during the hours between 8:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. Extraction by blasting shall be prohibited on Saturdays, Sundays,
and legal holidays unless a variance is obtained from the fire code official
based upon public safety concerns or extraordinary economic considerations.
(6) Monitoring of Blasting.
i. The extraction site operator shall monitor each blast to accumulate
data with respect to seismographic and air blast effects of the blasting
activity, as required by state and federal law. The extraction site
operator shall conduct independent monitoring of blasting events, if
directed, and to the extent and frequency reasonably required by the
regulatory agency.
ii. Information generated in the form of reports or other data from this
monitoring shall be submitted to the fire code official within seventytwo
(72) hours of each blasting event.
iii. Monitoring information shall include:
1. actual date and time of the blast;
2. type of explosives or blasting agents used;
3. technical data and material safety data sheets for all explosives
or blasting agents used;
4. total pounds of explosives used in each blast;
5. number, spacing, stemming and depth of holes;
6. maximum pounds per delay;
7. firing sequence, delay sequence, and typical hole load diagrams;
8. location and distance of extraction operation from seismographs;
9. weather conditions at time and location of blast;
10.seismograph data;
11. and ground vibrations or air blast records which shall include:
1. Type of instrument, sensitivity and calibration signal of
certification of annual calibration.
2. Exact location of instrument and the date, time and
distance from the blast;
3. Name of person and firm taking the reading as well as
the person analyzing the seismic record; and
4. The vibration and air blast level recorded.
(7) Safety Standards. The extraction site operator is responsible and required to
comply with all applicable provisions of any state or federal law or applicable
regulations promulgated by the Occupational Safety Health Administration
(OSHA), Mine Safety Health Administration (MSHA), Alcohol, Tobacco, and
Firearms (ATF), or any other executive agency of the state or federal
government relating to use, handling, transportation, storage, or detonation of
explosives or blasting agents.
(8) Records and Inspections
i. The holder of a blasting permit shall make the extraction operations
site available to the fire code official for inspection at all times during
regular business hours.
ii. The permittee shall retain a record of all blasts and monitoring
information for at least five (5) years past the to include date of a
blast.
iii. All records, including monitoring records referenced in subsection
(f)(iii) above, relating to blasting activities shall be made available to
the fire code official during normal business hours within seventy-two
(72) hours of request.
(d) Control of Adverse Effects.
(1) Air Blast (Noise) Limits. For the purpose of this section, the air overpressure
and related noise generated by the use of explosives or blasting agents in
extraction operations shall be measured by the air blast created thereby. Air
blast shall not exceed 134 dB peak (± 3dB) at the location of any dwelling,
public building, school, church, or community or institutional building outside
the permit area, except as provided in subsection (e) of this section.
(2) Ground vibration. In all blasting operations, except as otherwise authorized in
subsection (e) below, the maximum ground vibration shall not exceed one (1)
inch per second at the location of any dwelling.
(3) Monitoring Requirement. The operator shall conduct monitoring to ensure
compliance with the air blast standards and ground vibration standards. Air
blast and ground vibration measurements of blasts must be performed to the
extent required this section.
(4) Flyrock. Flyrock traveling in the air or along the ground shall not be cast from
the blasting site beyond the area under the control of the operator.
(5) Exception. The maximum air blast and ground-vibration standards of this
section shall not apply at the following locations:
i. At structures owned by the permittee and not leased to another
person;
ii. At structures owned by the permittee and leased to another person, if
a written waver by the lessee has been obtained.
Sec. 12-16. Business Registration.
i. Purpose. Business registration is a procedure administered by Temple Fire & Rescue,
in conjunction with the Utilities department, which assures that all businesses within
the City of Temple are registered for 911 services, inspected and comply with all city
codes.
ii. Registration prerequisite to doing business in the City of Temple. All businesses shall
comply with the registration requirements of this article as a precondition of initiating
or continuing any business within the City of Temple. For the purpose of this article,
the term “business” includes any commercial enterprise, school, church or
governmental office located within the city limits. Each occupant of a building used
by a business shall have responsibility for complying with the registration
requirements of this section.
iii. Registration procedure.
i. When a business owner applies for utilities he or she shall fill out a business
registration form and return to Temple Fire & Rescue prior to the business
receiving utilities or opening its doors for business.
ii. Registration or re-registration with the city is required prior to changing the
name, ownership, operator, location, or use of an existing business.
Article VI. Miscellaneous
Sec. 12-17. Establishment of limits of the fire district.
Beginning at the point of intersection of the south line of Calhoun Avenue with the east line
of North 5th Street; thence in southerly direction along the east line of North 5th Street to the
south line of Barton Avenue; thence in a westerly direction along said south line of Barton
Avenue to the point of intersection with the east right-of-way of the Gulf, Colorado and
Santa Fe Railroad; thence in a southeasterly direction along the east line of South 9th Street,
if extended; thence in a southerly direction with said line to the north line of Avenue D;
thence in a easterly direction with said line to the east line of South 1st Street; thence in a
southerly direction along said line to the north line of Avenue E; thence in an easterly
direction along said line, if extended, to the west line of 6th Street, if extended; thence in a
northerly direction along said west line of 6th Street, if extended, to the north line of Avenue
A; thence in an easterly direction along said line to the west line of 8th Street; thence in a
northerly direction with said line to the south line of Central Avenue; thence in a westerly
direction with said line to the west line of 6th Street; thence in a northerly direction along
said line to the south line of Adams Avenue; thence in a westerly direction along said line to
the west line of 4th Street; thence in a northerly direction along said line to the south line of
Barton Avenue; thence in a westerly direction along said line to the west line of 2nd Street;
thence in a northerly direction along said line to the south line of Calhoun Avenue; thence in
a westerly direction along said line to the point of beginning.
Sec. 12-18. Unauthorized use of fire apparatus.
It shall be unlawful for any person, under any pretext whatever, other than for the purposes
for which they were intended in Temple Fire & Rescue, to take or use any engine, truck,
ladder, fire axe, or other apparatus belonging to or in possession of the department, or any
member or company thereof, or to break, deface, or injure the same.
Sec. 12-19. Injuring or driving over fire hose.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, deface, tear or otherwise injure, or drive any
vehicle over any fire hose belonging to the City of Temple or any fire department that is
providing mutual aid for the City of Temple.
Sec. 12-20. Reward for arrest and conviction of arsonists.
The city hereby offers a reward of five hundred dollars ($500) for the arrest and conviction of
any person for the crime of arson committed within the city limits of the City of Temple. The
sum of five hundred ($500) is hereby appropriated out of any funds belonging to the city not
already appropriated for some other purpose for the payment of such reward.
Sec. 12-21. New materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits.
The fire chief or his designee shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after
giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or
occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those enumerated in this chapter.
The fire chief or his designee shall post such lists in a conspicuous place in their offices,
and distribute copies thereof to interested persons.
Sec. 12-22. Exemptions.
Nothing contained in this Ordinance shall be construed as applying to the regular military
or naval forces of the Untied States, the duly authorized militia of the State, or the police
and fire departments of the city in the proper performance of their duties.
Sec. 12-23. Permit Fees.
The city council shall, by resolution, set the amount of all permit fees required by this
chapter. A copy of any resolution setting permit fees shall be maintained in the office of
the fire code official.
Sec. 12-24. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the fire chief or his designee.
Penalties
(a) Criminal Offenses. Any person or persons, firm or corporation which violates any
of the provisions of this chapter may be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be fined an amount not exceeding two thousand ($2,000) dollars for each
offense and each violation hereof shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense for each of
said days and shall be punishable as such.
(b) The city attorney may seek remedies at law or in equity to prevent a violation of
this chapter
(Ordinance No. 2011-4485, November 17, 2011)
(REVISED: Ordinance No. 2013-4586, May 16, 2013)
Chapter 13
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
ARTICLE I. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT,
PURPOSE AND METHODS
Sec. 13-1. Statutory authorization.
Sec. 13-2. Findings of fact.
Sec. 13-3. Statement of purpose.
Sec. 13-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
Secs. 13-5--13-9. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Sec. 13-10. Words, terms and phrases defined.
ARTICLE III. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 13-11. Lands to which this chapter applies.
Sec. 13-12. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
Sec. 13-13. Establishment of development permit.
Sec. 13-14. Compliance.
Sec. 13-15. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
Sec. 13-16. Interpretation.
Sec. 13-17. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
Secs. 13-18--13-23. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 13-24. Appointment of administrator.
Sec. 13-25. Duties and responsibilities of the administrator.
Sec. 13-26. Permit procedures
Sec. 13-27. Variance procedures.
Sec. 13-28—13-30. Reserved
ARTICLE V. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
Sec. 13-31. General standards
Sec. 13-32. Specific standards
Sec. 13-33. Standards for subdivision proposals.
Sec. 13-34. Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones).
Sec. 13-35. Floodways.
Sec. 13-36. Penalties for noncompliance.
Chapter 13
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
ARTICLE I. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT,
PURPOSE AND METHODS
Sec. 13-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas
Water Code, Section 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council of the City of
Temple, Texas does ordain as follows:
Sec. 13-2. Findings of fact.
(a) The flood hazard areas of the City of Temple are subject to periodic inundation,
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce
and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and
relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains
which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities; by the occupancy of flood hazard
areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately
elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
Sec. 13-3. Statement of Purpose.
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by
provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and
generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains,
electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development
of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
Sec. 13-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of
flood, or which cause excessive increases in flood heights (more than one foot) or
velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses,
be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective
barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood
damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert
flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
Secs. 13-5 – 13-9. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
Sec. 13-10. Words, terms and phrases defined.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be
interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its
most reasonable application.
(1) ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING - means flooding occurring on the surface of an
alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by highvelocity
flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and
unpredictable flow paths.
(2) APEX - means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path
of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can
occur.
(3) BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS – means the Appeal Board, called the Zoning Board of
Adjustments, the body that hears and renders judgment on requests for variances. This board
hears appeals and rules on special exceptions and variances.
(4) APPURTENANT STRUCTURE – means a structure which is on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use
of the principal structure.
(5) AREA OF FUTURE CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD – means the land area that
would be inundated by the 1-percent-annual chance (100 year) flood based on future
conditions hydrology.
(6) AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING - means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH,
or VO zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1 percent or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel
does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
(7) AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD - is the land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area
may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed
rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually
is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO,
AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
(8) BASE FLOOD - means the flood having a 1 percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
(9) BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) – The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Zones A,
AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting
from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year -
also called the Base Flood.
(10) BASEMENT - means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
(11) BREAKAWAY WALL – means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral
loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting
foundation system.
(12)CRITICAL FEATURE - means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be
compromised.
(13) DEVELOPMENT - means any man-made change to improved and unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
(14)ELEVATED BUILDING - means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building,
which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear
walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
(15) EXISTING CONSTRUCTION - means for the purposes of determining rates,
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing
construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures."
(16) EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - means a
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
(17) EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION - means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads).
(18) FLOOD OR FLOODING - means a general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(A) the overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(B) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
(19) FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY – means an examination, evaluation and determination
of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an
examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related
erosion hazards.
(20) FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) - means an official map of a community,
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood
hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
(21) FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) – see Flood Elevation Study.
(22) FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA - means any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding).
(23) FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT - means the operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
(24) FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS - means zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such
as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other
applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention
and reduction.
(25) FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM - means those physical structural works for which
funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community
subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a
system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These
specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound
engineering standards.
(26) FLOOD PROOFING - means any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their
contents.
(27)FLOODWAY – see Regulatory Floodway.
(28) FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE - means a use, which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not
include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
(29) HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE - means the highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
(30) HISTORIC STRUCTURE - means any structure that is:
(A) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained
by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(B) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing
to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(C) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(D) Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with
historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
(i) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or;
(ii) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
(31) LEVEE - means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the
flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
(32) LEVEE SYSTEM - means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed
and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
(33) LOWEST FLOOR - means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles,
building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's
lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National
Flood Insurance Program regulations.
(34) MANUFACTURED HOME - means a structure transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not
include a "recreational vehicle."
(35) MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - means a parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
(36) MEAN SEA LEVEL - means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program,
the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood
elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
(37) NEW CONSTRUCTION - means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an
initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction"
means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective
date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
(38) NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - means a
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
(39) RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - means a vehicle which is (A) built on a single chassis;
(B) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (C) designed
to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (D) designed primarily
not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.
(40) REGULATORY FLOODWAY - means the channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
(41) RIVERINE – means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
(42) SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA – see Area of Special Flood Hazard
(43) START OF CONSTRUCTION - (for other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes
substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage
of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement,
the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
(44) STRUCTURE – means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as
manufactured home.
(45) SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE - means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or
exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
(46)SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT - means any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent
of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This
term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (A) Any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official
and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or (B) Any alteration
of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a "historic structure."
(47) VARIANCE – means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain
management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations.)
(48) VIOLATION - means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other
development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of
compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
(49) WATER SURFACE ELEVATION - means the height, in relation to the North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
ARTICLE III. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 13-11. Lands to which this chapter applies.
The chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the
City of Temple.
Sec. 13-12. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) for Bell County Texas and Incorporated Areas," dated September 26, 2008, with
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps (FIRM
and/or FBFM) dated September 26, 2008 and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance.
Sec. 13-13. Establishment of development permit.
A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this ordinance.
Sec. 13-14. Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without
full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
Sec. 13-15. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance,
easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
Sec. 13-16. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be; (1)
considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body;
and (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.
Sec. 13-17. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare
occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made
or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder.
Secs. 13-18—13-23. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 13-24. Designation of the floodplain administrator.
The City Engineer is hereby appointed the Floodplain Administrator to administer and
implement the provisions of this ordinance and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR
(Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations)
pertaining to floodplain management.
Sec. 13-25. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions
of this chapter.
(2) Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building
site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably
safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by
adoption of this chapter.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have
been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental agencies (including
Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33
U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas
of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall
make the necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State Coordinating
Agency which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB), prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification
to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(7) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Article III,
Section 13-12, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a Federal,
State or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Article V.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain
Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or
other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE
on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of
the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more
than one foot at any point within the community.
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in
Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water
surface elevation of the base flood by more than 1 foot, provided that the
community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12.
Sec. 13-26. Permit procedures.
(a) Application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be presented to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited
to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of
proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of
manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood
hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement)
of all new and substantially improved structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall
be floodproofed;
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the
nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of
Article 5, Section 13-32 (2);
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
(5) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with Article 4, Section 13-
32(1);
(b) Approval or denial of a Floodplain Development Permit by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following
relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the
effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency
vehicles;
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions
including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the
floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage,
for the proposed use.
Sec. 13-27. Variance procedure.
(a) The Board of Adjustments, as established by the community, shall hear and render
judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
(b) The Board of Adjustments shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it
is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(c) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustments may
appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
(d) Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal
and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(e) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of
structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic
Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.
(f) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be
erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in Section
13-26 (b) of this Article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2
acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(g) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the
Board of Adjustments may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter. (Article 1, Section 13-3).
(h) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(i) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(j) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the
minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(A) showing a good and sufficient cause;
(B) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(C) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local existing
laws or ordinances.
(3) Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice
that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation
below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
(k) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial
improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally
dependent use provided that (1) the criteria outlined in Article 4, Section 13-27 (1)-(9) are
met, and (2) the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood
damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
Sec. 13-28 – 13-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
Sec. 13-31. General Standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new
construction and substantial improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified)
and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects
of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods
and practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials
and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other
service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems
into flood waters; and,
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding.
Sec. 13-32. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided
as set forth in (1) Article III, Section 13-12, (2) Article IV, Section 13-25 (8), or (3) Article
V, Section 13-33 (c), the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential Construction - new construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to be
not less than 1 (one) foot above the base flood elevation. A registered professional
engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the Floodplain
Administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in Article IV, Section
13-26 (a)(1), is satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential Construction - new construction and substantial improvements of
any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the
lowest floor (including basement) be not less than 1 (one) foot above the base flood
level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that
below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review
structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes
the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
(3) Enclosures - new construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed
areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding
shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(A) A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not
less than 1 square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured Homes -
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a
community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices
which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement,
manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable State and local anchoring
requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved
within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i)
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred
"substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is shall be not
less than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored
to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement.
(C) Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on
sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30,
AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of
paragraph (4) of this section be elevated so that either:
(i) the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to not less
than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or
(ii) the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers
or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are
no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(5) Recreational Vehicles - Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within
Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either (A) be on the site for fewer than
180 consecutive days, or (B) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (B) meet the
permit requirements of Article 4, Section 13-26 (a), and the elevation and anchoring
requirements for "manufactured homes" in paragraph (4) of this section. A recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached
additions.
Sec. 13-33. Standards for subdivision proposals.
(a) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall be consistent with Article 1, Sections 13-2, 13-3, and 13-4 of this
ordinance.
(b) All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet Floodplain Development Permit
requirements of Article 3, Section 13-13; Article 4, Section 13-26; and the provisions of
Article 5 of this ordinance.
(c) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other
proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise
provided pursuant to Article 3, Section 13-12 or Article 4, Section 13-25 (8) of this
ordinance.
(d) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(e) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
Sec. 13-34. Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones)
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Article III, Section 13-12,
are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated
with base flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding
is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have
the lowest floor (including basement) shall be not less than 1 (one) foot above the
base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth
number is specified).
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures;
(a) have the lowest floor (including basement) shall be not less than 1 (one)
foot above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as
high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at
least 2 feet if no depth number is specified), or
(b) together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that
below the base specified flood depth in an AO Zone, or below the Base
Flood Elevation in an AH Zone, the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy.
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the
Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this Section, as proposed in Article
IV, Section 13-13 are satisfied.
(4) Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures.
Sec. 13-35. Floodways.
Floodways - located within areas of special flood hazard established in Article 3,
Section 13-12, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles
and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway
unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed
encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) If Article 5, Section 13-35 (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of
Article 5.
(3) Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood
Insurance Program Regulation, a community may permit encroachments within the
adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood
elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions
required by Section 65.12.
Sec. 13-36. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or
altered without full compliance with the terms of this court order and other applicable
regulations. Violation of the provisions of this court order by failure to comply with any of
its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection
with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this court order or
fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more
than $400.00 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City Council from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ordinance No. 2008-4236, July 17, 2008)
Chapter 14
FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 14-1. Sale of unsound, unwholesome, etc., food prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer or expose for sale, in the city, any
unsound, unwholesome, spoiled or putrid eggs, vegetables, fruit or other food.
Secs. 14-2--14-10. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. FOOD SERVICE
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 14-11. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this
article:
Approved. Acceptable to the health officer based on his determination as to
conformance with appropriate standards of good public health practice. Such approval shall
be in writing and signed by the health officer or his authorized representative.
Caterer. A food service establishment where food is completely or partially prepared
for delivery to a single customer, i.e., an individual, partnership, corporation, association or
other legal entity; and this food is transported to the customer at a separate location where it
is meant to be served and consumed.
Closed. Without openings large enough for the entrance of insects or other vermin.
Cold storage. The storing and preservation of food products by cold through means of
mechanical or electrical refrigeration.
Commissary. Any kitchen where food is prepared and packaged for individual
consumption, to be transported by the person preparing the food or his agent to another
location off the premises.
Convenience store. A retail food store having less than twenty-five hundred (2,500)
square feet of space in which food is kept and/or displayed.
Corrosion-resistant materials. Those materials that maintain their original surface
characteristics under prolonged influence of the food to be contacted, the normal use of
cleaning compounds and bactericidal solutions, and other conditions of the use or
environment.
Easily cleanable. Surfaces are readily accessible and made of such material and finish
and so fabricated that residue may be effectively removed by normal cleaning methods.
Employee. Any individual having supervisory or management duties and any other
person working in a food establishment.
Equipment. Stoves, ovens, ranges, hoods, slicers, mixers, meatblocks, tables, counters,
refrigerators, sinks, dishwashing machines, steam tables, and similar items, other than
utensils, used in the operation of a food establishment.
Filth. Dust, dirt, insect excretions or secretions, insect body parts, rodent hairs or
excretions, feathers, or any foreign or injurious contamination.
Food. Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, ice, beverage or ingredient
used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption.
Food-contact surface. Those surfaces of equipment and utensils with which food
normally comes in contact, and those surfaces from which food may drain, drip or splash
back onto surfaces normally in contact with food.
Food establishment. All food service establishments and food processing
establishments.
Food processing establishment. A commercial establishment in which food is
manufactured or packaged for human consumption and all commercial establishments
bottling water or other liquids intended for human consumption. The term "food processing
establishment" does not include a food service establishment or commissary operation.
Food service establishment. Any place where food is prepared and intended for
individual portion service and includes the site at which individual portions are provided.
The term includes any such place regardless ofwhether consumption is on or off the premises
and regardless of whether there is a charge for the food. The term also includes delicatessentype
operations that prepare sandwiches intended for individual portion service,
commissaries and retail food stores. The term does not include private homes where food is
prepared or served for individual family consumption, the location of food vending machines
or supply vehicles.
Garbage. Every accumulation of animal, vegetable and other waste matter that attends
the preparation, handling, consumption, storage or decay of plant and animal matter,
including meats, fish and seafoods, birds, fruit, vegetable or dairy products and the waste
wrappers or containers thereof.
Health officer. The director of public health of the city or his authorized
representatives.
Hermetically sealed container. A container designed and intended to be secure
against the entry of microorganisms and to maintain the commercial sterility of its content
after processing.
Kitchenware. The term "kitchenware" shall mean all multiuse utensils other than
tableware.
Law. All applicable federal, state and local statutes, ordinances and regulations.
Mobile food unit. A vehicle-mounted food service establishment designed to be
readily moveable.
Packaged. Bottled, canned, cartoned or securely wrapped.
Perishable food. Any food of such type or in such condition as may spoil.
Person. An individual, partnership, corporation, association, trustee or other legal
entity.
Person in charge. The individual present in a food establishment who is the
apparent supervisor of the food establishment at the time. If no individual is the apparent
supervisor, then each employee present shall be deemed to be the person in charge.
Potable water. Water from an approved source which has been determined by the
health officer after appropriate testing as suitable for human consumption.
Potentially hazardous food. Any food that consists in whole or in part of milk or milk
products, eggs, meat, poultry, fish, shellfish, edible crustacea or other ingredients, including
synthetic ingredients, in a form capable of supporting rapid and progressive growth of
infectious or toxigenic microorganisms. The term does not include clean, whole, uncracked,
odor-free shell eggs or foodswhich have a pH level of four and five-tenths (4.5) or below or a
water activity (Aw) value of eighty-five hundredths (0.85) or less.
Produce. All vegetables, fruits, nuts, berries, melons, cantaloupes and other edible
plant material.
Reconstituted. Recombining dehydrated food products with water or other liquids.
Refuse. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid wastes, including
garbage, rubbish and ashes.
Retail food store. Any establishment where food and food products are offered for sale
to the ultimate consumer and intended for off-premise consumption; provided, however, the
term shall not include an establishment where food is primarily prepared and sold for
individual portion service.
Rubbish. Nonputrescible solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, waste metal, tin cans, yard clippings,
wood, glass, crockery, plastics and similar materials.
Safe materials. Articles manufactured from or composed of materials that may not
reasonably be expected to result, directly or indirectly, in their becoming a component or
otherwise affecting the characteristics of any food. If materials are food additives or color
additives as defined in Section 201(s) or (t) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act as
used, they are "safe" only if they are used in conformity with regulations established pursuant
to Section 409 or Section 706 of the act. Other materials are "safe" only if they are not food
additives or color additives as defined in section 201(s) or (t) of the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act, as used.
Sanitization. Effective bactericidal treatment by a process that provides enough
accumulative heat or concentration of chemicals for enough time to reduce the bacterial
count, including pathogens, to a safe level on utensils and equipment.
Sealed. Free of cracks or other openings that permit the entry or passage of moisture.
Single-service articles. Caps, containers, lids, closures, plates, knives, forks, spoons,
stirrers, paddles, straws, napkins, wrapping materials, toothpicks and similar articles designed
for one-time, one-person use and then discarded.
Tableware.Multiuse eating and drinking utensils including flatware (knives, forks and
spoons).
Temporary food service establishment. Any food service establishment that operates
at a fixed location for a period of time of not more than fourteen (14) consecutive days in
conjunction with a single event or celebration.
Utensils.Any implement used in the storage, preparation, transportation or service of
food.
Wholesome. In sound condition, clean and otherwise suitable for use as human food.
Sec. 14-12. Penalty; compliance with article.
(a) All provisions of this article shall be applicable to all food establishments unless
specifically limited to food processing establishments or to food service establishments.
(b) No food service establishment or food processing establishment shall be operated
within the city unless it conforms with the requirements of this article.
(c) Unless otherwise provided, any person who violates any provision of this article
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of
not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00); provided,
however, if such person is convicted of an offense under this article which offense is also a
violation of Article 4476-5, Section 3, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, such person shall be
subject to a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00); and for the second or subsequent offense shall be subject to a fine of not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or
imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than one year, or both such fine and
imprisonment. However, nothing in this article shall be construed as requiring the health
officer to report minor violations of this article for prosecution whenever the health officer
believes the public interest will be adequately serviced in the circumstances by a warning.
(d) A permit holder shall insure that the food establishment or mobile food unit is in
full compliance with this article at all times.
(e) The person in charge shall insure that the food establishment is operated in full
compliance with this article and that all food is stored, prepared, displayed and served in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
Sec. 14-13. Inspections.
The health officer shall inspect every food establishment located within the city as
often as it is deemed necessary. The health officer may take and examine samples of food,
drink and other substances found on the premises for the detection of unwholesomeness and
adulteration, and may condemn and forbid the sale of, and cause to be removed or destroyed,
any food or drink which is unwholesome or adulterated.
If one or more violations occur which do not present an imminent hazard to the public
health, the health officer shall immediately notify the permit holder thereof and shall make a
second inspection after the lapse of such time as he deems necessary for the deficiencies to be
corrected. Any violations of the same items on the second inspection shall be grounds for
immediate suspension of the permit and/or court action.
In other cases involving situations in which an imminent health hazard does exist,
such as a sewage backup into the establishment or a complete lack of sanitization or
refrigeration, the establishment shall immediately cease food service operations and the
permit shall be suspended.
Whenever a food establishment is required to cease operations under the provisions of
this section, it shall not resume operations until such time as a reinspection determines that
conditions responsible for the requirement to cease operations no longer exist. Opportunity
for reinspection shall be offered within a reasonable time.
Food from food establishments outside the jurisdiction of the City of Temple may be
sold within the City of Temple provided such food establishments maintain a valid permit
issued under Bell County regulations.
The health officer shall post one copy of the inspection report upon a wall inside the
food service establishment, retail food store or mobile food service unit, and such inspection
report shall be displayed in clear view and shall not be defaced or removed except by the
health officer. He shall file one copy of the inspection report with the records of his office.
Sec. 14-14. Application of requirements to itinerant restaurants.
The sanitation requirements set out in this article shall be applicable to itinerant
restaurants, insofar as practicable. The health officer is authorized to make such inspections
of itinerant restaurants as he may deem necessary for the protection of public health and
require such compliance with provisions of this article as will, in his judgment, safeguard the
public health. No itinerant restaurant shall be operated more than ten (10) days in any
calendar year and any operation for a longer period than ten (10) days shall subject such
itinerant restaurant to all the provisions of this article, including, but without limitation,
provisions requiring permits, permanent installations, prescribed equipment and
specifications for floors, screens and all other improvements.
Sec. 14-15. Adoption of state rules.
This article shall be enforced by the health officer in accordance with Article 4476-5,
(Texas Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act), Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, together with the
latest edition of Texas Health Department Rules interpreting the cited statute for food
establishments and retail food stores and the provisions of this article. The cited rules as they
now exist and as they may be amended from time to time, are adopted by reference and made
a part of this article except as otherwise provided herein and will be used as the basis for
required food sanitation standards.
Sec. 14-16. Submission of plans.
Contents and approval. Whenever a food establishment is constructed or remodeled
and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, three (3) sets
of properly prepared plans and specifications for each construction, remodeling or alteration
is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement and
construction materials of work areas, and the type of proposed fixed equipment and facilities.
The health officer shall approve the plans and specifications if they meet the requirements of
this article. No food establishment shall be constructed, remodeled or altered except in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the health officer. If any changes are to
be made concerning proposed layout, arrangement and construction materials of work areas,
and the type of proposed fixed equipment and facilities after the first set of approved plans
and specifications have been delivered to the owner or contractor, such changes shall be
shown on revised plans and specifications and shall be reviewed and approved by the health
officer before such changes are made and shall appear on all three (3) original sets of plans
and specifications.
Disposition of approved plans and specifications. One set of the approved plans and
specifications will be given to the owner or contractor responsible for the construction of the
establishment. A second set of approved plans and specifications will be transferred to the
representative of the health officer responsible for the pre-operational inspection and will be
signed over to the establishment owner by said representative upon completion of
construction and issuance of a permit. A third set of approved plans and specifications will
remain on file with the health officer.
Pre-operational inspection. Whenever plans and specifications are required by this
section of this article to be submitted to the health officer, the health officer or his authorized
representative shall inspect the food establishment prior to its beginning operation to
determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications and with the requirements
of this article.
Additional requirements. The requirements of this section shall be in addition to all
applicable requirements of the Building Code of the City of Temple.
Sec. 14-17. Extensions.
A food establishment licensed at the time of enactment of this article which must
undertake alterations or remodeling of its present facilities in order to comply with the
minimum requirements of this article may apply for an extension of time to complete such
work. Upon such application, the health officer shall grant a reasonable time, not to exceed
six (6) months, for completion of such alterations or remodeling if good cause is shown as to
why the necessary changes could not be accomplished between the time this article was
finally passed and the date this article became effective.
Sec. 14-18. Construction of article; effective date.
(a) This article shall be liberally construed and applied to promote its underlying
purpose of protecting the public health.
(b) The provisions of this article shall become effective ninety (90) days from passage
by the city council of the City of Temple, except section 14-37 shall become effective twelve
(12) months from passage of this article.
Secs. 14-19, 14-20. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. FOOD DEALER'S PERMIT
Sec. 14-21. Required.
No person shall operate a food processing establishment, food service establishment,
temporary food establishment or mobile food unit who does not possess a valid permit issued
to him by the health officer. Such permit shall be known as a "food dealer's permit." Only a
person who complies with the requirements of this article shall be entitled to receive or retain
such a permit. Permits are not transferable from one person or place to another person or
place. A valid permit shall be posted in view of the public in every food service establishment
and every temporary food service establishment. Permits for temporary food service
establishments shall be issued for a period of time not to exceed fourteen (14) consecutive
days. All "food dealer's permits" shall remain the property of the Bell County Health
Department.
Sec. 14-22. Application.
Any person desiring to obtain a food dealer's permit shall make written application for
such permit on forms provided by the health officer. Such application shall include the
applicant's full name and post office address and whether such applicant is an individual, firm
or corporation, and, if a partnership, the names of the partners, together with their addresses;
the location and type of proposed food processing or food service establishment; and the
signature of the applicant or applicants. If the application is for a temporary food service
establishment, no permit shall be granted unless the application also sets out the inclusive
dates of the proposed operations, and the name, address and telephone number of the owner
or owners of the property where the temporary food service establishment is to be located,
and attached to such application is a statement signed by the owner(s) of the property or his
authorized agent stating that arrangements have been made for the proper disposal of all
rubbish, trash and garbage and for maintaining the property free from litter and nuisance
during the total period of operation up to and including any cleanup time required to remove
all rubbish, trash, garbage and litter resulting from the food service. A description of such
arrangements and the attendant facilities must be included.
Sec. 14-23. Inspection of establishment; issuance of permit.
Prior to approval of an application for a permit, the health officer shall inspect the
proposed establishment and premises to determine compliance with the provisions of this
article.
The health officer shall issue a permit to the applicant if inspection reveals that the
proposed food establishment complies with the requirements of this article.
Sec. 14-24. Fees.
Fee due upon issuance or renewal.At the time of issuance of an original food dealer's
permit and each renewal thereof, the person requesting the permit shall pay the city controller
or other designated city official a permit fee for one complete year from the date of issuance.
Food dealer's permit. The fee for a dealer's permit shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00)
per year. Food service establishments which operate exclusively as a part of a hospital,
nursing home, day care center, home or center for the aged, or any other medical care
institution or facility that is licensed by the State of Texas, or as a public school or college, a
church kitchen or a recognized fraternal organization shall be charged no fee; however, they
must otherwise comply with the applicable provisions of this article.
Mobile food service units.At the time of issuance of an original food dealer's permit to
the operator of a mobile food service unit and each renewal thereof, the person requesting
said food dealer's permit shall pay the city controller or other designated city official a fee of
five dollars ($5.00) for one complete year from the date of issuance.
Sec. 14-25. Permit valid for one year.
A food dealer's permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance and shall be
renewed on or before the first day after the expiration date of the previous permit.
Sec. 14-26. Suspension of permit.
The health officer may suspend any food dealer's permit with such notice as is
reasonable under the circumstances, if the permit holder does not comply with the
requirements of this article, or if the operation of the food processing or food service
establishment or the mobile food service unit otherwise constitutes a substantial hazard to
public health. Suspension is suspended, food processing and/or food service operations shall
immediately cease.
Sec. 14-27. Notice of suspension of permit.
Whenever a permit is suspended, written notice shall be given to the permit holder or
the person in charge or any employee or agent of the food service establishment or mobile
food service unit. Such notice shall set forth:
(1) The specific condition(s) in the food establishment or mobile unit which are in
violation of this article;
(2) The specific condition(s) which constitute a substantial hazard to public
health;
(3) That a hearing will be held before the health officer or his designate at the
request of permittee;
(4) The date, time and place of such hearing;
(5) That the permit holder may appear in person and/or be represented by counsel
and he may present testimony and may cross-examine all witnesses.
Such hearing shall be held not later than ten (10) days after the date the permit is
suspended.
Sec. 14-28. Removal of permit.
Whenever a permit is suspended, it shall be physically removed from the premises by
the health officer and retained at the health department until the suspension has terminated.
Sec. 14-29. Hearings.
All hearings shall be held by the director of the Bell County Health Department or his
designated representative. Such official shall be referred to as the hearing officer. However,
the director of the Bell County Health Department shall not designate any person or persons
to perform the duties of hearing officer under this section who has participated in the
inspection or inspections of such food establishment or mobile unit, or who has prior
knowledge of the allegations or circumstances discovered in such inspection or inspections
except that the person designated as hearing officer may, prior to the hearing, receive a copy
of the notice given to the permit holder or the person in charge.
All hearings shall be conducted under rules consistent with the nature of the
proceedings; provided, however, the following rules shall apply to such hearings:
(1) All parties shall have the right to representation by a licensed attorney although
an attorney is not required.
(2) Each party may present witnesses in his own behalf.
(3) Each party has the right to cross-examine all witnesses.
(4) Only evidence presented before the hearing officer at such hearing may be
considered in rendering the order.
If the permit holder fails to appear at the hearing at the time, place and date specified,
the health department shall present sufficient evidence to establish a prima facie case
showing violation of this article or conditions constituting a hazard to public health which
formed the basis of the suspension of the permit.
If the hearing officer finds that the food service establishment, food processing
establishment or mobile unit was, in fact, in violation of this article or that it constituted a
hazard to public health, the hearing officer shall make written findings of fact and shall order
the permit suspended until all violations of this article are corrected and any conditions
constituting a hazard to public health are eliminated. A copy of the findings and order of the
hearings officer shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the permit holder.
If the hearing officer finds that the public interest will be adequately protected by a
warning or other penalties authorized under this article, he may reinstate the permit.
Whenever the reasons for a suspension no longer exist, the permit holder or person in
charge shall notify the health officer that the conditions under which the permit was
suspended have been corrected and that an inspection is requested. Such inspection shall be
conducted as soon as possible after receiving the request and in no event later than three (3)
regular working days after the receipt of the request for inspection.
Sec. 14-30. Revocation of food dealer's permit.
A food dealer's permit may be revoked if:
(1) The permit holder or his agents or employees interfere with an inspection of
the food establishment by the health officer or his authorized agents, or
(2) There are repeated or serious violations of the applicable portions of this
article, or
(3) There are repeated or serious violations of federal or state food laws or laws
regulating food establishments as defined in this article, or
(4) In the case of mobile food service units if the permit holder or his agent has not
reported an accident to the health officer within twenty-four (24) hours of the
time the accident occurred if such accident resulted in the damage of the water
system, waste retention tank, food service equipment or any facility which may
result in the contamination of the food being carried or any damage which
results in a violation of the provisions of this article.
Prior to revocation, written notice shall be given to the permit holder or person in
charge. Such notice shall set forth:
(1) The grounds upon which the city will seek revocation of the permit,
(2) The specific violations of this article or of federal or state law upon which the
city will rely in seeking revocation of the permit,
(3) That a hearing will be held before the director or his designated agents,
(4) The date, time and place of such hearing,
(5) That the permit holder may appear in person and/or be represented by counsel,
may present testimony and may cross-examine all witnesses.
Such hearing shall be held in accordance with section 14-29. If the permit holder fails
to appear at the hearing at the time, place and date specified, the health department shall
present sufficient evidence to establish a prima facie case showing that an act or acts have
been committed which constitutes grounds for revocation of a permit.
After completion of a hearing, the hearing officer shall make written findings as to
whether or not grounds exist for revocation of the permit. If the hearing officer finds that
grounds do exist for revocation of the permit, he shall revoke such. A copy of the written
findings shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the permit holder. If the
address of the permit holder is unknown, or if such findings are returned and undelivered,
such findings shall be served on the person in charge of the food establishment or mobile
food service unit.
If the hearing officer revokes the permit, written notice of such revocation shall be
served on the permit holder or the person in charge with a copy of the findings.
Upon service of a written notice that the permit has been revoked as provided herein,
all food operations shall cease immediately.
Whenever a permit is revoked, it shall be physically removed from the premises or
vehicle by the health officer.
In the event a permit is revoked, the city shall not be liable to the permit holder for any
refund of any part of the permit fees. Reinstatement of a permit which has been revoked shall
require application and payment of a permit fee as if it were an initial application.
Sec. 14-31. Service of notice.
Any notice provided in this article may be served by personal delivery or by certified
mail, return receipt
Secs. 14-32--14-35. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. FOOD SERVICE MANAGER'S CERTIFICATION
Sec. 14-36. food service manager's certification generally.
There shall be a program of food service manager's certification conducted under the
direction of the director of the Bell County Health Department. Such a program shall have as
its primary goal the training of persons in managerial positions within the food service
industry in safe handling practices, including knowledge of Temple's Food Service Sanitation
Ordinance, and the Texas Department of Health Rules on Food Service Sanitation. Training
shall be accomplished by means of a special course which will be made available to those
persons seeking certification. Certification shall be accomplished after all course
requirements have been met and the applicant has demonstrated by means of an examination
that he possesses the required minimum essential knowledge as determined by the director.
Sec. 14-37. Certification required; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating, directing or managing any food
establishment, catering operation, or any place or vehicle regulated by this article where food
or drink if manufactured, produced, processed, prepared or otherwise manipulated, to fail to
employ or fail to keep in his employ a manager, assistant manager, supervisor, or other person
in charge of said establishment who has in his possession a valid and current food service
manager's certification card issued to him by the director in accord with the provisions of this
division of the article; provided, however, convenience stores, if such store is under the
supervision of a food service manager who so supervises not more than eight (8) such stores,
and public schools and colleges shall not be required to have a certified food service manager
in charge of such store or such school.
Sec. 14-38. Operator of temporary food service establishment exempt.
Persons applying for a permit to operate a temporary food service establishment shall
be exempt from the food service manager's certification requirements if such applicant can
show evidence of an adequate understanding of the provisions dealing with temporary food
service establishments, and an adequate understanding of satisfactory operating practices and
is not simultaneously associated with another food service operation in the city or its
immediate environs.
Sec. 14-40. Application.
Any person desiring food service manager's certification shall make written
application for said certification on forms provided by the director. Such application shall
include the applicant's full name and post office address; identifying features such as color of
hair, eyes, height, weight, sex, age; a summary of the applicant's experience regarding food
service management; the name and address of the establishment where the applicant is
currently employed; a description of duties; and the signature and title of the applicant.
A completed application for food service manager's certification shall serve as a
request for enrollment in a special course of training conducted under the direction of the
director.
All applications for food service manager's certification must be accompanied by the
appropriate fee as set forth in section 14-45.
The health officer may deny an application for a food service manager's certification if
any persons knowingly makes any false, fraudulent or unlawful statement on the application.
Sec. 14-41. Other courses approved.
Those agencies, institutions or other entities wishing to conduct a course of training
for the purpose of food service manager's certification may do so if the course currculum and
instructors have been approved by the director. In any event, all examinations for certification
are to be administered by the Bell County Health Department.
Sec. 14-42. Waiver of course attendance, examination.
The requirement that an applicant for food service manager's certification attend a
course of training and pass an examination shall be waived if the applicant has been
employed at least three (3) full consecutive years as a food service manager or in a similar
position of authority, immediately preceding the effective date of the article or if the applicant
is a graduate of at least a two-year program in restaurant and/or hotel management approved
by the director. The director shall approve such program only if he finds that the standards
and curriculum are such as to insure that the students are knowledgeable of safe food
handling practices; provided, however, any appliicant must attend a course of training and
pass an examination for certification if there have been repeated violations of the health code
in the food establishment(s) where the applicant has been in a position where he had
authority to prevent or eliminate such violations.
Sec. 14-43. Course and examination.
The special course of training for food service manager's certification shall be at least
ten (10) hours in length and no more than twelve (12) hours in length.
Courses will be scheduled periodically in Bell County to allow all qualified individuals
the opportunity for training.
All persons completing the course of training for food service manager's certification
shall be required to demonstrate by means of an examination that they possess a minimum
essential knowledge of safe food handling practices, including an acceptable knowledge of
Temple's Food Service Sanitation Ordinance and the Texas Department of Health Rule of
Food Service Sanitation. A passing score for this examination shall be at least seventy-five
(75) points out of a possible one hundred (100). If an applicant fails to pass the required
examination for certification, he must take or repeat the course of training before taking
another examination.
Sec. 14-44. Certification identification card.
A person may be issued a food service manager's certification if he has satisfactorily
completed the requirements set forth in section 14-40, 14-41 and/or 14-42. Such certification
shall be in the form of an identification card and shall include the applicant's full name and
post office address; identifying features such as height, weight and age; the signature of the
person certified; the signature of the director; the date issued and the expiration date; and a
photograph of the person certified.
A person possessing a food service manager's certification card shall have said card on
his person as proof of certification at all times while on duty.
A person possessing a food service manager's certification card shall present said card
for examination when requested to do so by the health officer or his duly authorized
representative.
Valid food service manager's certification cards remain the property of the Bell
County Health Department and may be required to be surrendered to the health officer to be
voided when such as been revoked.
Sec. 14-45. Fees.
Fees for food service manager's certification and each renewal thereof are as follows:
(1) Food service manager's certificate. The fee for certification during the first
twelve (12) months immediately following adoption of this article will be
fifteen dollars ($15.00). Fees for certification in subsequent years will be
determined annually by the Bell County Board of Health and will not exceed
actual costs. All such fees will be paid to the director, Bell County Health
Department, for use in meeting reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by
the Bell County Health Department in administering the certification program.
This fee is required regardless of whether or not the course requirement is
waived. Fees are refundable only if the applicant's application is denied by the
health officer. In no other instance shall fees be refundable.
(2) Replacement of certification card. An individual who has lost a valid, current
food service manager's certification card may obtain a replacement from the
health officer for a fee of two dollars ($2.00).
Sec. 14-46. Valid for three years.
A food service manager's certification shall be valid for three (3) years from the date
of issuance and shall be renewed on or before the first day after the expiration date of the
current certification.
Any person desiring to renew a food service manager's certificate shall make
application on forms provided by the director not more than thirty (30) days prior to nor later
than thirty (30) days after the date of expiration of the certificate. Such person shall set forth
his full name, post office address, identifying features such as color of hair, eyes, weight, sex
and age; the name and address of the establishment where the person is employed; his title; a
description of his duties and his signature. Such application for renewal of a food service
manager's certificate must be accompanied by payment of the fee as set forth in section 14-
45.
Sec. 14-47. Revocation.
A food service manager's certificate may be revoked if:
(1) The food service manager interferes with an inspection of the food
establishment by the health officer or his authorized agents.
(2) There are repeated or serious violations of this article in the food establishment
at times the food service manager is in charge.
(3) There are repeated or serious violations of federal or state food laws or laws
regulating the operation of the food establishment at times the food service
manager is in charge.
Prior to revocation of a food service manager's certificate, written notice shall be given
to the food service manager and to the holder of the food dealer's permit for the establishment
in which the food service manager is employed. Such notice shall set forth:
(1) The grounds upon which the health department will see revocation of the
certificate.
(2) The specific violations of this article or of federal or state laws upon which the
department will rely in seeking revocation of the certificate.
(3) That a hearing will be held before the director or his designated agents.
(4) The date, time and place of such hearing.
(5) That the food service manager may appear in person and/or be represented by
counsel, may present testimony and may cross-examine all witnesses.
Such hearing shall be held in accordance with section 14-29. If the food service
manager fails to appear at the hearing at the time, place and date specified, the department
shall present sufficient evidence to establish prima facie case showing that an act or acts have
been committed which constitute grounds for revocation of the certificate.
After completion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make written findings as to
whether or not grounds exist for revocation of the certificate. If the hearing officer finds that
grounds do exist for revocation of the certificate, he shall revoke such. A copy of the written
findings shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the food service manager
and to the holder of the food dealer's permit for the establishment in which the food service
manager is employed.
If the hearing officer revokes the certificate, written notice of such revocation shall be
served on the food service manager and the holder of the food dealer's permit with a copy of
the findings.
Upon receiving written notice that the food service manager's certificate has been
revoked, the food service manager shall submit the certificate to the health officer. In the
event a certificate is revoked, the health department shall not be liable for any refund of the
fee paid for the certificate.
A person whose food service manager's certificate has been revoked shall not be
granted a new certificate until he has attended a course of training and passed the required
examination subsequent to the revocation and met all requirements of an initial applicant.
Sec. 14-48. Fraudulent statement to obtain certification.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false, fraudulent or
untruthful statement on any application for food service manager's certification or in any way
knowingly conceal any material fact or give or use any fictitious name in order to secure or
aid in securing a food service manager's certification required by this division. Any such food
service manager's certification card so secured shall be void.
Sec. 14-49. Fraudulent use.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fraudulently make use of, in any manner for his
own or another's benefit or advantage, a food service manager's certification which has not
been duly issued him in accordance with the provisions of this division.
Secs. 14-50--14-64. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. FOOD WORKER'S REGISTRATION
Sec. 14-65. Definitions.
For the purpose of this division, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them:
Domestic servant. A "domestic servant" is any person employed in any home, house,
dwelling, apartment house or any other place, except hotels and tourist courts, restaurants,
cafes, nursing homes and public eating places, where any person or persons reside in the city,
who, as a part of his or her duties, is required to prepare, serve or handle food or food
products.
Food. The term "food" shall include all articles used by man for food, drink, flavoring,
confectionery and condiment, whether simple, mixed or compounded.
Food establishment. The term "food establishment" shall mean any hotel, restaurant,
cafe, tavern, grocery store, bakery, fruit stand, bottling plant, or any other place where food or
drink is handled, stored, packed, served or sold in the city.
Food worker. The term "food worker" shall mean any person employed or working in
a food establishment who handles food and/or drink during preparation or serving, or who
comes in contact with any eating, drinking or cooking utensils, or who works in a room or
rooms in which food or drink is prepared, served or stored. Professionally trained personnel
such as dieticians, nutritionists and certified managers or supervisors are excluded from this
definition.
Sec. 14-66. Food workers--Employers not to hire until certain requirements are met.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association,
managing or conducting any food establishment where food or drink or containers therefor of
any kind are manufactured, transferred, prepared, stored, packaged, served, sold or otherwise
handled, to work or employ any food worker until such food worker has fully complied with
all state laws and regulations and all city ordinances now or hereafter enacted and with all the
provisions of this division nor until such food worker has received a food worker's
registration certificate from the Bell County Health Department which is valid at the time of
such employment.
Sec. 14-67. Same--Employees to obtain food worker's registration card.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any food worker, as defined in this division, to work
for any person, firm, corporation or association as a food worker in the city without having in
his or her possession a food worker's registration certificate issued to him or her by the Bell
County Health Department which is valid at the time of such employment.
Sec. 14-68. Domestic servants--Eligible for training and examination.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or association or group
of persons to employ any domestic servant handling food as defined in this division until
such domestic servant has fully complied with all state laws and regulations and all city
ordinances now or hereafter enacted and with all provisions of this division nor until such
domestic servant has received a food worker's registration card from the Bell County Health
Department which is valid at the time of such employment. Employees of private individuals
shall be eligible for training and examination under this division.
Sec. 14-69. Same--Employees to obtain food worker's registration card.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any domestic servant, as defined in this division, to
work for any person, firm, corporation or association as a domestic servant in the city without
having in his or her possession a food worker's registration card issued to him or her by the
Bell County Health Department which is valid at the time of such employment.
Sec. 14-70. Orientation and examination of applicant.
No food worker's registration card shall be issued by the Bell County Health
Department to any person required by law or by this article to have or exhibit such certificate
until the applicant shall have met the following requirements:
(1) Complete a personal health statement and if deemed necessary by the director,
Bell County Health Department, submit to a physical examination by a
practicing physician licensed by the State of Texas. A written report of such
examination shall be returned to the Bell County Health Department for
evaluation and filing prior to any issuance of a food worker's registration
certificate to the applicant involved.
(2) Complete a two-hour orientation in basic food health principles, for either
restaurant or grocery store employees as appropriate, under the supervision of
the director, Bell County Health Department. Each orientation will be designed
to be applicable to employees of restaurants and taverns, or grocery stores
respectively. The schedule, time and location of orientation sites will be
announced by the director, Bell County Health Department. The primary
emphasis of this orientation will be directed toward the food workers' behavior
when working in a public food establishment rather than extensive training
which is the responsibility of each food service manager.
(3) Upon completion of the prescribed orientation and the necessary medical and
administrative processing, each individual will be issued a food worker
identification card which will be displayed by the employee while on duty at
the place of employment and left posted in a conspicuous place in the place of
employment while off duty.
(4) Managers, assistant managers, shift supervisors and other food service
personnel who have completed the prescribed manager's certification will not
be required to comply with the provisions of this division.
(5) Currently issued food worker registration certificates in the hands of
employees below supervisory level will be considered valid until expiration.
(6) This requirement of the registration process may be waived at the discretion of
the director, Bell County Health Department, provided the establishment
applies for the waiver in writing, has in-service employee training in basic
hygiene and food sanitation and otherwise meets the director's requirements as
to frequency, scope, type of training and instructor qualifications. When such
waivers are granted, the manager of the establishment will be notified in
writing of such approval. Retention of this waiver, when granted, will be
subject to maintaining acceptable standards of training and sanitation within
the establishment.
Sec. 14-71. Registration cards--Issuance.
All other identification cards will be valid for one- or two-year periods, at which time
the food workers will complete a refresher orientation of two (2) hours in food service
sanitation. Cards will then be renewed for a period of one or two (2) years. Cards will be
renewable thereafter at one- or two-year intervals provided the applicant is free of
communicable disease and complies with other provisions of section 14-70 and section 14-
76.
Sec. 14-72. Same--Term.
A food worker's registration card or a domestic servant's registration card issued under
this division shall be valid for twelve (12) or twenty-four (24) months from the time of
complying with the provisions of section 14-70.
Sec. 14-73. Same--Renewal.
Each such registration card issued under this division must be renewed by each such
applicant each twelve (12) or twenty-four (24) months by the same procedure as outlined
above in this division for original cards.
Sec. 14-74. Procedure when employees suspected of being ill with or carrying
communicable disease.
(a) If the holder of a restaurant or grocery store permit or any of his employees
suspects that any food worker has contracted any disease in communicable form or has
become a carrier of such disease, he shall notify the health officer immediately.
(b) When the health officer has reason to believe that there exists a possibility of
transmission of infection from a restaurant or grocery store food worker, he is authorized to
require any or all of the following measures:
(1) The immediate exclusion of the employee, as an employee, from all restaurants
or grocery stores.
(2) The immediate closing of the restaurant or grocery store concerned until no
further danger of disease outbreak exists.
(3) Adequate medical examinations of the employee and his associates, with such
laboratory examinations as may be indicated.
Sec. 14-75. Authority of health officer to pick up certificate and require reexamination
of holder.
If the city health officer or his representative has reason to believe that any food
worker has become infected with any disease that may be contagious or communicable, the
city health officer or his representative or the Bell County Health Department is empowered
to pick up the food worker's card and require such person, individual or food worker to
secure an adequate examination of himself or herself by a licensed physician, who resides in
Bell County, stating that such examination has been made and that to the best of his or her
knowledge the person examined was found, on that date, to be free of any transmissible
condition of any disease or local infection commonly transmitted through the handling of
food or drink. Such examinations shall be actual and thorough and conducted within the
framework of practical scientific procedures for the determination of the existence of
communicable disease which may be transmissible through the handling of food or drink.
Sec. 14-76. Fees.
Fees for food worker's registration card and each renewal thereof are as follows:
Food worker's registration card. The fee for certification during the first twelve (12)
months immediately following adoption of this division will be six dollars ($6.00) for a oneyear
card, or ten dollars ($10.00) for a two-year card. fees for registration in subsequent years
will be determined annually by the Bell County Board of Health and will not exceed
reasonable and necessary costs. All such fees will be paid to the director, Bell County Health
Department, for use in meeting reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the Bell
County Health Department in administering the registration program.
Prepayment. At the option of the food service establishment manager or owner,
registration fees for all food workers may be prepaid by the management on an annual or
biannual basis. If this option is elected in lieu of paying individually, the annual fee will be
calculated by multiplying the regular number of employees by six dollars ($6.00) with the
total adjusted by the addition of one-third of such total in order to compensate for the
turnover within the work force. If such fees are paid biannually, the foregoing procedures
will be followed except that ten dollars ($10.00) will be substituted for the six dollars ($6.00)
fee. This procedure will be arranged with the director, Bell County Health Department.
Refunds. Fees are refundable only if the applicant's application is denied by the health
officer. In no other instance shall fees be refundable.
Replacement of a registration card. An individual who has lost a valid, current food
worker's registration card may obtain a replacement from the health officer for a fee of two
dollars ($2.00).
Sec. 14-77. Reserved.
Chapter 15
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section 15-1. Definitions.
Section 15-2. Containers Required--For Wet Garbage.
Section 15-3. Wet Garbage to be Placed in Proper Container.
Section 15-4. Condition of Container.
Section 15-5. All Containers to be Kept Covered.
Section 15-6. Rocks and Dirt not to be Placed in Containers.
Section 15-7. Disposal of Manure, Offal, Remodeling Material and Other
Waste Not Collected by City.
Section 15-8. Unauthorized Usage of City Furnished Containers.
Section 15-9. Preparation of Brush, Shrubs, Tree Trimmings and Cuttings
for Collection by City.
Section 15-10. Collection by City Generally; Private Collection of Brush,
Etc.
Section 15-11. Placement of Containers for Collection.
Section 15-12. Collection Charges.
Section 15-13. Billing; Failure to Pay.
Section 15-14. No Credit for Vacancy of Premises.
Section 15-15. Junk and Bulk Items.
Section 15-16. Streets and Alleys not to be Used for Storage.
Section 15-17. Salvaging Prohibited.
Section 15-18. Inspections to Enforce Ordinance.
Section 15-19. Hauling Garbage to Sanitary Landfill.
Section 15-20. Fees and Use of Sanitary Landfill.
Section 15-21. Exemption from Residential Service Requirement.
Section 15-22. Collection of Solid Waste Outside the City.
Section 15-23. Carry out service for residents.
Section 15-24. Garbage only accounts.
Section 15-25. Rental Properties, evictions, move-outs.
Section 15-26. Cul-de-sacs.
Section 15-27. Lost of Damaged Container.
Section 15-28. Recycling Drop-off Center.
Section 15-29. Curbside Recycling Program.
Section 15-30. Curbside Container Replacement.
Section 15-31. All Recycling Containers to be Kept Covered.
Section 15-32. Inspections to Enforce Ordinance.
Section 15-33. Recycling Collections Outside the City.
Section 15-34. Recycling Carry Out Service for Residents.
Section 15-35. Curbside Recycling for Garbage Only Accounts.
Section 15-36. Curbside Recycling Acceptable Materials.
Section 15-37. City Confiscation of Recycling Container.
Section 15-38. Non-Participation in the Curbside Recycling Program.
Section 15-39. Fees.
Section 15-40. Curbside Recycling by City Generally.
1
CHAPTER 15
GARBAGE, REFUSE, AND RECYCLING
Section 15-1. Definitions.
"Approved type garbage can" as used herein, means a receptacle furnished by the City
of Temple.
“Approved Recycling Container” as used herein, means a recycling receptacle
furnished by the City of Temple.
"Business" as used herein, means any commercial operation, or any usage of property
for other than residential purposes, involving the employment of any individual, or the sale or
manufacture of any product.
“Collection Cycle” as used herein, means those days of the week or month that are
specified by the City for the collection of household garbage, brush, shrubs, tree trimmings,
yard waste, furniture, appliances, or junk and bulk items.
"Dry garbage" as used herein, means nonputrescible solid waste (excluding ashes),
consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste materials; combustible rubbish
includes paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber (but not tires), plastics, yard
trimmings, leaves and similar materials; noncombustible rubbish includes glass crockery, tin
cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and like materials which will not burn at ordinary
incinerator temperatures (1600?-1800? Fahrenheit).
“Out of Cycle Collection” as used herein, means the collection by the City of
household garbage, brush, shrubs, tree trimmings, yard waste, furniture, appliances, junk and
bulk items on any day other than the specified collection cycle days.
“Recycling” as used herein, means a process by which materials that have served their
intended use or are scrapped, discarded, used, surplus, or obsolete are collected, separated,
composted, or processed, and returned to use in the form of raw materials in the production
of new products.
“Recycling Drop-off Center” as used herein, means a location, either temporary or
permanent, established for the receipt of recyclable solid waste including, but not limited to,
aluminum, cardboard, metal, paper, glass, and plastic.
“Recycling Program” as used herein, means the organized collection of recyclable
materials for the purpose of resource recovery and recycling in pursuit of the goals of the
City.
"Small Quantity Commercial Solid Waste Generator" as used herein, means a place of
business that generates a volume of non-wet garbage that will not require over two (2)
pickups per week of a one-half () cubic yard container (an example would be a small barber
shop, small fix-it shop, or small business), as determined by the Solid Waste Division.
“Special Pickup” as used herein, means the out of cycle collection of solid waste by
the City at the request of the customer and, for which, a fee is assessed.
"Wet (putrescible) garbage" as used herein, means animal or vegetable matter, such as
waste material from kitchens, grocery stores, butcher shops, restaurants, cafes, hotels,
2
rooming and boarding houses, such as scraps of meat, bread, bones, peelings of fruit and
vegetables.
Section 15-2. Containers Required--For Wet and Dry Garbage.
(a) Each owner, occupant, tenant or lessee using and occupying any residence, building,
house or structure within the corporate limits of the City as a place of abode or as a
place of business is hereby required to keep and maintain, at all times and at a
convenient place at his house, dwelling or place of business, if his business is of a
type which accumulates wet and dry garbage in connection with the operation of
same, adequate disposable garbage containers in sufficient numbers to properly
receive and hold all wet and dry garbage, which includes grass clippings and leaves,
being disposed of from his premises. Each such garbage container shall be made of
plastic or other disposable material and of good sound construction and shall be
capable of being secured from leaking and be flytight.
(b) In areas of the City served by City furnished containers, the disposable containers will
be placed, unbroken, into the furnished containers.
(c) It is the responsibility of the customer to keep their container clean (residential only).
Section 15-3. Wet Garbage to be Placed in Proper Container.
Each person in the City having wet garbage to be disposed of is hereby required to
place the same in a garbage container meeting the requirements of Section 15-2, and all wet
garbage shall at all times be stored in such a container. It is hereby declared to be unlawful
for any person to place any wet garbage on the ground or in an open box or container or to
store same in any receptacle other than a container meeting the requirements of Section 15-2.
Section 15-4. Condition of Container
All containers shall be the property of the City and must not be painted, marked,
abused, mutilated, altered, or modified in any way. Abuse and damage to a container by
customers shall result in an assessment equal to the replacement cost of the container and/or
time and materials involved to repair such container. Examples of abuse include, but are not
limited to, overloading the container beyond the rated capacity, fire damage caused by hot
coals and/or ashes, painting or marking the container in any manner.
Section 15-5. All Containers to be Kept Covered.
All wet and dry garbage that is to be disposed of shall be placed inside the City
provided container in such a manner that the lid will close to prevent litter, spillage or entry
of vectors. No items shall be draped over, hanging out or protruding from the container.
Items that will not fit inside the container shall be broken down into smaller pieces that will
fit inside or be placed at the curb for bulk item collection in accordance with Section 15-15.
Overloaded containers shall be subject to an additional fee charged to the monthly utility bill
for that residence. Lids shall only be opened while emptying additional garbage in such
containers or while an authorized person is removing such garbage or unloading the same for
disposal.
Section 15-6. Rocks and Dirt not to be Placed in Containers.
3
No rocks or dirt shall be placed in any containers maintained in accord with this
Chapter.
Section 15-7. Disposal of Manure, Offal, Remodeling Material and Other Waste
Not Collected by City.
Manure from private stables, offal and refuse from animals and fowl, night soil, dead
animals and fowl, refuse from the remodeling of buildings, rocks, dirt, concrete and all other
waste not mentioned in Section 15-1 must be kept in a suitable receptacle separate from the
containers required by this Chapter for garbage and not dumped in the alleys or retained on
the premises so as to become a nuisance, and the same shall be disposed of by the owner
thereof. It shall be the duty of the Director of Solid Waste Services to see that such refuse is
properly disposed of by the owner when so ordered. Such refuse shall be hauled away from
the premises of the owner at his own expense and by his own means; and such refuse shall
not be considered "garbage" and shall not be picked up by the garbage trucks of the City
except as part of the roll off system.
Section 15-8. Unauthorized Usage of City Furnished Containers.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation placing garbage or refuse in a container
not specifically assigned to that person, firm or corporation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Section 15-9. Preparation of Brush, Shrubs, Tree Trimmings and Cuttings for
Collection by City.
(a) Items placed within eight (8) feet of the curb line of the street shall be considered a
request for service.
(b) All leaves and lawn cuttings, tree trimmings and cuttings shall be placed in the City
furnished containers insofar as is possible and the container's capacity will allow.
(c) All other brush, shrubs and tree cuttings that cannot be effectively disposed of in the
container shall be placed behind the curb within three (3) feet of the curb line of the
street. Items cannot be placed under any low lines or wires or tree limbs and must be
at least 6 feet from any other object (mail box, car, garbage containers, etc.).
(d) Brush and tree trimmings shall be placed in a separate pile from any bagged or boxed
items or bulky items. Mixed brush and bulk at the curb will constitute a special pickup
and a special pickup fee will be assessed.
(e) A special pickup may be requested and/or required for out of cycle brush/bulk
collection or to pickup items that are not normally collected with this service
(remodeling, demolition or building materials or when there is no water service at
location). Setting out an item on a “non-cycle” day will constitute a request for service
and special pickup charges shall apply. Special pickup charges are set by resolution of
the City Council.
(f) Private (professional/commercial) tree trimmers must register their businesses with
the City and will be required to haul their cuttings to the landfill or other site
designated by the Director of Solid Waste Services.
4
(g) Homeowners are encouraged to practice backyard composting and the Don’t Bag It
Programs for grass clippings, leaves and vegetation.
(h) Utility companies franchised by the City in easements or right-of-way accepted by the
City or otherwise authorized to provide utility service are exempted from the
provisions of this ordinance for the purposes of trimming/removing trees for
emergency conditions that endanger public safety and welfare by interfering with
utility service or during the course of reestablishing utility service. Franchised utilities
will coordinate emergency operations with the Director of Solid Waste Services.
Utilities will not be charged for disposal of emergency response brush. Utility
companies are required to haul their trimmings due to routine maintenance and
dispose of or recycle the trimmings.
Section 15-10. Collection by City Generally; Private Collection of Brush, Etc.
The collection of garbage in the City shall be the responsibility of the Solid Waste
Division, the employees of which shall make periodic garbage pickups throughout the City
from the garbage containers provided by the City as required by this Chapter. It shall be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation other than employees of the Solid Waste
Division to collect garbage or refuse in the City without having first obtained written
authority, by contract, from the City. Such contract shall provide the extent of collection and
other authority to such person, firm or corporation as the City may deem appropriate. All
rates of collection shall be regulated by the City Council by resolution. The private collection
of brush, shrubs, leaves, grass and tree trimmings and cuttings for hire or otherwise shall be
allowed, notwithstanding the provisions of this section. Private (professional/commercial)
tree trimmers must register their businesses with the City and are required to haul their
cuttings to the landfill or other site designated by the Director of Solid Waste Services.
Section 15-11. Placement of Containers for Collection.
The owner, occupant or lessee of any premises within the corporate limits of the City
shall maintain the garbage containers as outlined in this section:
(a) The City will, in selected locations as determined by the Director of Solid Waste
Services and approved by the Director of Public Works, place containers of varying
capacity for the collection of garbage. Each person, firm or corporation shall be
notified by the Director of Solid Waste Services of the container location assigned to
that person, firm or corporation. The use of other containers except by permission of
Solid Waste Services is not permitted.
The criteria for placement of containers will be as follows:
(i) Containers will be placed in the alleys in the central area to serve all business
activities.
(ii) Additional containers will be placed in the alleys serving residential accounts
to the extent that they can economically be serviced.
(b) City-furnished containers in alleys shall conform to the following requirements:
5
(i) The Director of Solid Waste Services shall place the appropriate sized
containers in such a manner that they will serve three (3) or more residential
accounts.
(ii) The allocation of containers for commercial activities will be on a volumeneeded
basis. Where there are a number of small volume businesses
contiguously located, the Director of Solid Waste Services shall place an
appropriate sized container to serve these commercial accounts. Where the
volume of garbage from any commercial account is sufficient to justify a
separate container for that establishment, the Director of Solid Waste Services
shall so place a container at that location.
(c) Where there is not an open alley abutting the rear property line of any premises, the
occupant shall place the garbage containers for collection within three (3) feet of the
curb line of the street immediately abutting the front property line of the premises, or,
in the event the premises is a corner lot the containers shall, upon request of the
Director of Solid Waste Services, be placed within three (3) feet of the curb line of the
side street. Provided, however, no commercial containers shall be allowed on the
street right-of-way. In the event the geography of any lot such as slope, etc., prevents
garbage containers from being placed as hereinabove provided, the Director of Solid
Waste Services may allow said garbage to be placed for collection at a convenient
location of said lot. All garbage containers must be placed by the curb by 7:00 a.m. on
scheduled garbage days and must be removed from the curb by 8:00 p.m. on
scheduled garbage collection days.
(d) Notwithstanding conflicting provisions herein, apartment projects and mobile home
parks may place garbage containers at a designated location within the project or
mobile home park for collection. The location shall be subject to the approval of the
Director of Solid Waste Services.
(e) Unless otherwise instructed, garbage containers that are equipped with wheels shall be
placed on the street with the wheels against the curb and a clearance of six (6) feet on
both sides, two (2) feet to the rear and fourteen (14) feet above. If there is no curb the
container shall be placed on the pavement or roadway as close as safely possible to
the right of way with the wheels and handle facing away from the road.
(f) Alley containers will be positioned with the lid or lids opening toward the alley so
they may be properly emptied. Turning or moving alley containers is prohibited.
(g) Containers which were not collected because they were not placed at the curb or
collection point as required are considered “missed containers.” Customers with
“missed containers” can receive collection services for an additional fee.
6
Section 15-12. Collection Charges.
Collection charges for solid waste services shall be set by resolution of the City
Council.
Section 15-13. Billing; Failure to Pay.
The charges fixed in this Chapter for the removal and disposal of garbage and
dumping of garbage at the sanitary landfill shall be entered as a charge against each owner,
occupant or lessee on the water and wastewater bills of the City. Should any person fail or
refuse to pay the charges fixed against him and his place of abode or his place of business
when due, the City shall be authorized to cut off and disconnect the water and wastewater
services to his place of abode or business against which such garbage pickup fees have been
fixed and assessed, and, in addition thereto, shall be authorized to discontinue garbage pickup
services until such fees have been paid in full.
Section 15-14. No Credit for Vacancy of Premises.
No credit will be given on the garbage collection charges fixed by this Chapter to any
owner, occupant or lessee of any residence or place of business for vacancy thereof, unless
the City is notified by such person and such person requests the City to disconnect or stop
water, wastewater and garbage service to such premises.
Section 15-15. Junk and Bulk Items.
The Solid Waste Division will collect from residential customers old furniture,
appliances, junk, and bulk items placed at the curb on regular brush/bulk collection schedule.
(a) Small items shall be placed in the City furnished container insofar as is possible and
the container’s capacity will allow.
(b) Items that cannot be effectively disposed of in the City container shall be placed
behind the street curb within eight (8) feet of the curb line of the street. Items should
not be placed under any low wires or limbs and shall be placed at least six feet from
any other objects (mailboxes, cars, garbage containers, etc.). Items placed in violation
of this provision shall constitute a request for service.
(c) Bagged, boxed or bulky items, furniture and appliances shall be placed in a separate
pile from brush and tree trimmings as they are handled separately. Mixed bulk items
with brush and tree trimmings will constitute a special pickup for which a fee will be
assessed.
(d) A special pickup may be requested and/or required for out of cycle collection or
collection of items that are not normally collected with this service (remodeling,
demolition or building materials or when there is no water service at the location).
Items set out on non-collection days will constitute a request for service for which a
special pickup charge will be assessed. Special pickup charges are set by resolution of
the City Council.
7
Section 15-16. Streets and Alleys not to be Used for Storage.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, store or abandon garbage, lumber, junk,
refuse, furniture, appliances, leaves or brush within any alley or upon any street within the
city limits.
Section 15-17. Salvaging Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to salvage any items from any refuse container,
alley container or curb side container within the city limits of the City of Temple.
Section 15-18. Inspections to Enforce Ordinance.
As a condition of receiving garbage service from the City, the Director of Solid Waste
Services or his designee shall have the right to inspect customer containers, as needed, to
determine whether garbage is being properly disposed of and to file a complaint against any
person violating any provision of this Chapter.
Section 15-19. Hauling Garbage to Sanitary Landfill.
Should any person haul all or part of his garbage to the sanitary landfill, he shall
nevertheless be required to:
(a) Pay garbage collection fees and dumping fees in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter;
(b) Dump his garbage at the sanitary landfill in accordance with and subject to the
rules and regulations of the Solid Waste Division and the Temple Landfill;
(c) Dump his garbage in the area designated by the Temple Landfill;
(d) Prevent any garbage from falling onto any street, alley or thoroughfare in the
City. All loads of loose material shall be covered, enclosed or secured in such
a manner so as to prevent such material from blowing or falling upon public
roadways en route. Persons bringing unsecured loads to the landfill will be
subject to a twenty dollar ($20.00) surcharge per load or as set by the City’s
contractor, Waste Management of Texas, Inc. Properly bagged trash will be
considered to be covered.
(e) All commercial, industrial or institutional haulers are required to prominently
mark by painted sign or other easily recognizable method both doors of the
passenger compartment of their vehicles with the name of their firm or
institution, or in lieu of signs, require their drivers, upon arriving at the
sanitary landfill scales, to immediately dismount and report to the scale
operator the name of said firm or institution.
Section 15-20. Fees and Use of Sanitary Landfill.
(a) The City of Temple Landfill is operated by Waste Management of Texas, Inc.,
under a lease agreement between the City of Temple and Waste Management. A copy of the
lease agreement, dated March 16, 2011 is on file in the Office of the City Secretary, and
available for inspection by the public. Tipping or dumping fees for use of the Landfill are set
by Waste Management subject to the terms and conditions of the agreement between the City
8
and Waste Management. The agreement also authorizes Waste Management to charge
additional handling charges for certain types of special waste.
(b) Residents of the City who present a paid City water bill, which includes a garbage
collection charge, dated within sixty (60) days of the date of presentment, shall be entitled to
dump without charge one (1) time each calendar month garbage that is normally collected by
the City from residences. This section does not authorize free dumping of manure, offal,
remodeling, demolition, or construction materials or other waste not collected by the City
from its residential customers. City customers dumping with a paid water bill under this
section are limited to loads not in excess of one pickup truck. Customers may request prior
authorization from the City's Director of Solid Waste Services to bring more than one load of
garbage to the Landfill under this subsection. Without prior approval of the Director of Solid
Waste Services for dumping in excess of once per month, or for loads containing
unauthorized solid waste, customers shall pay the current tipping charge. This subsection
does not require Waste Management to accept for disposal any materials not authorized for
disposal in a Type I landfill.
Section 15-21. Exemption from Residential Service Requirement.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, the Director of Solid Waste
Services may grant exemptions in areas of the City zoned for agricultural use from the
requirement in this Chapter that all residences within the City have garbage service.
Residents may request an exemption in writing from the Director of Solid Waste Services.
The request signed by the owner of the property in question must demonstrate that the
residence is adequately served by an alternate method of solid waste disposal that does not
create a public nuisance or threaten public health and safety. The decision by the Director of
Solid Waste Services whether to grant an exemption shall be final. The Director of Solid
Waste Services shall make regular inspections of any exempted residential property to ensure
that a nuisance or threat to public health and safety is not being created.
Section 15-22. Collection of Solid Waste Outside the City.
The Director of Solid Waste Services is authorized to collect solid waste from
residential customers outside the City under the conditions contained in this section. The
Director of Solid Waste Services must receive a request for service, and the residence to be
served must be located on or near a City solid waste collection route for City residents. The
decision by the Director of Solid Waste Services whether to provide service outside the City
limits to residential customers shall be final. The charge for service outside the City limits
shall be 1.25 times the in-City rate for the same service.
Section 15-23. Carry out service for residents.
City residents who for health reasons establish to the satisfaction of the Director of
Solid Waste Services that they are unable to physically place their container curbside for
collection, and who live alone or have no one residing with them physically able to place the
container curbside, are eligible for carry out service. The Director may in appropriate
circumstances require a statement from the resident’s personal physician verifying the need
for carry out service. Re-enrollment shall be required annually. At such time as the situation
changes wherein an able-bodied resident becomes available, carry out service terminates and
containers must be placed at the point of collection in order to be serviced. The container for
carry out service shall be placed near the front of the house, at a point visible from the street
so as to be safely accessible by the operator, and not more than fifty feet from the curb of the
street. Containers for carry out collection shall not be placed inside fenced areas or a garage
without approval from the Director of Solid Waste Services.
9
Section 15-24. Garbage only accounts.
Residential and commercial customers within the City not serviced by water or
wastewater service shall be treated as Garbage Only customers. To arrange for such service,
each customer shall provide necessary information to establish such account and pay a
deposit at the Utility Business Office. Rates for Garbage Only services are set by Resolution
of the City Council of the City of Temple, Texas. Garbage Only accounts are subject to the
late payment, disconnection, forfeiture of deposit, returned check, and reconnect provisions
pertaining to water and wastewater accounts under Chapter 38 of the City Code.
Section 15-25. Rental Properties, evictions, move-outs.
In cases of rental properties, any charges for special pickups shall be billed to the
owner of the property, the responsible party, or the responsible property management office.
Section 15-26. Cul-de-sacs.
There will be no parking allowed in cul-de-sacs or circles on garbage or recycling
collection days. Parking blocks collection containers, limiting access or preventing
collection. Collection will not be provided when such is the case.
Section 15-27. Lost or Damaged Containers.
A fee may be applied to replace a lost or damaged garbage container or recycling
container.
Section 15-28. Recycling Drop-off Center.
(a) The City may operate one or more citizen drop-off sites for recyclable materials.
Materials brought to a drop-off site shall be placed in the designated receptacle, or as directed
by a site attendant. Materials shall not be left at drop-off sites during non-operational or nonpublic
access hours.
(b) It shall be the duty of any person using City recycling drop-off centers or special
collection events, to follow all traffic, safety, and directional signs, site operating rules and
verbal directions, or directions posted or given within any City drop-off site at all times. Only
materials authorized for acceptance at the site are allowed. Failure to comply will constitute a
violation of this chapter and may result in denial of access to these locations.
Section 15-29. Curbside Recycling Program.
(a) Participation in the City’s curbside recycling program is voluntary. Anyone who
chooses to participate agrees to abide by the rules and requirements set by the Director of
Solid Waste Services. Failure to comply with these guidelines may result in forfeiture of all
privileges to participate in the curbside recycling program.
(b) A curbside recycling fee is included in the monthly utility fee for residential
garbage service. There is no additional fee charged for participation in the residential
curbside recycling program.
(c) Recycling containers for the residential curbside recycling program will be
provided by the City.
10
Section 15-30. Recycling Container Placement.
Unless otherwise instructed, recycling containers that are equipped with wheels shall
be placed on the street with the wheels against the curb and a clearance of six (6) feet on
both sides, two (2) feet to the rear and fourteen (14) feet above. If there is no curb the
container shall be placed on the pavement or roadway as close as safely possible to the right
of way with the wheels and handle facing away from the road. All recycling containers must
be placed by the curb by 7:00 a.m. on scheduled recycling days and must be removed from
the curb by 8:00 p.m. on scheduled recycling collection days.
Section 15-31. All Recycling Containers to be Kept Covered.
All recyclables shall be placed inside the curbside recycling container in such a
manner that the lid will close to prevent litter, spillage or entry of vectors. No items shall be
draped over, hanging out or protruding from the container. Lids shall only be opened while
placing additional recyclables in such containers or while an authorized person is removing
such recyclables or unloading the same for processing.
Section 15-32. Inspections to Enforce Ordinance.
As a condition of receiving residential curbside recycling service from the City, the
Director of Solid Waste Services or his designee shall have the right to inspect customer
containers, as needed, to determine whether recyclable materials are being properly disposed
of and to file a complaint against any person violating any provision of this Chapter.
Section 15-33. Recycling Collection Outside the City.
If the customer has qualified for garbage collection service as stated in Section 15-22,
the customer will also qualify for curbside recycling collection with no additional fee.
Section 15-34. Recycling Carry Out Service for Residents.
If the customer has qualified for garbage carry out service as stated in Section 15-23,
the customer will also qualify for curbside recycling carry out service with no additional fee.
Section 15-35. Curbside Recycling for Garbage Only Accounts.
If the customer has qualified for a garbage only account as stated in Section 15-24, the
customer will also qualify for curbside recycling collection with no additional fee.
Section 15-36. Curbside Recycling Acceptable Materials.
(a) Customers are provided a green recycling container in which to place specified
items (“recyclables” or “recyclable materials”). All items must be acceptable under
applicable laws and regulations and the City’s contracts with purchasers of recyclable
materials. Customers participating in the recycling program receive once-per-week collection
of recyclable materials. Specific collection days are designated by the Solid Waste Division.
(b) Acceptable recyclable materials shall be designated by the City, and include:
(i) Newspaper, mixed office paper, magazines;
(ii) Corrugated cardboard, pasteboard products (without liners);
11
(iii) Aluminum, tin, steel cans;
(iv) Plastic bottles, and most plastics labeled #1-#7; and
(v) Other materials as may be designated by the Director of Solid Waste
Services.
(c) Recyclables should be rinsed and free of contaminates.
(d) Recyclables shall be placed in the container loosely and not bagged.
(e) At the discretion of the Director of Solid Waste Services or his designee, a
recycling container shall not be collected if the recycling container is contaminated with any
of the following:
(i) Garbage
(ii) Glass
(iii) Styrofoam
(iv) Plastic Bags
(v) Appliances
(vi) Clothing
(vii) Toys
(viii) Dead Animals
(ix) Yard waste including grass clippings, leaves or trimmings
(x) Household Hazardous Waste; or
(xi) Any other materials as may be designated by the Director of Solid
Waste Services.
(f) Contamination of a recycling container with any of the materials listed above is
considered a violation of this Chapter and may result in confiscation of a customer’s
recycling container as set forth in Section 15-37.
Section 15-37. City Confiscation of Recycling Container.
(a) If a recycling container is not serviced due to the conditions detailed in Section 15-
34, the Solid Waste Division shall notify the customer to which the recycling container is
assigned in writing when and for what reason the recycling container was not serviced.
Customers receiving notification of no service shall have the option of removing the
contaminated material from the container and placing the container out for collection on the
next recycling collection day.
(b) If the violation in (a) is observed a second time within six (6) months of the first
violation, the customer to which the recycling container is assigned will receive a verbal
warning and a second written warning regarding the violation. If the violation is observed a
12
third time within the same six (6) month period, the customer will receive written notice that
his container will be confiscated by the City within forty-eight (48) hours.
(c) A recycling container that has been confiscated as set forth in this section will be
returned to the customer upon payment of the re-delivery fee.
Section 15-38. Non-Participation in the Curbside Recycling Program.
Residents not participating in the City recycling program will receive once-per-week
collection of garbage. This section includes residents that voluntarily do not wish to
participate. It also includes residents that have been removed from the program due to
habitual violation of this code.
Section 15-39. Fees.
The City Council authorizes the City Manager, or his designee, to establish the fees to
be applied for replacement of a lost or damaged container, to replace a confiscated recycling
container, for a second 96-gallon garbage or recycling container, for an overloaded container
and for a missed container.
Section 15-40. Curbside Recycling by City Generally.
Residential curbside recycling collection in the City shall be a part of the duties of the
Solid Waste Division, the employees of which shall make periodic pickups throughout the
City from the recycling containers provided by the City as required by this Chapter. It shall
be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation other than employees of the Solid Waste
Division to collect residential recyclable materials in the City. Such contract shall provide
the extent of collection and other authority to such person, firm or corporation as the City
may deem appropriate.
(REVISED: Ordinance No. 2013-4621, December 5, 2013)
Chapter 16
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 16-1. Spitting on sidewalks, crosswalks or floors of public buildings.
Secs. 16-2--16-6. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. BELL COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT
Sec. 16-7. Bell County Health Department established.
Sec. 16-8. Bell County Board of Health--Created; memberships;
appointment; term; ex officio members; vacancies; compensation.
Sec. 16-9. Same--Organization; meetings; quorums.
Sec. 16-10. Same--Functions.
Sec. 16-11. Bell county health department director; office centre;
appointment; qualifications; duties and authority.
Sec. 16-12. Amendment, repeal of article; changes in offices, etc.
Sec. 16-13--16-19. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. BIRTHS AND DEATHS
Sec. 16-20. Reserved.
Sec. 16-21. Seal of registrar.
Sec. 16-22. Registration required.
Sec. 16-23. Reports by hospitals, doctors, etc.
Sec. 16-24. Records to be kept.
Sec. 16-25. Original certificates to be forwarded to state registrar.
Sec. 16-26. Fee for copies of certificates.
Sec. 16-27. Monthly reports to city council.
Sec. 16-28-16.29. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. RESERVED.
Sec. 16-30-16-48. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. RODENT CONTROL
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 16-49. Definitions.
Sec. 16-50. Business buildings to be rat-proofed and rat-free.
Sec. 16-51. Rat-proofing of nonbusiness buildings.
Sec. 16-52. Duty to rat-proof business buildings upon notice from health
officer.
Sec. 16-53. Duty to institute rat eradication measures at business buildings
upon notice from health officer.
Sec. 16-54. Closing of business buildings providing rat harborage.
Sec. 16-55. Condemnation and destruction of unoccupied business buildings
providing rat harborage.
Sec. 16-56. Maintenance of rat-proof business building.
Sec. 16-57. Removal of rat-proofing from business building; closing of new
openings.
Sec. 16-58. Accumulations conducive to rat harborage.
Sec. 16-59. Storage and dumping of garbage and refuse affording food or
harborage for rats.
Sec. 16-60. Storage of chicken and animal feed.
Sec. 16-61. Inspections to enforce article.
Sec. 16-62--16-66. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. MINIMUM REQUIREMENT FOR RAT-STOPPAGE IN
BUSINESS BUILDINGS
Sec. 16-67. Application and scope of division.
Sec. 16-68. Approval of material and installation.
Sec. 16-69. Protective coating for required metal and wire cloth.
Sec. 16-70. Covering of foundation and exterior wall openings generally.
Sec. 16-71. Covering of foundation wall ventilator openings.
Sec. 16-72. Doors and door jambs and sills.
Sec. 16-73. Protection of windows, pipes, wires, etc.
Sec. 16-74. Protection of light wells with windows below ground level.
Sec. 16-75. Special requirements for buildings constructed on piers.
Sec. 16-76. Special requirements for curb or farmers' markets.
Sec. 16-77--16-85. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. VENEREAL DISEASES
Sec. 16-86. Purpose of article; detention, examination, treatment of infected
persons.
Sec. 16-87. Duties of members of police department.
Sec. 16-88. City health officer may enforce article provisions.
ARTICLE VII. SMOKING REGULATIONS
Sec. 16-89. Smoking prohibited in certain public areas.
Sec. 16-90. Affirmative defense.
Sec. 16-91. Posting of signs.
Sec. 16-92. Allowing smoking in prohibited places.
Sec. 16-93. Locations smoking is not prohibited.
Sec. 16-94. Enforcement.
Sec. 16-95. No duty or obligation.
Sec. 16-96. Effective date.
Sec. 16-97 – 16-107. Reserved.
Chapter 16
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 16-1. Spitting on sidewalks, crosswalks or floors of public buildings.
It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, or the floor
of any church, public hall, theater, railroad, depot, bus, or other public place in the city.
Secs. 16-2--16-6. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. BELL COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT
Sec. 16-7. Bell County Health Department established.
A new Bell County Health Department organization is hereby established as follows.
Sec. 16-8. Bell County Board of Health--Created; memberships; appointment; term;
ex officio members; vacancies; compensation.
(a) Created. There is hereby created a board of health for Bell County and each of the
aforementioned cities to be known as the Bell County Board of Health, which board shall be
composed of fifteen (15) members, all of whom shall be residents of the County of Bell.
(b) Membership and appointment. Three (3) of the members shall be appointed by the
city council of Killeen; three (3) of the members shall be appointed by the city council of
Temple; two (2) of the members shall be appointed by the commissioner' s court of Bell
County; two (2) of the members shall be appointed by the city council of Belton; and one
each by the city councils of Rogers, Holland, Troy, Nolanville and Harker Heights. Not
more than one of the members appointed by each governmental unit shall be a physician.
(c) Term. The term of office for each member shall be three (3) years except that of
the members initially appointed. Five (5) shall serve for three (3) years, five (5) shall serve
for two (2) years and five (5) shall serve for one year, to be determined by lot at the first
meeting of the board. Thereafter their successors shall hold office for three (3) years. The
members of the board of health may be reappointed at the end of their respective terms.
(d) Ex officio members. The county judge of Bell County, the director of the Bell
County Health Department and the president of the Bell County Medical Society shall serve
as ex officio members of the Bell County Board of Health without voting privileges, and
shall act in an advisory capacity of the board.
(e) Vacancies. Upon the death, resignation or removal of any of the members of the
Bell County Board of Health the governmental unit which had appointed said member shall
nominate and appoint a successor as a member of the board who shall then hold his
membership until he shall resign or be removed from said board. In the event the best
interest of any governmental units may require the removal of any member of the board, his
removal shall be effected by the appointment of his successor by unanimous vote of the
commission, council or court which appointed him.
(f) Compensation. No salary or compensation of any sort shall be paid to the members
of the Bell County Board of Health for their services.
Sec. 16-9. Same--Organization; meetings; quorums.
Immediately after the enactment of this order by each governmental unit, the said Bell
County Board of Health shall as soon thereafter as is practicable meet and organize and
appoint one of its members as chairman, and one as vice chairman. The director of the Bell
County Health Department shall serve as secretary to said board. Following the original
meeting the Bell County Board of Health shall hold such regular meetings as such place and
dates as may be determined by the board and such other special meetings as may be called by
the chairman or by a majority of the members of the board upon giving twenty-four (24)
hours' notice to all members thereof. A majority of the total membership of said board shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of all matters to be considered by said board.
Sec. 16-10. Same--Functions.
The functions of the Bell County Board of Health shall be as follows:
(1) The board shall serve in a supervisory capacity in the enforcement of the
health laws, rules, and regulations of the State of Texas, Bell County and the
several cities [and] to the director of the Bell County Health Department and
shall make recommendations to the director, city councils and the
commissioner' s court of Bell County, named herein, concerning the status of
public health matters in Bell County.
(2) It shall institute through the director, studies of any condition which may affect
the life, health, or the preservation and improvement of health in Bell County.
(3) It shall be concerned with the elimination of causes of disease or peril to life or
health, and shall make recommendations to the director concerning these
matters.
(4) It shall make recommendations to the director and to other responsible officers
concerning the elimination of nuisances and conditions detrimental to health.
(5) It shall make recommendations concerning the operations of public institutions
insofar as health matters are concerned.
(6) It shall engage in an active program of health education.
(7) It shall act as a coordinating agency in providing adequate medical and dental
care, and shall maintain a close working relation with the medical and
associated professions, the nonofficial health agencies, lay organizations and
individuals concerned with the promotion of public health.
(8) It shall make recommendations to such director and each governmental units
concerning the needs and budget of such Bell County Health Department.
(9) A report of the activities and the financial conditions of the Bell County Health
Department shall be made to any of the governmental units at such time as the
summary be requested by any such governmental unit.
Sec. 16-11. Bell county health department director; office centre; appointment;
qualifications; duties and authority.
(a) Office created; appointment. There is hereby created the office of Bell County
Health Department Director and such officer shall be appointed jointly by the councils and
commissioner' s court that are parties to this agreement [article] upon recommendation by the
County Board of Health from an approved list of qualified health officers furnished by the
commissioner of health of the State of Texas Health Department.
(b) Qualifications. Such director shall be a currently licensed physician and also
qualified in public health work. Such director shall be qualified under and shall conform to
the merit system prescribed by the state board of health and shall devite such time as may be
required to the performance of the duties of Bell County Health Department Director as
necessary. Bell County Health Department Director shall not engage in the private practice
of medicine.
(c) Duties and responsibilities. The director of the Bell County Health Department
shall be in complete charge of all administrative and technical public health activities of the
department and shall direct the personnel in the employ of the health department. The
director shall appoint, discharge, or transfer all employees of the health department subject to
the approval of the county board of health and such employees shall be thoroughly qualified
to perform their respective duties.
Sec. 16-12. Amendment, repeal of article; changes in offices, etc.
This article shall be subject to amendment and repeal at any time by any governmental
agency represented on this board and any office created hereby and the term of any officer
holding same shall be subject to abolishment and termination at any time by joint action of
the city councils of the cities of Temple, Rogers, Holland, Belton, Killeen, Harker Heights,
Nolanville, Troy, and the commissioner' s court of Bell County.
Sec. 16-13--16-19. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. BIRTHS AND DEATHS
Sec. 16-20. Reserved.
Sec. 16-21. Seal of registrar.
The seal of the registrar of births and deaths shall have the words "Registrar of Births
and Deaths" around the rim thereof and the words "Temple, Texas" in the center. Such seal
shall be procured by the city controller at the expense of the city and used by him in the
certification of instruments when acting as registrar of births and deaths.
Sec. 16-22. Registration required.
Every birth and death occurring within the city limits shall be registered and the
necessary permit issued as required by the Vital Statistics Law of the State of Texas, being
Article 4477, rules 34a through 55a, of Vernon' s Annotated Civil Statutes, as such law may
be applied to the city.
Sec. 16-23. Reports by hospitals, doctors, etc.
It shall be the duty of every doctor, midwife or other person attending any birth or
death, and the superintendent or other person in charge of any hospital or other institution
where the sick are taken for detention and care, to report every birth and death to the
registrar of births and deaths. Such report shall be made on forms prescribed therefor by the
state and shall be made within twelve (12) hours and, in each event, prior to the removal of
the mother of the child or of the deceased from the hospital, institution or other place where
the birth or death occurred.
Sec. 16-24. Records to be kept.
The registrar of births and deaths shall complete, correct, arrange in chronological
order and index the birth and death records of the city. He shall maintain suitable bound
volumes for making permanent records of birth and death certificates. All such records shall
be kept in the regular fireproof vault for the permanent records of the city.
Sec. 16-25. Original certificates to be forwarded to state registrar.
The registrar of births and deaths shall forward, prior to the tenth day of each month,
to the state registrar of vital statistics, all original certificates of births and deaths filed during
the previous month.
Sec. 16-26. Fee for copies of certificates.
The registrar of births and deaths is hereby authorized and directed to charge and
collect a fee, as set out herein below, for each certified copy of a birth, death and/or fetal
death certificate properly and completely made out and registered with him and correctly
recorded and promptly sent by him to the state bureau of vital statistics as required by law.
Such fees shall be for the benefit of the general fund of the city and proper records shall be
kept showing the monthly receipts from such source. The city council shall adopt by
resolution a schedule of the birth, death and fetal death certificate fees charged by the city for
each certificate issued, a copy of which shall be maintained in the treasury office.
Sec. 16-27. Monthly reports to city council.
The registrar of births and deaths shall tabulate the data shown on the birth and death
certificates and shall make such monthly reports to the city council with reference thereto as
it may require.
Sec. 16-28-16.29. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. RESERVED.
ARTICLE V. RODENT CONTROL
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 16-49. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
Business building. The term "business building," either vacant or occupied, shall
mean any structure, whether public or private, that is adapted for occupancy for transaction
of business, for rendering of professional service, for amusement, for the display, sale or
storage of goods, wares, or merchandise, or for the performance of work or labor, including
hotels, apartment buildings, tenement houses, rooming houses, office buildings, public
buildings, stores, theaters, markets, restaurants, grain elevators, abattoirs, warehouses,
workshops, factories, and all outhouses, sheds, barns and other structures on the premises.
Health officer. The term "health officer" means the city health officer or any duly
authorized representative.
Occupant. The term "occupant" shall mean the individual, partnership, or corporation
that uses or occupies any business building or part or fraction thereof, whether the actual
owner or tenant. In the case of vacant business buildings or vacant portions thereof, the
owner, agent, or custodian shall have the responsibility as occupant.
Owner. The term "owner" shall mean the actual owner, agent, or custodian of the
business building, whether individual, partnership, or corporation. The lessee shall be
construed as the "owner" for the purpose of this article when business building agreements
hold the lessee responsible for maintenance and repairs.
Rat eradication. The term "rat eradication" shall mean the elimination or
extermination of rats within buildings by any or all of the accepted measures, such as
poisoning, fumigation, trapping, or other methods deemed necessary.
Rat harborage. The term "rat harborage" shall mean any condition which provides
shelter or protection for rats, thus favoring their multiplication and continued existence in,
under, or outside of any structure.
Ratproofing. The term "ratproofing" applies to a form of construction to prevent the
ingress of rats into business buildings from the exterior or from one business building or
establishment to another. It consists essentially of treatment, with material impervious to rat
gnawing, of all actual or potential openings in exterior walls, ground or other floors,
basements, roof and foundations, that may be reached by rats from the ground by climbing
or by burrowing.
Sec. 16-50. Business buildings to be ratproofed and rat-free.
All business buildings in the city shall be ratproofed, freed of rats, and maintained in
a ratproof and rat-free condition to the satisfaction of the health officer.
Sec. 16-51. Ratproofing of nonbusiness buildings.
From and after December 13, 1949, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct,
repair or remodel any dwelling, or other nonbusiness building or structure, unless such
construction, repair, remodeling or installation shall render the building or other structure
ratproof in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this article. The provisions of this
section apply only to such construction, repairs, remodeling or installation as affect the
ratproof condition of any building or other structure.
Sec. 16-52. Duty to ratproof business buildings upon notice from health officer.
Upon receipt of written notice from the health officer, the owner of any business
building specified therein shall take immediate measures for ratproofing the building, and
unless such work and improvements have been completed by the owner in the time specified
in the written notice, in no event to be less than fifteen (15) days, or within the time to which
a written extension may have been granted by the health officer, then the owner shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Sec. 16-53. Duty to institute rat eradication measures at business buildings upon notice
from health officer.
Whenever the health officer notifies the occupant of a business building in writing that
there is evidence of rat infestation of such building, the occupant shall immediately institute
rat eradication measures and shall continuously maintain such measures in a manner
satisfactory to the health officer. Unless such measures are undertaken within five (5) days
after receipt of the notice, it shall be construed as a violation of the provisions of this section
and the occupant shall be held responsible therefor.
Sec. 16-54. Closing of business buildings providing rat harborage.
Whenever, in the opinion of the health officer, conditions inside or under occupied
business buildings provide extensive harborage for rats, the health officer is empowered,
after due notification in accord with section 16-52, to close such business buildings until such
time as the conditions are abated by ratproofing and harborage removal, including, if
necessary, the installation of suitable concrete floors in basements or replacement of wooden
first or ground floors with concrete or other major repairs necessary to facilitate rat
eradication.
Sec. 16-55. Condemnation and destruction of unoccupied business buildings providing
rat harborage.
Whenever, in the opinion of the health officer, conditions inside or under unoccupied
business buildings provide extensive harborage for rats, the health officer is empowered to
require compliance with the provisions of section 16-52, and, in the event that such
conditions are not corrected in a period of sixty (60) days, or within the time to which a
written extension may have been granted by the health officer, the health officer is
empowered to institute condemnation and destruction proceedings.
Sec. 16-56. Maintenance of ratproof business building.
The owners of all ratproofed business buildings are required to maintain the premises
in a ratproof condition and to repair all breaks or leaks that may occur in the ratproofing,
without a specific order of the health officer.
Sec. 16-57. Removal of ratproofing from business building; closing of new openings.
It shall be unlawful for the occupant, owner, contractor, public utility company,
plumber or any other person to remove and fail to restore in like condition the ratproofing
from any business building for any purpose. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person or
agent to make any new openings that are not closed or sealed against the entrance of rats.
Sec. 16-58. Accumulations conducive to rat harborage.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premise, improved
or vacant, or on any open lot or alley in the city, any lumber, boxes, barrels, bottles, cans,
containers or similar materials that may be permitted to remain thereon and that are
conducive to the harborage of rats, unless the same are placed on open racks that are
elevated not less than eighteen (18) inches above the ground, and evenly piled or stacked.
Sec. 16-59. Storage and dumping of garbage and refuse affording food or harborage for
rats.
All garbage or refuse consisting of waste animal or vegetable matter upon which rats
may feed, and all small dead animals, shall be placed and stored, until collected, in covered
containers of a type prescribed by section 15-4 of this Code. No person shall dump or place
on any premise, land or waterway any dead animals or any waste vegetable or animal matter
of any kind.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, leave, dump, or permit to accumulate any
garbage, rubbish, or trash in any building or on any premises, improved or vacant, or on any
open lot or alley in the city, so that the same shall or may afford food or harborage for rats.
Sec. 16-60. Storage of chicken and animal feed.
All food and feed within the city used for feeding chickens, cows, pigs, horses, and
other animals shall be stored in rat free and ratproof containers, compartments, or rooms,
unless stored in a ratproof building.
Sec. 16-61. Inspections to enforce article.
The health officer is empowered to make unannounced inspections of the interior and
exterior of business buildings to determine full compliance with this article and the health
officer shall make periodic inspections at intervals of not more than forty-five (45) days of all
ratproofed buildings to determine evidence of rat infestation and the existence of new breaks
or leaks in their ratproofing and, when any evidence is found indicating the presence of rats
or openings through which rats may again enter business buildings, the health officer shall
serve the owners or occupants with notice and/or orders to abate the conditions found.
Sec. 16-62--16-66. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. MINIMUM REQUIREMENT FOR RAT-STOPPAGE IN
BUSINESS BUILDINGS
Sec. 16-67. Application and scope of division.
For the purpose of obtaining rat-stoppage in business buildings, the regulations
prescribed by this division are set forth as the minimum requirements for applying ratstoppage
to business buildings.
Sec. 16-68. Approval of material and installation.
The health officer shall approve all materials used pursuant to this division and the
method of installation.
Sec. 16-69. Protective coating for required metal and wire cloth.
Solid sheet metal, expanded metal and wire cloth specified in this division shall have a
rust-resisting protective coating, preferably galvanized.
Sec. 16-70. Covering of foundation and exterior wall openings generally.
All foundation and exterior wall openings, excluding those used for the purpose of
ventilation, light, doors, and windows, such as those openings around pipes, electric cables,
conduits, openings due to deteriorated wall, broken masonry, or concrete, shall be protected
against the ingress of rats by closing such openings with cement mortar, concrete or
masonry, or close-fitting sheet metal or suitable size pipe flanges or other material with equal
rat-resisting properties, which shall be securely fastened in place.
Sec. 16-71. Covering of foundation wall ventilator openings.
All foundation wall ventilator openings shall be covered for their entire height and
width with perforated sheet metal plates of a thickness not less than twenty-four (24) gauge,
or with expanded sheet metal of a thickness not less than eighteen (18) gauge, or with cast
iron grills or grates, or with any other material of sufficient strength and equal rat-resisting
properties. The openings therein shall be small enough to prevent the ingress of rats, and in
no instance shall be larger than one-half (1/2) inch mesh.
Sec. 16-72. Doors and door jambs and sills.
All exposed edges of the lower eight (8) inches of wooden doors and door jambs,
serving as front, rear or side entrances into business buildings, from the ground, basement or
cellar floors, and other doors accessible to rats, shall be protected against the gnawing of rats
by covering such doors and jambs with solid sheet metal of not less than twenty-four (24)
gauge thickness. The same material shall be used on door sills or thresholds, or such door
sills or thresholds may be constructed of cement, stone, steel, or cast iron. Doors, door
jambs and sills of coal chutes and hatchways that are constructed of wood shall be covered
with solid sheet metal of twenty-four (24) gauge or heavier, or they may be replaced with
metal chutes of twenty-four (24) gauge or heavier installed in such manner as will prevent
the ingress of rats. All buildings with side and rear door entrances shall be provided with fly
screens and hardware cloth doors. These entrances shall be provided with suitable automatic
self-closing devices.
All doors on which metal channel flashing has been applied shall be properly hinged
to provide for free swinging. When closed, doors shall fit snugly so that the maximum
clearance between any door, door jambs, and sill shall not be greater than three-eighths (3/8)
of an inch.
Sec. 16-73. Protection of windows, pipes, wires, etc.
All window and other openings for the purpose of light or ventilation that are or may
be accessible to rats by way of exposed pipes, wires, conduits and other appurtenances, shall
be covered for their entire height and width, including frame, with wire cloth of nineteen
(19) gauge or heavier, having a mesh of not larger than one-half (1/2) inch, in installed metal
frames of twenty-four (24) gauge and anchored in place with proper anchorage.
In lieu of the wire cloth covering, provided for above, such pipes, wires, conduits and
other appurtenances shall be blocked from rat usage by installing sheet metal guards of
twenty-four (24) gauge or heavier. Such guards, when used on vertical pipes, wires, conduits
or other appurtenances, shall be fitted snugly around the pipe, wire, conduit or other
appurtenance.
Sec. 16-74. Protection of light wells with windows below ground level.
Light wells with windows in exterior walls that are located below the outside ground
level shall be protected from the ingress of rats by one of the following methods:
(1) Installing over the light well cast iron or steel grills or steel gratings, or other
material of equal strength and rat-resisting properties, with openings in grills
or gratings not to exceed one-half (1/2) inch in largest dimension.
(2) Installing securely to and completely covering existing metal grills that are
broken or have openings larger than one-half (1/2) inch in largest dimensions
or otherwise defective, with expanded metal of eighteen (18) gauge or heavier,
having openings not greater than one-half (1/2) inch in largest dimension.
(3) At the option of the owner the opening in the wall of the building below the
grate may be entirely closed with brick or concrete or partially closed and the
remaining open space covered with nineteen (19) gauge or heavier wire cloth
with mesh not to exceed one-half (1/2) inch.
Sec. 16-75. Special requirements for buildings constructed on piers.
(a) Business buildings constructed on piers having wooden floor sills twelve (12)
inches or less above the surface of the ground shall have the intervening space between the
floor sill and the ground protected against the ingress of rats by installing a solid masonry or
concrete curtain wall, not less than four (4) inches thick, around the entire perimeter of the
business building and extending such curtain wall to a depth of not less than eighteen (18)
inches with a twelve (12) inch shelf extending outward from the wall and fastening securely
to the exterior wall of the business building, in such manner as will prevent rats from
entering the building. In lieu of the installation of curtain walls, all ground floors of wood
construction may be replaced with concrete of not less than three (3) inches in thickness.
Exterior wall protection shall be securely tied into the concrete floor at all points.
(b) Business buildings constructed on piers having wooden floor sills greater than
twelve (12) inches above the ground level shall have the intervening spaces between floor sill
and ground protected against the ingress of rats by installing curtain walls in accordance with
subsection (a), or by protecting such business buildings against the ingress of rats by
installing solid sheet metal coverage of twenty-four (24) gauge or heavier snugly around each
pipe, cable, wire, conduit or other utility service passing through wooden ground floors,
Such metal coverage shall not be less than eight (8) inches in diameter larger than diameter
of pipe, cable, wire, conduit or other utility service, and shall be securely fastened to the
wooden floor. All other openings in wooden ground floors through which rats may gain
entrance into double walls or the interior of the business buildings, such as openings that may
exist in floors and double walls above floor sills, shall be closed with twenty-four (24) gauge
or heavier solid sheet metal of sixteen (16) gauge or heavier wire cloth of one-half (1/2) inch
or masonry or with concrete.
Sec. 16-76. Special requirements for curb or farmers' markets.
Curb or farmers' markets in which fruit or vegetables or any other products are
exposed and offered for sale, on racks, stands, platforms and in or outside of business
buildings, shall have floors paved with concrete or asphalt for the entire surface area of the
market. Display racks, stands or platforms on which fruits or vegetables or any other food
products are displayed or offered for sale shall be of sufficient height that all such fruits,
vegetables or other food products shall be kept at a distance of not less than eighteen (18)
inches above the floor pavement and be so constructed that rats cannot harbor therein or
thereunder.
Sec. 16-77--16-85. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. VENEREAL DISEASES
Sec. 16-86. Purpose of article; detention, examination, treatment of infected persons.
In order to protect persons in the City of Temple from the spread of communicable
venereal disease the Bell County Health Department is empowered and authorized and the
Bell County Health Director is directed to use every available means to ascertain the
existence of and to investigate immediately all suspected cases of communicable venereal
disease and to determine the sources of such infections. Certain persons reasonably suspected
to be infected with a communicable venereal disease may be detained in jail, examined, and
if determined to be so infected, treated, in accordance with the provisions of this section. The
Bell County Health Director or his authorized representative shall order other persons
reasonably suspected to be infected with a communicable venereal disease to be examined at
the Bell County Health Department on an in-patient or out-patient basis, or, with the consent
of the director or his representative, by a person licensed to practice medicine, and to be
treated medically for such disease, if necessary.
(1) Categories of suspected persons. A person in any of the following categories
may be reasonably suspected to have venereal disease:
(a) Any person who is arrested and charged in the municipal court of the
city or any court in the county with an offense in the nature of or
involving prostitution, rape, or another offense related to sex and any
person convicted of any such offense in the city or county.
(b) Any person reasonably suspected to have had contact with another
individual reasonably believed to have had a communicable venereal
disease at the time of such contact and any person who is reasonably
believed to have transmitted any such disease to another individual.
Any person who has had any such disease or who has been convicted of
any offense of the kinds herein specified within twelve (12) months
next past, and who is reasonably believed to be engaged in any activity
which might have occasioned exposure to a communicable venereal
disease.
(2) Detention in jail. Suspected persons in the categories enumerated in
subparagraph (1)(a) may be detained in jail. When any person so detained is
determined not to have venereal disease in communicable form the director
shall release the individual from detention for health purposes. The detention
of any person in jail under the provisions hereof shall continue only for such
time as is reasonably necessary to examine such person and render treatment if
such person is found to have a venereal disease in a communicable form. The
provisions hereof shall not be utilized as, nor construed to be a penalty or
punishment. No person detained for health under the provisions hereof shall be
released from such detention even if he or she is otherwise eligible for release
on bond or by reason of payment of fine, or termination of sentence imposed.
(3) Examination in jail. Every suspected person detained in jail under the
provisions of subparagraph (1)(b) shall be examined by the Bell County Health
Department for the purpose of determining whether or not such person is, in
fact, infected with a communicable venereal disease. Every such person shall
submit to such examinations as are necessary and permit specimens to be taken
for laboratory analysis. The detention of each suspected person shall continue
until the results of such examinations are known and the person found to be
free from any such disease or if infected, until the disease is no longer
communicable.
(4) Treatment in jail. The Bell county Health Department shall treat every person
suspected to have venereal disease who has been detained and examined in jail
and found to have any such disease. The treatment shall continue until the
disease is no longer communicable.
(5) Examination and treatment at the Bell County Health Department or by private
physician. Every suspected person in the categories enumerated in
subparagraph (1)(a) who is not detained in jail shall be examined at the Bell
County Health Department on an in-patient or out-patient basis as determined
in individual instances by the Bell County Health Department Director or his
authorized representative. Each such person shall submit to examinations as
necessary and permit specimens to be taken for laboratory analysis and shall
comply with the directions of the Bell County Health Director or his
authorized representative with relation to hospitalization on an inpatient basis
or attendance at clinic on an out-patient basis, as the case may be. Each such
person shall continue to follow these directions until the results of his or her
examination are known and the person determined to be free from any such
disease, or, if infected, until the disease is no longer communicable. With the
consent of the director or his authorized representative a suspected person may
be at his or her expense examined by a doctor licensed to practice medicine
and treated medically for such disease, if necessary. In these latter instances,
the director or his authorized representative shall receive reports of
examinations and treatment and other information relative to the problems
involved from the medical doctor selected.
(6) Violations. It shall be unlawful to refuse to submit to examination or treatment
provisions hereof or to violate any order of detention. It shall be unlawful to
refuse to obey any order of the Bell County Health Director or his authorized
representative requiring examinations and treatment, if necessary, for such
disease, or any other order issued hereunder.
Sec. 16-87. Duties of members of police department.
The chief of police and the officers of the police department of the city are hereby
authorized, empowered, and directed to implement the purposes of section 16-86 in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
(1) Chief of police. The chief of police shall cause to be furnished to the Bell
County Health Department information pertinent to the enforcement of section
16-86 with relation to persons who are arrested and charged or otherwise
imprisoned in any jail administered by the chief of police. The chief of police
is directed to make available from time to time an area, room, or a place in
such jail which may be used as a detention for health facility and for
examinations. Said room
or area may be a jail and may be used in the day to day operation of the jail
when not for the purposes hereof. It may be changed from time to time and
need not be restricted to any one area so long as individuals held hereunder are
not housed with prisoners held for nonhealth purposes. Any area employed for
the purposes of examination shall be such as to provide privacy to the patient
and doctor. The chief of police and officers of the police department shall
cooperate in the execution of such detention procedures as may be necessary,
and shall assume custodial supervision of persons detained under the
provisions of section 16-86(1)(b) and shall supply such personal restraints as
may be necessary to effectuate the purposes thereof.
(2) Police department. Officers of the police department of the city shall furnish to
the Bell County Health Department information pertinent to the enforcement of
the provisions of section 16-86(1). Police officers shall have authority to detain
suspected persons in the categories enumerated in section 16-86(1)(a) for
health purposes in jail in accordance with the procedure set forth in section 16-
86(2) for examination and treatment by the Bell County Health Department
under the provisions of section 16-86(3) and (4). Police officers shall have
authority to order suspected persons in the categories enumerated in section
16-86(1)(a) and (b) who are not detained in jail to report to the Bell County
Health Department for examination and treatment at the direction of the Bell
County Health Director or his authorized representative in accordance with the
provisions of section 16-86(5). They shall also have authority to order persons
to report to the Bell County Health Department for examination and treatment,
as aforesaid, who have been held for investigation of offenses of the types
enumberated in section 16-86(1)(a) and who have been released without
charges having been filed and similarly persons who have been acquitted of
any such charges and other suspected persons who have been released on
bond.
(3) Violations. It shall be unlawful to refuse to submit to examination or treatment
under an order as hereinabove provided or to violate any order of detention or
to refuse to obey any order requiring submittal to examination and treatment at
the Bell County Health Department.
Sec. 16-88. City health officer may enforce article provisions.
The city health officer of the City of Temple, Texas, and his designated
representatives, may exercise all the rights, powers, and duties provided herein to the Bell
County Health Department and the director thereof. To that extent, whenever used in this
article, the terms "Bell County Health Department" and "Bell County Health Director" shall
include the city health officer.
ARTICLE VII. SMOKING REGULATIONS
Sec. 16-89. Smoking prohibited in certain public areas
a. A person commits an offense in violation of this Article if he/she smokes or
possesses a burning tobacco, weed or other plant product in any of the following indoor or
enclosed areas:
1. public or private preschools, primary or secondary schools, public or private
colleges or universities, child-care facilities;
2. elevators, museums, libraries, galleries, public transportation facilities open
to the public and service lines of establishments doing business with the
general public;
3. City buildings, City parks (with the exception of the golf course portion of
Sammons Golf Course), or any portion thereof owned or leased by the City
and used for the City purposes;
4. any building which is used for or designated for the purpose of exhibiting
any motion picture, stage drama, lecture, musical recital, athletic event or
any other event whenever open to the public, including all restrooms and
any area commonly referred to as a lobby; however, smoking, which is a
part of a stage performance, is permitted;
5. any retail or service establishment serving the general public, including but
not limited to, any food products establishment, department store,
restaurant, bowling alley, entertainment center, Laundromat, grocery store,
private club, drug store, shopping mall, hair styling salons, including
service lines, but excepting outdoor patio areas where food is served;
6. all restrooms open for public use;
7. within all areas available to and customarily used by the general public in all
businesses and nonprofit entities patronized by the public, including, but not
limited to, commercial, financial and professional offices, including banks,
hotels and motels;
8. within twenty (20) linear feet of a public entrance of any establishment or
facility where smoking is prohibited except to briefly transverse this area to
use an extinguishing device;
9. in any public area of a health care facility or hospital, including, but not
limited to, clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctor' s offices, nursing and
convalescent homes, residential treatment centers/homes and dentist' s
offices except in bed space areas of health facilities if all patients within the
room are smokers and such smoking is ordered on the health care facility' s
admission form by an attending physician, in keeping with the guidelines
established by the facility; or
10. any establishment or facility, or any portion thereof, that has been
designated as nonsmoking by the owner, operator, manager or other person
who controls any establishment or facility.
b. An offense under this subsection is punishable by a fine not to exceed fine not
to exceed ONE HUNDRED AND NO/100 DOLLARS ($100.00) for the first offense;
TWO HUNDRED AND NO/100 DOLLARS ($200.00) for a second offense; and THREE
HUNDRED AND NO/100 DOLLARS ($300.00) for each subsequent offense
Sec. 16-90. Affirmative defense
It shall be a defense to prosecution for an offense committed under Section 16-89
that the establishment or facility in which the offense takes place does not have
conspicuously displayed a sign or signs that smoking is prohibited and that an offense is
punishable by a fine not to exceed fine not to exceed ONE HUNDRED AND NO/100
DOLLARS ($100.00) for the first offense; TWO HUNDRED AND NO/100 DOLLARS
($200.00) for a second offense; and THREE HUNDRED AND NO/100 DOLLARS
($300.00) for each subsequent offense.
Sec. 16-91. Posting of signs
The owner, operator, manager or person in charge of an establishment or facility
in which smoking is prohibited in all or a portion thereof shall conspicuously post signs
informing the public that smoking is prohibited in the establishment or facility or a portion
thereof. The manner of such posting shall be at the discretion of the owner, operator,
manager or person in charge of an establishment or facility so long as the signs are
conspicuous and state that smoking is prohibited and that an offense is punishable by a
fine. Said fine shall not exceed ONE HUNDRED AND NO/100 DOLLARS ($100.00) for
the first offense; TWO HUNDRED AND NO/100 DOLLARS ($200.00) for a second
offense; and THREE HUNDRED AND NO/100 DOLLARS ($300.00) for each
subsequent offense.
Sec. 16-92. Allowing smoking in prohibited places
The owner, operator, manager or person in charge of an establishment or facility
commits an offense if the owner, operator, manager or person in charge of an
establishment or facility fails to verbally notify someone smoking in the establishment or
facility that smoking is in violation of this Article, and continues to provide service to a
person smoking in violation of this Article. An offense is punishable by fine not to exceed
ONE HUNDRED AND NO/100 DOLLARS ($100.00) for the first offense; TWO
HUNDRED AND NO/100 DOLLARS ($200.00) for a second offense; and THREE
HUNDRED AND NO/100 DOLLARS ($300.00) for each subsequent offense. It is an
affirmation defense to prosecution under this section, if the owner, operator, manager or
person in charge of an establishment or facility, has posted the signs required by Section
16-91, verbally notified a person smoking in person that they are smoking in violation of
this Article, and refused to serve them while they are smoking.
Sec. 16-93. Locations smoking is not prohibited
Smoking is not prohibited in the following establishments or facilities, or portions
thereof, unless designated as nonsmoking by the owner, operator, manager or person in
control of the establishment or facility:
(a) private residences, except when used as a licensed child care or health care facility;
(b) hotel and motel rooms rented to guests, provided that no more than twenty-five
percent (25%) of rooms will be designated as smoking rooms;
(c) retail tobacco stores;
(d) any area exterior to an establishment or facility that is not in violation of any other
provision of this ordinance;
(e) any enclosed rooms in an establishment or facility which are being used entirely for
private parties, events or other social functions;
(f) enclosed areas of an establishment or facility that are not available to the general
public and designated as a smoking area by the owner, manager, operator or person
in control;
(g) in the designated smoking areas of any establishment or facility which has provided
a designated smoking area equipped with a physical barrier that separates the
designated smoking area from nonsmoking area with a separate ventilation. No
more than fifty percent (50%) of the public area of a facility may be designated as a
smoking area. The physical barrier must form an effective membrane continuous
from outside wall to outside wall, from smoke barrier to smoke barrier, from floor
to floor or roof above, or a combination thereof, including continuity through all
concealed spaces, such as above suspended ceilings, interstitial structural and
mechanical spaces. Transfer grilles, louvers and similar openings shall not be used
in these partitions. Self-closing, tight fitting doors are permitted in such barriers.
The ventilation system must be a HVAC system designed by a licensed professional
engineer to have a negative pressure on the area designated for smoking to prevent
air from a smoking area to be drawn across or into a non-smoking area, provide a
total air exchange every fifteen (15) minutes and exhaust that air to the exterior of
the building. All air ventilation systems shall be tested when requested by the
Superintendent of Construction Safety and a record of such test maintained by the
establishment or facility and submitted to the Superintendent or his/her designee
when requested;
(h) an establishment or facility that has less than ten (10) employees. The term,
“employees,” includes leased employees, temporary employees, contract employees
and similar situated employees;
(i) in the designated smoking area of a bingo parlors, provided that no more than eighty
percent (80%) of such areas may be designated as smoking areas if the smoking areas
contain a separated ventilation systems and continuous physical barriers, or no more
than fifty percent (50%) of such areas may be designated as smoking areas if the areas
do not contain separated ventilation systems and continuous physical barriers; and
minors shall not be allowed access to areas of the premises designated as smoking
areas, or
(j) an establishment or facility where alcohol sales are equal to or in excess of fifty
percent (50%) of the gross receipts of the establishment or facility.
Sec. 16-94. Enforcement
The Police Department, the Construction Safety Departments, or some other
official(s) of the City designated by the City Manager, shall be responsible for administering
this Article. The Police Department or the Fire Department may, while an establishment is
undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this Article.
Sec. 16-95. No duty or obligation
In undertaking the enforcement of this ordinance, the City is promoting the
general health, safety and welfare of its citizens. The City is not assuming any duty or
obligation, nor is it imposing any duty and/or obligation on its officers and/or employees,
nor is it liable in money damages or otherwise to any person who claims that the City or
one of its officers, agents or employees breached any such obligation and the breach
proximately caused injury.
Sec. 16-96. Effective date
This Ordinance is effective upon adoption. Establishments and facilities that desire
to designate an area as available for smoking have until October 15, 2007 to comply with
the structural requirements of the barrier and ventilation requirements of this Article unless
the establishment or facility undergoes construction or structural renovation in an amount
equal to or greater than fifty percent (50%) of the value of the structure as set forth of the
City’s tax roll, in which case, they must come into compliance upon completion of said
construction or renovation.
(Ordinance No. 2006-4119, December 21, 2006)
Sec. 16-97 – 16-107. Reserved.
Chapter 17
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Sec. 17-1. Declaration of policy.
The city council hereby finds as a matter of public policy that the protection,
enhancement, preservation and use of historic areas, places and landmarks is a public
necessity and is required in the interest of the culture, prosperity, education and welfare of
the people. The purposes of this chapter are:
(1) To protect, enhance and perpetuate historic areas, places and landmarks
which represent or reflect distinctive and important elements of the city's
cultural, social, economic, political, archaeological and architectural history;
(2) To safeguard the city's historic and cultural heritage, as embodied and
reflected in such historic areas, places and landmarks;
(3) To stabilize and improve property values in such locations;
(4) To foster civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the past;
(5) To protect and enhance the city's attractions to tourists and visitors and
provide incidental support and stimulus to business and industry;
(6) To strengthen the economy of the city; and
(7) To promote the use of historic areas, places and landmarks for the culture,
prosperity, education and welfare of the people of the city and visitors to the
city.
Sec. 17-2. Definitions.
[As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them,
unless the context indicates otherwise:]
Administrator. That city staff member appointed by the city manager to serve as
provided for herein.
Applicant/certificate of appropriateness. The owner of the property under
consideration or that owner's legally designated, in writing, representative.
Applicant/historic structure, area or site designation. Any person, persons, group or
organization, residing or based in the city, which has authority under this chapter, to petition
for such designation as provided for herein.
Block. All lots fronting one street between two (2) intersecting streets.
City Council. The city council of the City of Temple.
Designated landmark or area. Means a landmark or area that has received official
designation and approval as provided for in section 17-4.
Exterior architectural change. See section 17-6(b)(4).
Historic area. Also known as historic multiresource area or historic district.
Historic landmark. Any building, structure, site, district, area or land designated as
provided for herein.
Historic structure. Any officially designated structure or building, or accessory
structure of an officially designated building.
Ordinance. The Historic Preservation Ordinance [Chapter 17].
Redeveloped. A term to include those activities associated with the substantial
rebuilding or renovation of a deteriorating or blighted area.
Shall, may. "Shall" implies mandatory compliance; "may" implies permissive.
Significant. Having such importance, expressiveness and meaning as to be essential
to interpretation, determination and/or appreciation of a larger whole.
Sec. 17-3. Designating of historic areas, sites and structures.
(a) Historic procedure:
(1) Initiating designation procedures:
a. In the case of the designating of a historic site, building or structure,
either in or outside historic areas or districts, the property may be
considered for designation as a historic structure or landmark only
upon the written request or upon the written permission of the property
owner.
b. In the case of the designating of historic areas or districts, the historic
preservation board, city council or property owners may initiate the
consideration for designation of such historic areas or districts.
c. Such designation, affirmed by the city council, shall occur only when
it is deemed necessary or desirable to bring such areas, sites or
structures under the purview of this chapter.
(2) a. The review and comment on the designation of any historic area, site
or structure shall begin with or be referred to the historic preservation
board for initial review and comment on the merits of such
designation.
b. When such consideration is placed on the agenda of the historic
preservation board, the administrator shall notify the owners of record
of such properties being proposed for designation in the manner as
provided for in handling a zoning matter.
c. In the case of historic areas or districts, property owners of record
within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed boundaries of such area
or district shall also be notified of the proposal of establishing a
historic area or district.
(3) The historic preservation board shall complete its review and comment within
thirty (30) days of the date of official filing of the designation request with
the office of the administrator.
(4) The historic preservation board's recommendations and findings related to the
designation request shall be forwarded, in writing, to the city council for
consideration at the next regular meeting of the council.
(5) The city council shall act upon such designation request after having
complied with such requirements of the Open Meetings Act (V.A.C.S. Art.
6252-17).
(b) Criteria to be used in considering designation: In making such designation as set
forth in this section, the historic preservation board and the city council shall consider one
or more of the following criteria:
(1) Character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural
characteristics of the City of Temple, the State of Texas or the United States.
(2) Location, as the site of a significant historic event;
(3) Identification with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the
culture and development of the city;
(4) Exemplification of the cultural, economic, social or historical heritage of the
city;
(5) Portrayal of the environment of a group of people in an era of history
characterized by a distinctive architectural style;
(6) Embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type or
specimen;
(7) Identification and in recognition of the work of an architect or master builder
whose individual work has influenced the development of the city;
(8) Embodiment of elements of architectural design, detail, materials or
craftsmanship which represent a significant architectural innovation;
(9) Relationship to other distinctive buildings, sites or areas which are eligible for
preservation according to a plan based on historic, cultural or architectural
motif;
(10) Unique location of singular physical characteristics representing an
established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood, community or of
the city;
(11) Archaeological value in that it has produced or can be expected to produce
data-affecting theories of historic or prehistoric interest;
(12) Value as an aspect of community sentiment or public pride.
(c) Filing of request for designation; contents of request:
(1) The applicant shall file a request for historic designation with the office of the
administrator.
(2) If the applicant is other than the city, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as
provided for herein. (See section 17-7. Such fee shall be considered a part of
the filing of request.)
(3) The filing of a request shall not be considered complete and a request ready
for processing until:
a. The application form is complete,
b. Filing fee is paid, and
c. The applicant has provided the administrator with such information in
such form and detail so he can reasonably determine the nature and
extent of the relationship of the applicant's request to the spirit, intent,
declaration of policy and regulations of this chapter. (See section 17-1
and paragraph (b), above.)
Sec. 17-4. Designated historic areas, districts, sites and structures.
The North Central Temple Historic District, as hereafter described in Attachment A
of this ordinance [not set out herein, is designated as a historic district.]
Sec. 17-5. Certificate of appropriateness/creation and review process.
(a) Establishment of certificate of appropriateness:
(1) There is hereby established a certificate of appropriateness. A certificate is
the written confirmation issued by the city that an applicant's action comes
under the purview of this chapter and the action has been reviewed and found
to comply with the purpose, spirit and requirements of this chapter.
(2) The administrator shall issue certificates of appropriateness in compliance
with subsection (d) below.
(3) The administrator shall issue such a certificate only after this chapter and
related statutes have been complied with as called for in subsection (b) below.
(b) Certificate of appropriateness required: A certificate is required before any of
the following actions can be taken:
(1) Prior to the granting of preliminary approval by the city council of any
subdivision or resubdivision of land within or adjoining a designated historic
area, site or structure.
(2) Prior to granting of a final approval by the city council of any zoning of land
within or adjoining a designated historic area, site or structure.
(3) Prior to the issuance of the permits including or related to:
a. Building construction, either new or repair, dealing with that part(s) of
the exterior of the structure or a building open to view from a public
way;
b. Demolition activities, either a portion or the whole of a structure or
site configuration. (See also subsection (d)(3) following.)
This subsection (b)(3) shall apply both to buildings or structures within a
designated historic district or area and those designated historic structures
outside of designated historic areas or districts.
(4) Exterior alterations and changes; certificate of appropriateness, etc.: No
person or entity shall construct, reconstruct, alter, change, restore, remove or
demolish any exterior architectural feature of a designated historic structure
unless a certificate of appropriateness has been granted. As used in this
article, the term "exterior architectural feature" shall include, but not be
limited to, architectural style and general arrangement of such portion of the
exterior of a structure as is designed to be open to view from a public way.
(c) Ordinary repair and maintenance: That repair and maintenance activity which
does not involve significant changes in architectural and historic value, style or general
design and is considered ordinary by the administrator shall be exempt from the provisions
of subsection (b) above.
(d) Review process:
(1) The administrator shall be that person designated by the city manager to
function as such. That person shall be responsible for the provision and
coordination of staff functions necessary to administer this chapter.
(2) Regular review process:
a. the administrator, upon knowledge of any request covered in
subsection (b) above shall inform applicants what they must do to
comply with this chapter and related ordinances.
Thereupon, the applicant shall file a concurrent request for a certificate
of appropriateness with the administrator.
The applicant shall provide information in such detail and form as
reasonably required by the administrator to determine the nature and
extent of the relationship of the applicant's proposed action to the
spirit, intent, declaration of policy and regulations of this chapter
before a request can be officially considered filed and ready for
processing.
b. The request for approval of a certificate shall be acted upon by the
administrator, who shall either grant, deny or approve with conditions,
a request for a certificate of appropriateness. The applicant has the
right to appeal the decision of the administrator and such appeal shall
be placed on the agenda of the next called meeting of the historic
preservation board so long as the request is officially filed at least ten
(10) full working days before the board's called meeting.
The historic preservation board shall make its findings and
recommendation within thirty (30) days of the appeal first being filed
with the administrator.
c. Requests for a certificate may be simultaneously processed with other
requests (e.g. zoning, etc.) as long as this section is complied with.
d. The action taken by the historic preservation board may be appealed to
the city council for consideration by said council at the next
appropriate regular meeting following the date of findings made by the
historic preservation board.
e. Within forty-five (45) days of initial consideration, the board shall
either approve, disapprove or approve with conditions a request for
certificates of appropriateness.
(3) Special review processes:
a. Demolition or removal of historic landmarks:
1. A designated structure shall not be demolished or removed to
another site without approval being received in the form of a
certificate of appropriateness by the administrator.
2. The administrator shall consider the state of repair of the
building; the reasonableness of the cost of restoration or repair;
the existing and/or potential usefulness, including economic
usefulness of the building; the purposes behind preserving the
structure as an historic structure; the character of the
neighborhood; and all other factors he finds appropriate.
3. If the administrator finds that, to serve the interest of preserving
historic values of the structure and to comply with the
declaration of policy of this chapter, the structure should not be
demolished or removed, the administrator shall notify the
historic preservation board and the property owner within
fifteen (15) days of the filing of the request as to his findings,
both general and specific.
4. The historic preservation board shall meet within fifteen (15)
days of the date the administrator's findings to either approve,
disapprove or approve with conditions the applicant's request.
The owner/applicant shall be given ten (10) days written notice
of such meeting considering his/her request.
4. The owner/applicant may appeal the historic preservation
board's decision to the city council. Such decision shall be
considered at the next appropriate regular meeting of the city
council. Within thirty (30) days of initial consideration by the
city council, said council shall either grant or deny such appeal.
5. After a decision is reached by the historic preservation board
that is not appealed, or after an appeal is denied by the city
council on a matter related to granting a certificate of
appropriateness under this subsection, a resubmittal of the
application for a certificate will not be accepted for additional
hearing within a six-month period from the date of the final
decision, except when the board is petitioned by the city's
director of inspections because the structure constitutes an
immediate or latent danger to the life or safety of a person or
persons.
6. The provisions of this part shall be coordinated with those
activities covered by the city's code related to the regulation of
unsafe, dilapidated and/or substandard structures.
b. Coordination with minimum housing code: This chapter shall be
coordinated with the application and enforcement of the city's
minimum housing code.
(4) General:
a. The historic preservation board has the authority to initiate review of
any existing certificate of appropriateness and make such
recommendations and findings as may be called for in light of new or
added information, circumstances or conditions affecting the
application of the spirit or purpose of this chapter. This initiative shall
be processed in the same manner as provided for above.
b. Upon denial of a request for a certificate of appropriateness by the
administrator, no appeal being timely filed with the administrator, a
resubmitted application shall not be accepted for review or
consideration for a period of six (6) months from the date of the
administrator's decision.
c. After an appeal is reached denying an application for a certificate of
appropriateness, and further appeal not being timely filed with the city,
a resubmittal application will not be accepted for additional hearing
within a six (6) month period from the date of final decision except:
1. Upon written request by the applicant indicating that there has
been a substantial change in conditions, or
2. In the instances where all changes in the application as
recommended by the historic preservation board or by the city
council have been or will be complied with.
d. Designations to coexist with other use classifications: Use of
classifications for all properties, which may also fall under the
purview and application of this chapter shall continue to be governed
by the city's zoning ordinance and the procedures therein established.
Sec. 17-6. Filing fees.
From time to time, the administrator shall submit proposals through the city manager
to the city council for their approval to establish a schedule of filing fees related to historic
designation requests and certificates of appropriateness requests.
Sec. 17-7. Preservation criteria to be used in issuing certificate appropriateness for
properties in designated historic areas or districts.
(a) General:
(1) No development, redevelopment or construction, involving either old or new
structures, shall be permitted in designated historic areas which will have a
significant, adverse affect on any major identified or designated historical,
architectural or cultural feature in such areas.
(2) a. The administrator shall utilize the criteria in this subsection as
guidelines to determine if structures or development or redevelopment
projects within designated historic areas or districts are consistent with
the intent and purpose of this chapter as applied to such historic area
or district.
c. The action proposed by an applicant related to a structure(s) or a
development or redevelopment project shall be considered to meet the
criteria if it is determined by the administrator that the structure(s),
after all changes, will still be substantially consistent with structures of
the same general use (residential, commercial, etc.) within the same
block.
c. On the basis of such determination of consistency or lack of
consistency, the administrator shall issue or deny a certificate of
appropriateness for development or redevelopment, or for
construction, involving the exterior of either old or new structures.
(3) In the event of appeal from the administrator's decision, appeals may be filed
as provided for in section 17-6.
(b) Criteria to be used for residential-type properties:
(1) Qualities of the block (residential): all new or redeveloped structures shall
substantially conform with both of the following:
a. Within the same block, the rhythm of spaces between buildings shall
be the generalized rhythm established by a reoccurrence of the ratio
between building widths and the spaces between them.
b. General landscaping and building siting shall be substantially
consistent with the open expanse of front lawns in the same block and
the quantities of planting within them.
(2) Qualities of the building form (residential): All new, remodeled or
redeveloped structures shall substantially conform with at least two (2) of the
following:
a. Height-width ratio: There shall a general consistency in the
relationship between the height and width of the front facade,
including wings, porches and colonades, with other structures on the
same block.
b. Shape of facade: There shall be a general consistency in the building's
silhouette, which results from the structure's geometric configuration
in comparison with other structures on the same block.
c. Multiplicity of roof forms: There shall be a general consistency in the
number of roofs being used, as well as their direction, pitch and
arrangement in comparison with other structures on the same block.
(3) Qualities of building treatment (residential):
a. All new, remodeled or redeveloped structures shall substantially
conform with at least one of the following elements:
1. Color: There shall be a general consistency in the use of color
of a natural material or an applied color, such as paint, as
compared to other structures on the same block.
2. Material: there shall be a general consistency in the choice of
exterior building material (whether it be primarily brick, stucco,
wood, stone or some other predominate material) as compared
to other structures on the same block.
b. All new, remodeled or redeveloped structures shall substantially
conform with at least one of the following:
1. Horizontal projections: There shall be a general consistency
with other adjoining structures in the same block in the ratios
between the facade area of the main building and the horizontal
additions such as wings, colonades, carports, greenhouses, etc.
2. Distribution and proportion of facade openings: There shall be
a general consistency with generalized patterns related to the
size and position of windows, doors, archways, etc. as well as
any ratio or rhythmic relations between these openings and
solid portions of the building facade, as established by other
structures on the same block.
(4) Qualities of facade accentuation (residential): All new, remodeled or
redeveloped structures shall comply with at least (2) of the following:
a. Porch or entrance projections: There shall be a general consistency in
the size, shape and prominence of the structure's entry with other
structures in the same block.
b. Detailing: Proposed actions shall generally be consistent in the manner
in which materials are used, the way in which materials or structural
elements are joined and the fashion in which elements such as
columns, eaves or arches are used and combined to create a particular
architectural style.
c. Embellishment: Proposed actions shall generally recognize and be
consistent with the architectural, historical and cultural use of applied
decoration such as leaf patterns, scrolls, stained glass, etc. (Generally
these decorations are found along roof lines and above facade
openings.)
(c) Criteria to be used for nonresidential-type properties:
(1) Qualities of the building form (nonresidential): All new, remodeled,
redeveloped structures shall substantially conform with at least one of the
following:
a. Height-width ratio: There shall be a general consistency in the
relationship between the height and width of the front facade,
including wings, porches and colonades with the nonresidential
structures on the same block.
b. Shape of facade: There shall be general consistency in the building
which results from the structure's geometric configuration in
comparison with other nonresidential structures in the same block.
(2) Qualities of building treatment (nonresidential):
a. All new, remodeled, redeveloped structures shall substantially
conform with at least one of the following:
1. Color: there shall be a general consistency in the use of color of
a natural material or an applied color, such as paint as
compared to other nonresidential structures in the same block.
2. Material: There shall be a general consistency in the choice of
exterior materials and the use of a primary exterior building
material (whether it be primarily brick, stucco, wood, stone or
other predominate material) as compared to other
nonresidential structures in the same block.
b. All new, remodeled, ore redeveloped structures shall substantially
conform with the following:
Distribution and proportion of facade openings: The size and position
of windows, doors, archways, etc., as well as any ratio or rhythmic
relations between these openings and solid portions of the building
facade shall be generally consistent with the pattern associated with
other nonresidential structures in the same block.
(3) Qualities of facade accentuation (nonresidential): all new, remodeled or
redeveloped structures shall substantially conform with at least two (2) or
more of the following:
a. Porches or entrance projections: There shall be a general consistency
in the architectural handling and statement of the size, shape and
prominence of the structure's entry when compared to other
nonresidential structures in the same block.
b. Detailing: There shall be a general consistency in the manner in which
materials or structural elements are joined, and the fashion in which
elements such as columns, eaves, or arches are used and combined to
create a particular architectural style.
c. Embellishment: Proposed actions shall generally recognize and be
consistent with the architectural, historical and cultural use of applied
decoration such as leaf patterns, scrolls, stained glass, etc. (Generally
these decorations are found along roof lines and above facade
openings.)
Sec. 17-8. Requirements associated with designated historic areas.
Reserved.
Sec. 17-9. Amending this chapter.
This chapter shall be amended according to procedures provided for in the city's
zoning ordinance, except that amendments shall be processed through the historic
preservation board to the city council.
Consideration of amendments shall be governed by prescribed procedures applicable
to the city council.
Sec. 17-10. Penalty.
(a) It shall be unlawful to construct, reconstruct, structurally alter, remodel, renovate,
restore, demolish, raze, remove or maintain any building, structure, or land, as covered
herein by this chapter in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
(b) The city, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful action, as noted hereabove, to prevent any illegal act,
business or maintenance in and about such premises.
(c) [Reserved.]
Sec. 17-11. Notice.
Any notice required to be given under this chapter shall be by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the addressee at his/her last known mailing address.
Sec. 17-12. Main Street historic landmark tax freeze.
(a) Tax freeze. The owner of a commercial or residential building in the approximate
fifty-five-block area officially designated as a Main Street Area, and further described in the
attached Exhibit "A", [not set out herein, but on file in the office of the city clerk] may
apply for a tax freeze on city property taxes for both the land and the structure on the
building site any time within twelve (12) months of the effective date of this section.
Provided, however, that the city council may extend the time for making such applications
an additional twelve (12) months if such an extension is deemed to be in the public interest.
Both the land and the structure will have an annual assessed value equal to the
assessed value of the tax year immediately before the restoration was completed, for five (5)
years following the completion of the restoration. The tax freeze will begin the first day of
the first tax year after the director of public works of the City of Temple has verified that
the restoration is substantially complete. For the purpose of this section, "restoration" means
work performed in accordance with the applicable building codes and regulations of the
city.
(b) Eligibility for a tax freeze. To be eligible for a city property tax freeze, the
property must be located within the official Main Street designated area described in
Exhibit "A" and must be designated as a historic landmark. To be so designated the property
must meet all of the following conditions:
(1) The building must be at least thirty (30) years old;
(2) The property must not have been granted a previous property tax freeze under
this section; and
(3) The property must generally meet the criteria established in section 17-3(b) of
the Temple City Code as determined by the Main Street Director and the
Main Street tax freeze committee or the Main Street redevelopment board.
Such committee to consist of five (5) members appointed by the Main Street
redevelopment board and shall function in an advisory capacity giving advice
to the Main Street director. A quorum of such committee shall be necessary to
make recommendations to the Main Street director.
(c) At the time of application for the tax freeze, the exterior and the interior of the
historic landmark must be in need of restoration that exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the
assessed value of the structure but is not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), the
year the restoration is to begin. Only that restoration for which a building permit, electrical
permit, plumbing permit, or any other project permit has been issued may be counted in
determining whether the work exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the assessed value of
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), whichever is the greater amount.
(d) Application for tax freeze. An application for a tax freeze must be filed with the
Main Street director. Each application must be signed and sworn to by the owner of the
property and must include the following information:
(1) The legal description of the property;
(2) The detailed plans and documents relating to the proposed work showing
how the exterior of the structure is to be restored in accordance with the
applicable City of Temple building codes;
(3) A statement and documentation of the costs for the repair and restoration of
the exterior and interior of the historic landmark to show that the costs exceed
the greater of twenty-five (25) percent of the assessed value of the structure
or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00);
(4) The projection of the construction time and completion date of the
restoration;
(5) The proposed use of the property;
(6) Any other information which is necessary to the city in determining
eligibility.
(e) Certification of eligibility. The owner of the structure shall comply with the
standards for eligibility set forth herein in order to have the proposed alternations to the
exterior of the structure approved and to obtain a certificate of eligibility indicating that the
structure is eligible with the advice of the Main Street tax freeze committee.
(f) Qualification for tax freeze.
(1) Upon completion of the restoration of the structure in accordance with the
certificate of eligibility issued by the Main Street director, the owner shall
submit to the director a sworn statement certifying that the restoration is being
completed. The Main Street director shall then review the sworn statement of
the owner, the structure shall be inspected by the director of public works or
his designees to determine whether the restoration is substantially complete
and the main street director, if approved, shall issue the owner a certificate of
qualification for a tax freeze.
(2) If a certificate of qualification is approved, the Main Street director shall send
written notice to the Bell County Appraisal District which shall appraise the
property in accordance with applicable divisions of the tax code, in particular
section 51-4.501(e)(1). The director shall send a copy of the certificate of
qualification to the city controller.
(3) A certification of qualification shall not be approved until the applicant files a
commitment to immediately repay to the city all tax revenues not paid
because of the tax freeze if the owner is required to repay the taxes under
section 51-4.501(e)(6). The commitment must be approved as to form by the
city attorney and filed in the county deed records. The commitment shall run
with the land and bind the owners and his heirs and assigns. Any unpaid
payment required under [section] 51-4.501(e)(6) shall be a lien against the
property.
(g) Historic landmark destruction or alteration.
(1) If the Main Street director has reason to believe that a historic landmark has
been totally or partially destroyed or altered by the willful act or negligence of
the owner or his representative in violation of the preservation criteria
contained in the ordinance designating the historic landmark, he shall notify
the city manager who shall immediately cause the matter to be scheduled for
the earliest possible consideration by the city council. If, after giving notice
and hearing to the owner, the city council determines that the historic
landmark has been totally or partially destroyed or altered by the willful act or
negligence of the owner or his representative, the owner shall immediately
repay to the city all of the tax revenues that were not paid because of the tax
freeze.
(2) Where a historic landmark is totally or partially destroyed or altered other
than by the willful act or negligence of the owner or his representative, the
owner shall, within thirty (30) days, request a demolition permit when
restoration is not feasible, or request a building permit to reconstruct the
historic landmark in accordance with the preservation criteria. The
determination as to whether restoration is feasible shall be made by the city
council, upon the advice of the Main Street director and the Main Street tax
freeze committee, as part of the certificate of qualification review procedure
required to be followed in obtaining a building permit. In cases where a
demolition permit is issued by the city because restoration is not feasible,
repayment of the tax revenues is not required.
Note--It should be noted that section 2 of Ord. No. 1950 provided: Notwithstanding the
provisions contained in section 51-4.501(e)(2)(C), if an application for historic landmark
freeze is filed within ninety (90) days of the passage of this ordinance [section], restoration
of the historic landmark conducted during the calendar year 1988 may be counted in
determining whether the costs of the historic landmark restoration exceed fifty (50) percent
of the assessed value as determined on January 1, 1988. Only that restoration for which a
building permit, electrical permit, or other project permit has been issued may be counted in
determining whether the work exceeds fifty (50) percent of the assessed value.
Chapter 18
JEWELRY, PRECIOUS METALS AND REGULATED
PROPERTY
Sec. 18-1. Definitions.
Sec. 18-2. Regulated property purchases and records.
Sec. 18-3. Purchases from minors.
Sec. 18-4. Items to be retained and kept separated for forty-eight (48)
hours; exception.
Sec. 18-5. Examination by police.
Sec. 18-6. Offenses.
Chapter 19
JUNK DEALERS
Sec. 19-1. Definitions.
Sec. 19-2. Record of purchases--Required; contents.
Sec. 19-3. Same--Inspection by police.
Sec. 19-4. Purchases from intoxicated persons and minors.
Sec. 19-5. Inspection of junk by police.
Chapter 21
MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS
ARTICLE I. ADMINISTRATION
Section 21-1. Adopted.
Section 21-2. Scope; Enforcement.
Section 21-3. Purpose.
Section 21-4. Definitions.
Section 21-5. Commission created; membership; term of office.
Section 21-6. Authority of Commission; procedures.
Section 21-7. Public nuisance.
Section 21-8. Standards for repair, vacation or demolition.
Section 21-9. Minimum standards for continued use or occupancy/
Section 21-10. Commencement of proceedings.
Section 21-11. Notice of hearing.
Section 21-12. Contents of Notice.
Section 21-13. Public hearing.
Section 21-14. Commission orders.
Section 21-15. Actions subsequent to Commission order.
Section 21-16. Compliance with board order.
Section 21-17. City’s authority to secure a dangerous structure.
Section 21-18. Additional authority.
Section 21-19. Diligent or best efforts by the city.
Section 21-20. Placing of placard on structure.
Section 21-21. Emergency cases.
Section 21-22. Disconnecting public utilities.
Section 21-23. Violation, penalty.
Section 21-24. Civil Penalty.
Section 21-25. Judicial Review.
Section 21-26. Seizure or sale of property to recover expenses.
CHAPTER 21
MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS
Sec. 21-1 Adopted.
There is hereby adopted by the city the 2009 International Property Maintenance Code
and amendments thereto, a copy of which is attached hereto as Exhibit A and made a part of
this chapter for all purposes, with the exception of such sections thereof as are deleted,
modified or amended in Exhibit B also attached hereto and made a part of this chapter for all
purposes.
Sec. 21-2 Scope; Enforcement.
(a) This chapter shall apply to all dangerous buildings or other structures, and any of
its components or systems and shall apply equally to new and existing conditions.
(b) The city’s Building Official is responsible for the administration and enforcement
of this chapter.
Sec. 21-3 Purpose.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 54 and
Chapter 214. The purpose of this chapter is to establish the minimum standards for the
continued use and occupancy of all types of buildings and structures within the city,
regardless of the date of their construction, in order to safeguard the public health, safety and
welfare and to protect property.
Sec. 21-4 Definitions.
Building Official means the officer or other designated authority, or his duly
authorized representative, charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter.
Commission means the Building & Standards Commission of the city.
Construction standards means all of the construction codes adopted by the city of
Temple’s Code of Ordinances.
Dangerous building or structure means any premises, building or structure, in whole
or in part, that is:
(a) Unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees and unsecured from
unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other
uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by minors, regardless
of the structural condition of the building or structure; or
(b) Boarded up, fenced, or otherwise secured in any manner if:
(1) The building constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry;
or
(2) The means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent unauthorized
entry or use of the building in the manner described in subsection (a) of this
definition; or
(c) Dilapidated, substandard or unfit for human habitation and a hazard to the public
health, safety, and welfare. A building, premises or structure that contains the following
defects shall be considered a dangerous building or structure under this definition:
(1) Interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such
an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside the
middle third of its base;
(2) 33% or more damage or deterioration to the supporting member or members,
or 50% damage or deterioration to the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or
covering, exclusive of the foundations;
(3) Improperly distributed loads upon floors or roofs or in which the same are
overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose
used or in which the stress of any material, member or portion thereof, due to all
imposed loads, including dead load, exceeds the stresses allowed in the construction
standards adopted by the city;
(4) Damage from fire, flood, earthquake, wind, or other cause so as to have
become dangerous to life, safety or the general health and welfare of the occupants or
the general public;
(5) Damage from fire, flood, earthquake, wind, or other cause to the extent that the
structural integrity of the building or structure is less than it was prior to the damage
and is less than the minimum requirements established by the construction standards
adopted by the city for new buildings;
(6) Condition of the structure or building is likely to cause sickness or disease, so
as to work injury to the health, safety, or general welfare of those living therein or to
persons or property in its vicinity;
(7) Decay, deterioration or dilapidation, reasonably likely to cause the structure to
fully or partially collapse;
(8) Light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health,
safety or general welfare of human beings who occupy the building or structure;
(9) Inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or those having
insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, or other means of communication in
order to evacuate in a timely and expedient manner in order to avoid injury or peril
from within;
(10) Parts thereof which are detached that they may reasonably be expected to fall
and injure members of the public or property;
(11) Any exterior appendage or portion of the building or structure that is not
securely fastened, attached or anchored such that it is capable of resisting wind or
similar loads as required by the construction standards adopted by the city;
(12) Insufficient space for sleeping or occupation of the building;
(13) Unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare;
(14) Unsafe, unsanitary or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitutes
a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing
use, constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment; or
(15) Constructed or maintained in violation of a specific requirement of any of the
construction codes adopted by the city or contrary to any State law.
Structure means a building or other structure, or part of a building or other structure.
Vacate means to leave the premises and not return until further allowed by the building
official or Commission.
21-5 Commission created; membership; term of office
(a) Pursuant to the authority vested in the city under Texas Local Government Code,
Chapter 54, Subchapter C, a Building & Standards Commission is hereby created which shall
be composed of five (5) regular members and four (4) alternative members appointed by the
City Council for two year terms. Such alternates shall serve in the absence of one or more
regular members when requested by the Mayor or City Manager, or their representatives.
(b) The City Council may remove a Commission member for cause on written charge.
Before a decision regarding removal is made, the City Council must hold a public hearing on
the matter if requested by the commission member subject to the removal action. If the
Commission member is removed, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term.
21-6 Authority of Commission; procedures
(a) The Commission shall have all powers, duties, and responsibilities authorized by
State law, it being the intent of the City of Temple to fully implement Subchapter C of
Chapter 54 of the Texas Local Government Code.
(b) A majority vote of the members of the Commission on a matter is necessary to
take any action.
(c) The building official shall present all cases to the Commission on the city’s behalf.
(d) The Commission shall adopt rules and procedures in accordance with this chapter
governing the conduct of hearings before the Commission, providing ample opportunity for
the presentation of evidence and testimony by respondents or persons opposing charges
brought by the City, acting through the building official, relating to the violation of city
ordinances.
21-7 Public nuisance.
The City of Temple declares every substandard building or structure as herein defined
to be a public nuisance and subject to repair, vacation or demolition to abate such nuisance as
herein provided in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the occupants and the
public.
21-8 Standards for repair, vacation or demolition.
(a) Repair. If the dangerous building or structure can be feasibly repaired or the
condition remedied so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter, it
shall be ordered remedied or repaired. Repairs shall be deemed feasible only if less than 50%
of the structure of the building must be repaired or replaced or the value of the structure is
reduced by less than 50% because of the violations.
(b) Vacated and/or secured. If the dangerous building or structure is in such a
condition as to make it hazardous to the health, safety or general welfare of its occupants or
the public, it shall be ordered vacated and secured, and the order may also require the
occupants to be relocated.
(c) Demolition. In any case where more than 50% of a building or structure is
damaged, decayed or deteriorated, it shall be ordered demolished or removed, unless the
Commission deems that the structure can be feasibly repaired or the condition remedied. In
all cases where a building cannot be repaired, it shall be ordered demolished.
21-9 Minimum standards for continued use or occupancy.
In this chapter, the minimum standards that shall determine the suitability of a
building for continued use or occupancy, regardless of the date of construction, are those
found in chapter 7 of the city’s code of ordinances and this chapter.
21-10 Commencement of proceedings.
Whenever the building official has determined that a building is a dangerous building
or structure, he shall obtain a date and time for a public hearing before the Commission to
determine whether the building complies with the standards set out in chapter 7 and this
chapter. The building official may seek voluntary compliance with this chapter with the
owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the building or structure before seeking a hearing before
the Commission. If the building official receives voluntary compliance from the owner,
lienholder or mortgagee, the building official need not seek a public hearing from the
Commission.
21-11 Notice of hearing
(a) Notice of the public hearing required under section 21-10 shall be sent to the
owner of record, lienholder, and mortgagee of the affected property. The notice shall be
served at least ten (10) calendar days before the hearing date. The notice may be served
personally, by certified mail, return receipt, or by delivery by the United States Postal Service
using signature confirmation. The executed return receipt shall be prima facie evidence of
service. If the owner of record, lienholder, or mortgagee of the building cannot be identified,
the city shall make a diligent effort, use its best efforts, or make a reasonable effort to
determine the identity and address of the owner, a lienholder, or mortgagee. If a notice is
mailed according to this subsection and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as
“refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice shall be
deemed to be delivered.
(b) Notice of the public hearing must be posted on the front door of each building or
structure situated on the affected property or as close to the front door as practicable.
(c) Notice of the public hearing must be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city on one occasion on or before the 10th day before the date fixed for the
hearing.
(d) The city may file a notice of the hearing in the official public records of real
property for Bell County. The notice must contain:
(1) The name and address of the owner of the affected property if that information can
be determined;
(2) A legal description of the affected property; and
(3) A description of the hearing, including the date time and place of the hearing.
(e) The filing of the notice of hearing in the official public records of real property for
Bell County is binding on subsequent grantees, lienholders, or other transferees of an interest
in the property who acquire such interest after the filing of the notice and constitutes notice
of the hearing on any subsequent recipient of any interest in the property who acquires such
interest after the filing of the notice.
21-12 Contents of notice.
(a) The notice shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the owner of the affected property if that information can
be determined;
(2) A legal description of the affected property; and
(3) A description of the hearing, including the date time and place of the hearing.
(b) A notice of a public hearing required by section 21-10 sent to an owner, lienholder
or mortgagee shall:
(1) Include a statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee will be required to
submit at the hearing written proof of the scope of any work that may be required
to comply with this chapter and the time it will reasonably take to perform the
work; and
(2) Contain a description of each violation which allegedly exists, a statement that the
city may perform the required work to abate the violation if the owner fails to do
so, and an explanation of the owner’s right to a hearing before the Commission.
21-13 Public hearing.
At the hearing the building official shall present evidence of the condition of the
building and may recommend a course of action. The owner, lienholder, mortgagee or any
other interested party may present evidence on any relevant issues.
21-14 Commission orders.
(a) After the public hearing before the Commission, if a building is found in violation
of the standards set out in this chapter or any other applicable ordinances, the Commission
may find the building to be a dangerous building or structure and order that the building be
vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished by the owner within a reasonable time.
(b) The mortgagees and lienholders may be provided an additional reasonable amount
of time to comply with the ordered action in the event the owner fails to comply with the
order within the time provided by the Commission.
(c) A Commission order shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the
building to within 30 days:
(1) secure the building from unauthorized entry; or
(2) repair, remove or demolish the building, unless the owner or lienholder establishes
at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within 30 days.
(d) If the Commission allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 30 days
to repair, remove or demolish the building, the Commission shall set specific time schedules
for the commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder,
or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while
the work is being performed, as determined by the Commission.
(e) The Commission may not allow the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90
days to repair, remove or demolish the structure or fully perform all work required to comply
with the order unless the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee:
(1) submits a written detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and
(2) establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within 90
days because of the scope and complexity of the work.
(f) If the Commission allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90 days to
complete any part of the work required to repair, remove or demolish the building, the
Commission will require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to regularly submit progress
reports, as defined by the Commission, to the building official to demonstrate compliance
with the time schedules established for commencement and performance of the work. The
order may require that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee appear before the Commission or
the building official to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules.
(g) If the Commission allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to repair, remove or
demolish the building, the work shall be done in compliance with all permitting requirements
of the city and State of Texas. Any repair work must comply with the applicable codes for
the work to be completed.
(h) If the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee owns property, including structures and
improvements on property, within the city limits with a value that exceeds $100,000.00 in
total value, the Commission may require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to post a cash
or surety bond in an amount adequate enough to cover the cost of repairing, removing or
demolishing a structure under subsection (f) of this section. In lieu of a bond, the
Commission may require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to provide a letter of credit
from a financial institution or guaranty from a third party approved by the Commission. The
bond must be posted, or the letter of credit or third party guaranty provided, not later than the
30th day after the board issues the order. Value may be determined by using the appraised
value of real property improvements as determined by the Bell County Tax Appraisal
District, or its successor in interest.
(i) The owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has the burden of proof to demonstrate the
scope of any work that may be required to comply with the applicable city ordinances and the
time it will take to reasonably perform the work.
21-15 Actions subsequent to Commission order.
(a) Within 10 days after the date the order is issued, the city shall:
(1) File a copy of the order in the office of the city secretary; and
(2) Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city in which the building is
located a notice containing:
a. The street address or legal description of the property;
b. The date of the hearing;
c. A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and
d. Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained.
(b) The building official shall promptly mail by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a copy of the order to the owner of the structure and to any lienholder or
mortgagee of the structure. The city shall use its best efforts to determine the identity and
address of any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the structure. If a copy of the order is
mailed according to this subsection and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as
“refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the mailing is not affected, and the copy of the
order shall be deemed to be delivered.
21-16 Compliance with board order
(a) If the building is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished, or the
occupants are not relocated within the allotted time, the city may vacate, secure, remove, or
demolish the structure or relocate the occupants at its own expense.
(b) If the city incurs expenses under subsection (a) of this section, the city may assess
the expenses on, and the city has a lien against, unless it is a homestead as protected by the
Texas Constitution, the property on which the building is located. The lien is extinguished if
the property owner or another person having an interest in the legal title to the property
reimburses the city for the expenses. The lien arises and attaches to the property at the time
the notice of lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the Bell County clerk. The notice
must contain the name and address of the owner if that information can be determined with a
reasonable effort, a legal description of the real property on which the building is located, the
amount of expenses incurred by the city, and the balance due. The lien is a privileged lien,
subordinate only to tax liens.
(c) This section does not limit the city’s ability to collect on a bond or other financial
guaranty that may have been required by section 21-14(h).
21-17 City’s authority to secure a dangerous structure.
(a) The city may secure a building the building official determines:
(1) Violates the minimum standards; and
(2) Is unoccupied or is occupied only by persons who do not have a right of
possession to the building.
(b) Before the 11th day after the date the building is secured, the building official shall
give notice to the owner by:
(1) Personally serving the owner with written notice;
(2) Depositing the notice in the United States mail addressed to the owner at the
owner’s post office address;
(3) Publishing the notice at least twice within a 10 day period in a newspaper of
general circulation if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner’s post
office address is unknown; or
(4) Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building if personal service
cannot be obtained, and, the owner’s post office address is unknown.
(c) The notice must contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building
and the property on which it is located;
(2) A description of the violation of the city standards that is present at the building;
(3) A statement that the city will secure or has secured, as the case may be, the
building; and
(4) An explanation of the owner’s entitlement to request a hearing about any matter
relating to the city’s securing the building.
(d) The Commission shall conduct a hearing at which the owner may testify or present
witnesses or written information about any matter relating to the city’s securing of the
building if, within 30 days after the date the city secures the building, the owner files with the
building official a written request for the hearing. The Commission shall conduct the hearing
within 20 days after the date the request is filed.
(e) If the city incurs expenses under this section, the city may assess the expenses on,
and the city has a lien against, unless it is a homestead as protected by the Texas
Constitution, the property on which the building is located. The lien is extinguished if the
property owner or another person having an interest in the legal title to the property
reimburses the city for the expenses. The lien arises and attaches to the property at the time
the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the county clerk in the county in
which the property is located. The notice must contain the name and address of the owner if
that information can be determined with a reasonable effort, a legal description of the real
property on which the building is located, the amount of expenses incurred by the city, and
the balance due.
(f) After the hearing conducted in accordance with subsection (d) of this section, the
Commission may:
(1) Uphold the city’s actions; or
(2) Order that the amount of the lien assessed under subsection (e) of this section be
reduced or extinguished.
(g) The authority granted by this section is in addition to any other remedy provided in
this chapter or by state law.
21-18 Additional authority.
(a) A Commission order issued pursuant to section 21-14 may require that after the
expiration of the time allotted for repair, removal or demolition of a building:
(1) That the city repair, remove or demolish the building or structure at the expense of
the city and may place a lien on the land which the building stands or to which it is
attached for the expenses of the repair, removal or demolition; or
(2) Assess a civil penalty against the property owner for failure to repair, remove or
demolish the building and may recover the penalty by placing a lien on the
property.
(b) The city may repair a building under subsection (a) of this section only to the
extent necessary to bring the building into compliance with the minimum standards and only
if the building is a residential building with ten or fewer dwelling units. The repairs may not
improve the building to the extent that the building exceeds minimum housing standards.
(c) If the board orders the building or structure repaired or assesses the civil penalty
against the owner under subsection (a) of this section, the city shall impose a lien against the
land on which the building stands or stood, unless it is a homestead as protected by the Texas
Constitution, to secure the payment of the repair expenses or the civil penalty. Promptly after
the imposition of the lien, the city must file for record, in recordable form in the office of the
Bell County clerk, a written notice of the imposition of the lien. The notice must contain a
legal description of the land.
(d) Any civil penalty or other assessment imposed under this section accrues interest
at the rate of 10 percent per year from the date of the assessment until paid in full.
(e) The city’s right to the assessment lien cannot be transferred to third parties.
(f) A lien acquired under this section by the city for repair expenses may not be
foreclosed if the property on which the repairs were made is occupied as a residential
homestead by a person 65 years of age or older.
(g) The Commission may assess by order, and the city may recover, a civil penalty
against a property owner at the time of the Commission hearing on violations of this chapter
in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 a day for each violation or, if the owner shows that the
property is the owner’s lawful homestead, in an amount not to exceed $10.00 a day for each
violation, if the city proves:
(1) The property owner was notified of the requirements of this ordinance and the
owner’s need to comply with the requirements, and
(2) After notification, the property owner committed acts in violation of the ordinance
or failed to take an action necessary for compliance with the ordinance.
(h) Notice of an action taken under subsection (a) of this section shall be the same
notice provided for in section 21-15.
(g) The authority granted by this section is in addition to any other remedy provided in
this chapter or by state law.
Sec. 21-19 Diligent or best efforts by the city.
Under this chapter, the city is deemed to have made a diligent effort, used its best
efforts, or made a reasonable effort to determine the identity and address of an owner, a
lienholder, or mortgagee if it searches the following records:
(a) County real property records of the county in which the building is located;
(b) Appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the building is located;
(c) Records of the secretary of state;
(d) Assumed name records of the county in which the building is located;
(e) Tax records of the city; and
(f) Utility records of the city.
Sec. 21-20 Placing of placard on structure.
The building official may place a red placard on a structure or dwelling unit that is
unsanitary or unsafe warning of its dangerous condition. A person commits an offense if:
(a) Without authority from the building official, he removes or destroys a red placard
placed by the building official;
(b) He occupies a vacant structure or dwelling unit on which the building official has
placed a red placard; or
(c) As owner of a structure or dwelling unit, he allows a person to occupy or continue
to occupy a structure or dwelling unit on which he is aware or should be aware that the
building official has placed a red placard.
Sec. 21-21 Emergency cases.
(a) In cases where it reasonably appears there is an immediate and imminent danger to
the life or safety of any person unless a dangerous building as defined in this chapter is
immediately vacated, repaired, closed or demolished, the building official shall cause the
immediate vacation, repair, closure or demolition of such dangerous building or part thereof.
The building official shall use the least intrusive means to abate the emergency.
(b) The building official shall make reasonable attempts to notify the affected persons
in accordance with section 21-15. The costs of such emergency repair, vacation or demolition
of such dangerous building shall be collected in the manner as provided for by section 21-16.
21-22 Disconnecting public utilities.
The building official may request that public utilities be disconnected in order that
demolition may be accomplished without delay when an order for demolition has been issued
or when an emergency situation exists.
21-23 Violation, penalty.
Any violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof is subject to a fine in accordance with the provisions of chapter 1, section
1-9 of the city’s code of ordinances. Each and every day a violation continues constitutes a
separate offense.
21-24 Civil Penalty.
In addition to imposing a criminal penalty, the city may, in accordance with Texas
Local Government Code Chapter 54, bring a civil action against a person violating a
provision of this chapter relating to dangerous buildings. The civil action may include, but is
not limited to a suit to recover a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 for each day or portion
of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted.
21-25 Judicial Review.
(a) Any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of record of property jointly or severally
aggrieved by an order of the Commission issued under section 21-14 may file in district court
a verified petition setting forth that the decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying
the grounds of the illegality. The petition must be filed by the owner, lienholder, or
mortgagee within 30 calendar days after the respective dates a copy of the final decision of
the city is mailed to them by first class mail, certified return receipt requested, or such
decision shall become final as to each of them upon the expiration of each such 30 calendar
day period.
(b) On the filing of the petition, the court may issue a writ of certiorari directed to the
city to review the order of the board and shall prescribe in the writ the time within which a
return on the writ must be made, which must be longer than 10 days, and served on the
relator or the relator’s attorney.
(c) The city may not be required to return the original papers acted on by it, but it is
sufficient for the city to return certified or sworn copies of the papers or of parts of the papers
as may be called for by the writ.
(d) The return must concisely set forth other facts as may be pertinent and material to
show the grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be verified.
(e) The issuance of the writ does not stay proceedings on the decision appealed from.
(f) Costs may not be allowed against the city.
(g) If the decision of the Commission is affirmed or not substantially reversed but only
modified, the district court shall allow to the city all attorney’s fees and other costs and
expenses incurred by it and shall enter a judgment for those items, which may be entered
against the property owners, lienholders, or mortgagees, as well as all persons subject to the
proceedings before the Commission.
(h) If no appeals are taken from the decision of the Commission within the required
period, the decision of the Commission is, in all things, final and binding.
Sec. 21-26 Seizure or sale of property to recover expenses
The city may foreclose a lien on property under this chapter in a judicial proceeding,
if:
(a) a building or other structure on the property has been demolished;
(b) a lien for the cost of demolition of the building or other structure on the property
has been created and that cost has not been paid more than 180 days after the date the lien
was filed; and
(c) ad valorem taxes are delinquent on all or part of the property.
(REVISED: Ordinance No. 2013-4589, June 6, 2013)
Chapter 22
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AND OFFENSES
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 22-1. Auctioneer records.
Sec. 22-2. Reserved.
Sec. 22-3. Reserved.
Sec. 22-4. Doorbells or knockers, improper use.
Sec. 22-5. Dropping or throwing articles from upper story of building.
Sec. 22-6. Fencing required for pits, holes, etc.
Sec. 22-7. Removal of sod, dirt, gravel, etc., from public places.
Sec. 22-8. Throwing or shooting stones, arrows, missiles, etc.
Sec. 22-9. Discharge of firearms.
Sec. 22-10. Hypodermic needles and syringes; sale, etc. restricted.
Secs. 22-11--22-19. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. SIGNS AND ADVERTISING
Sec. 22-20. Advertisements--Posting generally.
Sec. 22-21. Same--Posting on utility poles.
Sec. 22-22. Same--Deposit in public places or vehicles.
Sec. 22-23. Same--Placing in yards or on porches.
Sec. 22-24. Signs on public property.
Secs. 22-25--22-39. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. ADULT ACTIVITIES
Sec. 22-40. Definitions.
Sec. 22-41. Display of female breasts.
Sec. 22-42. Premises licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages.
Sec. 22-43. Urination and defecation in public.
Sec. 22-44. Entering restrooms of the opposite sex.
Sec. 22-45. Legitimate speech.
Sec. 22-46--22-60. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. UTILITIES
Sec. 22-61. Financial statement from public utilities.
Sec. 22-62. Records of communications between public utilities and city
required exceptions.
Sec. 22-63. Franchise required for public utility or passenger carrier service.
Secs. 22-64--22-70. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. GARAGE SALES
Sec. 22-71. Permitted in residential areas.
Sec. 22-72. Signs; size and location.
Sec. 22-73. No Auctions.
Sec. 22-74. Reserved.
Sec. 22-75. Each day separate offense.
Sec. 22-76. Abatement--Generally.
Sec. 22-77. Same--Separate violation.
Sec. 22-78. Same--Each hour subsequent offense.
ARTICLE VI. SOLICITATION OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
Sec. 22-79. Definitions.
Sec. 22-80. Solicitation of controlled substances prohibited.
Sec. 22-81. Penalty.
ARTICLE VII. TREE CARE
Sec. 22-90. Purpose.
Sec. 22-91. Definitions
Sec. 22-92. Tree Board
Sec. 22-93. Municipal responsibility.
Sec. 22-94. Adjacent Landowner Responsibility.
Sec. 22-95. Specifications and standards of practice.
Sec. 22-96. Trees near excavation or construction.
Sec. 22-97. Removal of diseased trees from private property.
Sec. 22-98. Prohibited actions.
Chapter 22
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AND OFFENSES
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 22-1. Auctioneer records.
Every auctioneer doing business in this city shall keep a record of all property sold
by him, the name and residence of the person for whom he sells such property, and the
name and residence of the purchaser. In the sale of animals, in addition to the foregoing, he
shall keep in his record an accurate description of such animals, together with their marks
and brands, if any. Such record shall at all times be open to the inspection of the city
council and any other officer of the city.
Sec. 22-2. Reserved.
Sec. 22-3. Reserved.
Sec. 22-4. Doorbells or knockers, improper use.
Whoever shall, in this city, mischievously or maliciously ring any door bell, or pull
or use any door knocker, or break or deface the same, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
Sec. 22-5. Dropping or throwing articles from upper story of building.
Any person who shall throw or let fall from a door or window or an upper story of
any house or building in this city, any water, slop or other liquid, trash or filth, or any
article or substance whatsoever, upon any sidewalk, street or other public place, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Sec. 22-6. Fencing required for pits, holes, etc.
Any person, being the owner or agent, or having control of vacant or unenclosed lot
within the corporate limits of the city, who shall allow any pits, holes or other similar
places to remain without guarding or fencing, or securely covering the same so as to
prevent persons and animals from falling therein, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Sec. 22-7. Removal of sod, dirt, gravel, etc., from public places.
Any person who shall, without first having obtained permission from the city
engineer, dig, remove or carry away, or cause or procure the same to be done, any sod,
stone, earth, sand or gravel from any street, alley water service, creek or public ground in
this city shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Sec. 22-8. Throwing or shooting stones, arrows, missiles, etc.
Any person who shall throw or cast any stone or other missile upon, at or against
any house in this city, or throw or shoot any bullet, stone or other missile from any
slingshot, rubber shooter or other contrivance of like kind, in, from or into any street, alley,
lane, public place, or enclosed grounds in this city, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
Any person who shall shoot any arrow from a bow or other contrivance, such arrow
equipped with a steel point or tip or similar material composing such point or tip, capable
of inflicting injury or death to birds, animals, or persons in the manner in which the same
was under the control of the person shooting such arrow from such bow or other
contrivance, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Sec. 22-9. Discharge of firearms.
Any person who shall fire or discharge any cannon, gun, pistol, or firearm of any
description, except in cases of urgent or grave necessity, in the city shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, except as provided herein. The firing or discharge of guns, pistols, and
firearms are allowed in the following circumstances:
(1) in shooting galleries and authorized ranges approved by the chief of police in
compliance with pertinent regulations, when under the supervision of qualified personnel
in competitive shooting clubs;
(2) under the direction and under regulations to be established by the chief of
police, animal control personnel and police officers may fire or discharge guns, pistols, or
firearms which fire projectiles designed to render unconscious dogs and other small
animals; and
(3) in areas of the City zoned A (Agricultural), the discharge of shotguns loaded
with shot no larger than number 6 (the smaller the number the larger the pellet size) is
permitted, provided the shotgun is discharged more than three hundred (300) yards from
any dwelling, business or roadway.
Sec. 22-10. Hypodermic needles and syringes; sale, etc. restricted.
(a) Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall sell, offer for sale, deliver
or give to any individual under the age of eighteen (18) years any hypodermic needles or
syringes, without the written consent of the parent or guardian of such purchaser or
recipient.
(b) Each person, firm or corporation selling or offering for sale or otherwise
handling the hypodermic needles and syringes shall keep and maintain a written register
reflecting the date of acquisition, the name and address of purchaser or recipient, item and
quantity. Said record shall be in duplicate, one copy to be maintained by preparer, and the
other copy to be delivered to the City of Temple Police Department not later than thirty
(30) days following the transaction.
(c) All persons purchasing or otherwise receiving the aforementioned products shall
give the written register and shall produce a valid Texas Driver's License or other
applicable identification at the request of the person, firm, or corporation selling or offering
for sale said products.
(d) The terms "sell," "offer for sale," "delivery," or "give," as used herein, shall
exclusively be limited, in definition, to apply to retail sales or distribution by persons, firms,
or corporations engaged either directly or indirectly in the sale, distribution, or supply of
hypodermic needles and syringes.
(e) Any person who shall violate any provisions of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00).
Secs. 22-11--22-19. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. SIGNS AND ADVERTISING
Sec. 22-20. Advertisements--Posting generally.
Any person who, without first having obtained the consent of the owner, shall stick,
paint or stamp upon any house, fence, wall, pavement, or other object not his own, any
written printed or other notice, bill sign, circular, poster or advertisement shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor.
Sec. 22-21. Same--Posting on utility poles.
It shall be unlawful for any person or any candidate for a public office to place, tack,
nail, paste or attached in any manner a circular, placard, picture, paper or other advertising
matter of any kind, or any announcement for public office, upon any telephone pole,
electric light pole or any other utility pole located within the city limits.
Sec. 22-22. Same--Deposit in public places or vehicles.
No person shall scatter, distribute, throw, deposit or place any advertisement,
circular, handbill or printed or written announcement upon any sidewalk, street or alley or
deposit, place or lease any such advertisement, circular, handbill or printed or written
announcement, in any automobile, truck, bus, or other vehicle, or within any public
building or upon any public grounds within the limits of the city.
Sec. 22-23. Same--Placing in yards or on porches.
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or cause to be distributed within the
territorial limits of the city any handbills or any printed or written advertising matter by
placing, or causing to be placed, the same in any yard or on any porch not in possession or
under the control of the person so distributing same. The provisions of this section shall not
be construed to apply to any newspaper or any publication printing news of a general
nature and keeping advertising space therein open to the public and the publication of
general advertising matter.
Sec. 22-24. Signs on public property.
(a) Definitions.
(1) Governmental sign. Any sign erected by a governmental entity for a
governmental purpose, including but not limited to traffic control devices,
street signs, barricades, survey monuments and markers, signs of public
utility companies indicating location of utilities or aiding service or safety,
and signs identifying governmental facilities.
(2) Median strip. A paved or planted strip dividing a street or highway into lanes
according to direction of travel.
(3) Sign. A sign, display, light, device, painting, drawing, message, plaque,
poster, billboard, or other thing designed or used to advertise or inform.
(b) Signs prohibited on median strips, parks and other public property. It shall be
unlawful for any person to place a sign, other than a governmental sign, on the premises of
any public property, including but not limited to, park land, median strips, and rights-ofway
maintained by a governmental entity.
(c) Signs permitted in privately maintained right-of-way. It shall be unlawful for any
person to place a sign that is not a governmental sign on a public right-of-way, unless the
sign is placed:
(1) On privately maintained portion of a public right-of-way with the prior
consent of the person charged by ordinance with maintaining that portion of
the right-of-way;
(2) By private license to occupy the right-of-way; or
(3) On right-of-way located within the central business area, as defined in the
zoning ordinance.
Signs must be erected in compliance with all other local, state and federal laws, regulations
and ordinances.
(d) Removal of signs by city. The superintendent of construction safety and services,
or his designee, shall cause to be removed any sign erected or existing in violation of this
section, and within five (5) days following removal, send a notice to any person whose
name and mailing address is listed on a removed sign. The notice shall specify the violation
involved, the location where the sign is stored, and the procedure for reclaiming the sign. If
no name and mailing address appears on a removed sign, the superintendent shall make a
reasonable effort to locate and notify the owner that the sign has been removed.
(e) Disposal of signs; costs. Any sign removed by order of the superintendent of
construction safety and services under this section shall become the property of the city
and, following the fifteenth day after removal, may be disposed of in any manner deemed
appropriate by the city. The cost of removal and storage of the sign shall be considered a
debt owed to the city by the owner of the sign, and may be recovered in an appropriate
court action by the city.
(f) Appeal to building board of adjustments. Any person having an interest in a sign
removed or ordered to be removed by the City of Temple may appeal the determination of
the superintendent of construction safety and services to the building board of appeals
within ten (10) days from receipt of a notice. The decision of the building board of appeals
shall be final.
(g) [Reserved.]
Secs. 22-25--22-39. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. ADULT ACTIVITIES
Sec. 22-40. Definitions.
Adult person means any male or female person who is eighteen (18) years or older.
Alcoholic beverage shall mean alcohol and any beverage containing more than onehalf
of one percent of alcohol by volume, which is capable of use for beverage purposes,
either alone or when diluted.
Beer means a malt beverage containing one-half of one percent of alcohol by
volume and not more than four (4) percent of alcohol by weight, and shall not be inclusive
of any beverage designated by label or otherwise by any other name than beer.
Premises shall mean the grounds as well as all of the buildings, vehicles, and
appurtenances pertaining thereto, and shall also include any adjacent premises, if directly or
indirectly under the control of the same person.
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common
areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and
shops.
Retail business, bar, club or cafe means any public place engaged in the selling of
beer or alcoholic beverages to the ultimate consumer thereof, for on premises consumption.
Sec. 22-41. Display of female breasts.
It shall be unlawful for an adult female to expose her breast(s) in a public place with:
(1) Intent to arouse or gratify the sexual desire of any person; or
(2) Intent to alarm or offend any person.
Sec. 22-42. Premises licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages.
It shall be unlawful for any adult person to appear in a retail business, bar, club, or
cafe, having a license to dispense or sell beer or other alcoholic beverages, in a state of
complete nudity, in a state of dress or undress as to expose his or her buttocks to the public
view, or, in the case of an adult female, in a state of dress or undress as to expose her
breast(s) to the public view.
Sec. 22-43. Urination and defecation in public.
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in any public place, or in
immediate proximity thereto, at a location which has not been designated as a restroom.
Sec. 22-44. Entering restrooms of the opposite sex.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and intentionally enter any public
restroom designated for the exclusive use of the sex opposite to his or her own, without the
permission of the owner, tenant, manager, lessee or other person in charge of the premises,
in a manner calculated to cause a disturbance.
Sec. 22-45. Legitimate speech.
The terms and provision of sections 22-40 through 22-44 of this article shall not
apply to theater productions, plays, and other forms of speech which, taken as a whole,
contain serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.
Sec. 22-46--22-60. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. UTILITIES
Sec. 22-61. Financial statement from public utilities.
On or before the first day of July of each calendar year, each public utility company
furnishing public utility services in the city and its inhabitants shall furnish to the city
controller a financial statement and income statement showing the amount invested in its
plant and properties in the city and showing its earnings, profit and loss and rate of return
on its investment in the City of Temple during the preceding fiscal year.
Sec. 22-62. Records of communications between public utilities and city required
exceptions.
(a) Each public utility doing business, supplying service or otherwise operating
within the City of Temple, Texas shall:
(1) Prepare, keep and maintain a record of each and every communication by
said public utility, its affiliates, representatives, agents or employees, with the
City of Temple, its representatives, agents, employees or officers. Such
records shall contain the name of the person contacting the regulatory
authority or member or employee of the regulatory authority, the name of the
business entities represented, a brief description of the subject matter of the
communication, and the action, if any, requested by the public utility, affiliate
or representative. The records shall be in printed or typewritten form, in the
English language and on white paper approximately eight and one-half (8
1/2) inches by eleven (11) inches in size, or in the form attached hereto as
Exhibit A. all such records shall be in chronological order, include a copy of
all written communications, and the record of each communication shall be
retained on file for a period of sixty (60) months from the date of
communication.
(2) Keep and maintain said records current, on a daily basis, open and readily
available to the public, during regular business hours, at a location
convenient to the public within the City of Temple.
(3) Prepare, keep, maintain and include, in a separate part of the hereinabove
described records, a record of communications with private citizens which
the public utility, its agents and employees, directly or indirectly requests to
contact or lobby with a member of the city council or city official on behalf
of the utility.
(4) In January, April, July and October of each year, file a true and correct copy
of the record of all communications, during the immediately preceding three
(3) calendar months, with the city secretary.
(b) The following communications and contacts are exempt, and are not required to
be kept in the records:
(1) Social contacts;
(2) Contacts with employees of the city council which do not pertain to the
regulation of utility rates;
(3) Routine inquiries of the utility company initiated by the council or city
employees;
(4) Communications between the water and sewer department of the City of
Temple and the Council, councilmen and employees of the city.
Sec. 22-63. Franchise required for public utility or passenger carrier service.
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation or association of persons to use or
occupy any public ground whatever in the City of Temple or any space above or below any
public ground for the purpose of conducting any public utility or passenger carrier service
wherein service is rendered to the public for hire or charge, unless permission is first had by
ordinance passed by a majority of all the members of the city council.
Secs. 22-64--22-70. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. GARAGE SALES
Sec. 22-71. Permitted in residential areas.
Occasional or garage sales will be permitted in those zoning districts where primary
use of property is residential.
(1) Only the sale of tangible personal property by the property owner who does
not hold himself out as engaging, nor does habitually engage, in the business
of selling such tangible personal property shall constitute a garage or
occasional sale under this article.
(2) There shall not be more than two (2) sales by the same property owner during
any twelve (12) month period, or on the same premises.
(3) All sales shall be confined to the garage, driveway, or patio of the premises.
(4) No merchandise acquired solely for the purpose of resale shall be sold.
(5) The duration of any sale shall not exceed three (3) consecutive calendar days.
Unsold items shall be placed out of public sight at the end of each day of sale
and upon completion of sale.
(6) Sales by churches, charities and fraternal organizations for the purpose of
raising funds may be held on property other than that owned by the
organization, and tangible personal property donated by members and others
may be sold.
(7) Two (2) or more families or owners of personal property may jointly engage
in the sale of tangible personal property on the property of one of the owners
of personal property, provided the owner on whose property the garage sale
is being held satisfies all other requirements of this article and does not hold
himself out as engaging, nor habitually engages, in the business of selling
such tangible personal property.
Sec. 22-72. Signs; size and location.
One sign is permitted, not to exceed two (2) square feet, upon the property where an
occasional garage sale is taking place. All signs at any other location are prohibited.
Sec. 22-73. No Auctions.
No sale of any of the property allowed to be sold under this article shall be by
auction, and such shall constitute a violation of this article.
Sec. 22-74. Reserved.
Sec. 22-75. Each day separate offense.
Each day any provision of this article is violated shall constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 22-76. Abatement--Generally.
Any individual holding an illegal garage sale under this article shall within one hour
of notice of violation of this article cease and desist any and all activity covered by this
article.
Sec. 22-77. Same--Separate violation.
Failure to so abate such illegal sale shall constitute a separate violation of this article.
Sec. 22-78. Same--Each hour subsequent offense.
After notice that an illegal sale is being held, the individual holding such sale shall
be guilty of a separate offense for each whole hour after the initial hour given to abate the
sale.
ARTICLE VI. SOLICITATION OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
Sec. 22-79. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this subsection, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates
another meaning:
Controlled substance shall have the meaning ascribed to it by Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat.
Ann. art. 4476-15 { 1.02(4), and any amendments thereto.
Controlled substance analogue shall have the meaning ascribed to it by Tex. Rev.
Civ. Stat. Ann. art. 4476-15 {1.02(5), and any amendment thereto.
Dangerous drug shall have the meaning ascribed to it by Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann.
art. 4476-14 { 2(a), and any amendments thereto.
Prohibited substance shall mean a "controlled substance," "controlled substance
analogue," "dangerous drug," "volatile chemical," or any combination thereof.
Volatile chemical shall mean any of the chemicals, or an isomer of any of the
chemicals, listed in Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann. art. 4476-13a { 2, and any amendments
thereto.
Sec. 22-80. Solicitation of controlled substances prohibited.
(a) A person commits an offense if, with intent to acquire a prohibited substance, he
requests, commands or attempts to induce another to sell, donate or otherwise transfer or
deliver a prohibited substance to the person.
(b) A person may not be convicted under this article on the uncorroborated
testimony of the person allegedly solicited. A conviction for solicitation under this article,
requires corroborative evidence of both the solicitation itself and the actor's intent that the
other person act on the solicitation.
(c) It is no defense to prosecution under this article that:
(1) No monetary or other consideration was tendered to the person solicited; or
(2) That the person solicited was unable or unwilling to transfer or deliver a
prohibited substance.
(d) It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution under this article that:
(1) The solicitation is made in furtherance of a transaction which would not
constitute a violation of any applicable law; or
(2) The solicitation is made by a peace officer or federal law enforcement officer
in the lawful discharge of his duties or by a law enforcement agent acting in
the lawful discharge of an official duty.
Sec. 22-81. Penalty.
Violation of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable, upon conviction,
by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two thousand dollars
($2,000.00). However, any conduct proscribed hereunder which also constitutes an offense
under State law shall not be prosecuted pursuant to and punishable as provided by the
applicable State law. An offense under this article is not a lesser included offense under
Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. art. 4476-14 or Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. art. 4476-13a.
ARTICLE VII. TREE CARE
Sec. 22-90. Purpose.
The City Council adopts this ordinance to ensure proper planting and maintenance
of trees on public property, to enhance property values, and improve the quality of life
within the City, consistent with the strategic goals adopted by the City Council. In
furtherance of these goals, the City herein creates an advisory board on tree planting and
maintenance, establishes practices governing the planting of trees on public property,
requires that property owners maintain trees on the City right-of-way adjacent to their
property, and makes provision for the emergency removal of diseased trees on private
property under certain conditions. With respect to public property, (for example, street
right of way, utility easements or drainage facilities) acquired by dedication to the City
during the development process, the rules with respect to the maintenance or removal of
trees apply to the property after it is acquired by the City.
Sec. 22-91. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
(a) ADJACENT GREEN SPACE—The space between the curb of a City Street, or
where no curb is present, the edge of the paving or traveled portion of a City Street, and
the property line of an Adjacent Property Owner, excluding any area covered by a
sidewalk.
(b) ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNER—An individual, entity, organization, or
other person owning property bordering a city street.
(c) CALIPER–Once planted, the diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches, six
(6) inches above ground level.
(d) CITY PROPERTY—Includes all interests in real property owned, leased or
otherwise under the control of the City after acceptance thereof by the City. The
definition includes land and the permanent improvements (for example, buildings) to
land. City Property includes City Streets.
(e) CITY STREET–A public road, easement or alley. The term includes the entire
area of a public road, easement or alley up to the property line of an Adjacent Property
Owner, and in the case of a public street both the paved portion of a roadway and the
space, including a sidewalk in some cases, up to the private property line.
(d) CITY TREE—A tree or other woody vegetation on City property, whether
planted initially by the City or a private property owner. City Trees are found on City
Property including the unpaved portion of a City Street between the edge of the pavement
and adjoining private property line,
(e) DRIP LINE—The perimeter of a tree measured as a vertical line extending
from the outermost edge of the tree canopy or shrub branch to the ground.
(f) NUISANCE–Any condition or act that unreasonably poses a threat to adjoining
property or public health, safety and welfare.
(g) ORNAMENTAL TREE—A tree that at maturity typically reaches a height of
twenty-five (25) feet or less.
(h) UTILITY COMPANIES—Private utility companies that are authorized by
franchise or State or Federal law to occupy City Property to provide electricity, gas,
sewer, water, telephone and cable television to the public.
(i) CITY FORESTER—an employee or agent of the City working under the
general direction of the City Manager to encourage the planting, maintenance and
management of trees on City Property.
Sec. 22-92. Tree Board.
(a) Establishment and membership. The City Council hereby creates an
advisory board known as the "Tree Board." The Board shall consist of five members, one
of whom shall be a member of the Parks and Leisure Services Advisory Board, one
member serving on the board of directors of Keep Temple Beautiful, Inc., one member
selected from the Planning and Zoning Commission, one member who is an employee of
the Blackland Research and Extension Center, and one member appointed at large. The
City Council shall solicit nominations for board appointments from the Parks and Leisure
Services Advisory Board, the Planning and Zoning Commission, the executive director
of the Blackland Research and Extension Center, and from the board of directors of Keep
Temple Beautiful, Inc. Representatives designated, by the board of directors for Temple
Independent School District and Belton Independent School District, shall be ex officio
members of the Board. Members of the Tree Board shall serve without compensation.
(b) Term of office. Board members shall be appointed for three year terms, except
for the term of the initial board. To create staggered terms, the initial members shall be
appointed as follows: two members shall be appointed for a term of one year; two
members shall be appointed for a term of two years; and one member shall be appointed
for a term of three years. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for three years.
(c) Duties. The duties of the Tree Board shall include:
(1) Development of public awareness and education programs relating to trees;
(2) Promotion of Arbor Day in the City;
(3) Development and updating of a five-year plan for planting trees on City
Property;
(4) Submission of a yearly report to the City Council of its activities;
(5) Advising the Parks and Leisure Services Department on the issues relating to
the planting or maintenance of trees and other landscaping on City Property;
(6) Development of a list of recommended trees for planting on City Property; and
(7) Such other duties as may be assigned to it by the City Council from time to
time.
(d) Meetings. The Board shall meet a minimum of four times each year. The Director of
the Parks and Services Department or the chair of the Tree Board may schedule additional
meetings in their discretion.
(e) Officers. The Board shall annually select one of the members to serve as chair,
and may appoint a second member to serve as vice-chair.
Sec. 22-93. Municipal responsibility.
(a) Maintenance of Trees on City Property. The City or its agents shall perform
all necessary maintenance to preserve and protect City trees in a safe and healthy
condition, including trimming, spraying, fertilizing, watering, staking, mulching, treating
for disease or injury, and removal if necessary. The City shall plant, prune, maintain and
remove trees, plants and shrubs on City Property to ensure public safety or to preserve or
enhance the appearance of such public grounds. The obligation of the City to plant,
prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs and to ensure public safety under
this section is a duty owed to the general public and not to any particular property owner
or a third party. Trees, plants and shrubs encroaching on Utility Companies’ overhead or
underground facilities shall be pruned and or removed by the Utility Company.
(b) Appointment of a City Forester. The City Manager shall designate a person
to be City Forester who may be an employee of the City or a private contractor. The
duties of the City Forester shall be established by the City Manager, and may include
management of the City’s tree farm, serving as an advisor to the City Tree Board,
working with City departments to plan for, plant and maintain City Trees and other
landscaping, and developing public education programs relating to this ordinance.
(c) Removal Recommendation. The City Forester shall recommend that a tree or
part of a tree on City Property be removed if the tree or tree part, if the tree:
(1) Poses a potential public safety risk or hazard;
(2) Causes an unsafe condition;
(3) By its nature, is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, waterlines
or other public improvements; or
(4) Is infected with any injurious fungus, insect or pest.
Sec. 22-94. Adjacent Landowner Responsibility.
(a) Property owners are responsible for the reasonable and routine maintenance of
trees and other landscaping on the unpaved portion of City Streets between the edge of
pavement or the curb and their property line.
(b) No property owner shall be permitted to allow a tree, or other plant growing on
his or her property to obstruct or interfere with the view of drivers of vehicles or
pedestrians on the sidewalk to create a traffic hazard. Property owners must maintain a
clear space of eight feet above the surface of a sidewalk and fourteen feet above the
surface of an adjacent street.
(c) Property Owners shall be permitted to plant only low-growing trees and or
shrubs near power lines that have a mature height of less than 25 feet. The City Forester
and Utility Companies may provide a list of recommended tree and shrub species suitable
for planting to property owners.
(d) If an obstruction persists, the City Forester shall mail a notice, in writing, to the
property owner to prune or remove the tree, shrub or plant within ten calendar days. If the
owner fails to comply with the notice, the City may undertake the necessary work and
charge the cost for such work to the property owner.
Sec. 22-95. Specifications and standards of practice.
(a) Trees on City Property should not be planted in a manner that will obstruct a
driver’s view at street intersections. Trees on City Property shall be planted and
maintained in a manner to preserve, at a minimum, a 25 foot visibility triangle at the
intersection of City streets. Intersection visibility triangles are further explained in
Chapter 13 of the City’s Zoning Ordinance. Section 32-18 of the City’s Code of
Ordinances contains additional regulations about obstructions within the right-of-way.
(b) Visibility regulations as set forth by the Texas Department of Transportation
(TxDOT) shall be adhered to for all streets owned by TxDOT, including, but not limited
to, IH 35 and Loop 363 .
(c) City Trees shall be spaced appropriate for their species in line with the
suggested spacing on the Tree Board’s recommended tree list.
(d) Location of underground utilities should be requested prior to any planting,
especially if disturbing soil to a depth of 16 inches or more or excavating on or near City
Property. Requests to locate City facilities should be made to the City’s public works
division. Requests to locate other utility operators’ facilities should be made to an
authorized, underground notification center such as DIG TESS (Texas Excavation Safety
Systems 1 800 DIG TESS).
(e) The City adopts the Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice of
the International Society of Arboricultural as published from time to time by the
American National Standard for Tree Care Operations (ANSI A300).
(f) All planting and maintenance of trees on City Property done by the City shall
conform to specifications and standards as set forth in ANSI A300 and or utility industry
standards including compliance with applicable laws, regulations, tariffs service
rules/guidelines, and publications such as PUC customer facts “All About Trees and
Power lines,” “Pruning Trees” by Dr.Alex L. Shigo and other such publications.
Sec. 22-96. Trees near excavation or construction.
(a) No person or utility shall excavate any ditches, tunnels or trenches, or lay any
drive within the drip line of a City Tree without first obtaining approval from the City
Forester.
(b) Except as provided herein, no person or utility shall remove a City Tree from
City Property without first obtaining approval from the City Forester. Utility Companies
franchised by the City in easements or right-of-way accepted by the City or otherwise
authorized to provide utility service are authorized to prune or maintain City Trees on
City Property for routine maintenance or emergency conditions that endanger public
safety and welfare by interfering with utility service or during the course of reestablishing
utility service. In an emergency, when reasonably necessary to protect public health or
safety or to prevent an imminent interruption of service Utility Companies may remove
City Trees on City Property.
(c) All City Trees near any excavation or construction of any building, structure,
or street work shall be guarded with a substantial fence, frame, or box not less than four
feet high. Whenever possible, the diameter of such fence, frame or box should be at least
one foot past the canopy of the tree. At no time shall the fence, frame, or box extend
beyond the sidewalk into the street, nor shall such fence, frame, or box cause a hardship
for those using the sidewalk.
(d) When construction, excavation, and/or material deposits result in the
destruction and/or removal of a City Tree, the person responsible for that damage shall
replace the City Tree with either a tree or trees of equivalent caliper size in the vicinity of
the removed City tree. Replacement trees must be on the City’s published list of
recommended trees. Franchised or licensed Utility Companies are exempted from this
subsection.
Sec. 22-97. Removal of diseased trees from private property.
(a) Any trees on City Property or private property which are determined by the
City Forester to be diseased by an epidemic disease or insect which spreads to other trees
(for example, Oak Wilt) are declared a public nuisance and the City may require their
treatment or removal. Private property owners have the duty, at their own expense,
remove or treat any trees upon their property which are determined to be diseased by an
epidemic disease or insect which spreads to other trees within the City limits or extraterritorial
jurisdiction or where the condition of a tree poses an eminent physical danger
to the users of public property.
(b) The City Forester may provide the property owner with written notification
and a deadline upon which the diseased tree(s) should be appropriately removed and/or
treated for the condition diagnosed.
(c) The City may remove diseased trees at the owner’s expense if the owner does
not comply with treatment and/or removal of diseased trees as specified by the City
Forester within the written notification period.
Sec. 22-98. Prohibited actions.
(a) No person shall fasten or attach to a City Tree, any sign, poster, bill, notice or
advertisement of any kind.
(b) No person or utility shall cause or permit any harmful or toxic substance into
the soil within the drip line of a City Tree which could injure such tree.
(c) No person shall fasten or cause to be fastened any animal to a City Tree or
permit any animal owned by him or in his charge to stand so near a City Tree so that the
tree may be gnawed or otherwise injured by the animal.
(d) No City Tree shall be planted to unreasonably interfere with, any drainage,
sewer, water, or utility easement. Trees planted in close proximity to power lines shall be
ornamental trees. The City may remove trees or other landscaping that unreasonably
interferes with traffic on adjacent public streets or with drainage, sewer, water or other
franchised utilities.
(Ordinance No. 2006-4117, December 21, 2006)
(Ordinance No. 2007-4127, March 1, 2007, Revised Sec. 22-93[a])




Chapter 24
NOISE
Sec. 24-1. Definitions.
Sec. 24-2. Loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises generally.
Sec. 24-3. Playing of radios, phonographs, etc.
Sec. 24-4. Use of stationary loudspeakers or amplifiers.
Sec. 24-5. Building operations. – REPEALED BY ORD 2012-4531, May 3, 2012
Sec. 24-6. Noisy animals and birds.
Sec. 24-7. Excessive noise near school or hospital.
Sec. 24-8. Shouting of peddlers, hawkers and vendors.
Sec. 24-9. Use of noise to attract attention to performance, show or sale.
Sec. 24-10. Noisy vehicles generally.
Sec. 24-11. Loading vehicles; opening or destruction of bales, boxes, etc.
Sec. 24-12. Sounding of vehicle horn or signaling device.
Sec. 24-13. Vehicle mufflers.
Sec. 24-14. Sound trucks--Purposes for which use permitted.
Sec. 24-15. Same--License.
Sec. 24-16. Same--Use regulations.
Sec. 24-17. Certain acts declared not to violate chapter.
Sec. 24-18. Suspension of enforcement of chapter during emergencies.
Chapter 24
NOISE
Sec. 24-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them:
Christmas music. "Christmas music," as played by the Temple Chamber of Commerce
or any of its regular committees, is music of a Christmas theme amplified during the
Christmas season and either stationary or moving in the Chamber's Christmas parade.
Sound truck. A "sound truck" is a vehicle on or in which any device, apparatus, or
instrument is used for the amplification of the human voice or any sound or noise or other
sound making or sound reproducing device.
Sec. 24-2. Loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises generally.
Any unreasonably loud, disturbing, unnecessary noise which causes material distress,
discomfort or injury to persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof is
hereby declared to be a nuisance and is hereby prohibited. Any noise of such character,
intensity and continued duration which substantially interferes with the comfortable
enjoyment of private homes by persons of ordinary sensibilities is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and is hereby prohibited.
Sec. 24-3. Playing of radios, phonographs, etc.
The playing of any radio, phonograph or other musical instrument in such manner or
with such volume, particularly during the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to
annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons of ordinary sensibilities in any
dwelling, hotel or other type of residence is hereby prohibited.
Sec. 24-4. Use of stationary loudspeakers or amplifiers.
The use of any stationary loudspeaker or amplifier of such intensity that annoys and
disturbs persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof, or the use of any
stationary loudspeaker or amplifier operated on any week day between the hours of 10:30
p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time on Sunday, is hereby prohibited.
Sec. 24-5. Building operations.
Repealed by Ordinance No. 2012-4531, May 3, 2012
Sec. 24-6. Noisy animals and birds.
The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long-continued noise,
shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate
vicinity is hereby prohibited.
Sec. 24-7. Excessive noise near school or hospital.
The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school or institution
of learning while the same is in session, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably
interferes with the workings of such institutions, shall be unlawful, providing conspicuous
signs are displayed in such manner indicating that the same is a school or hospital street.
Sec. 24-8. Shouting of peddlers, hawkers and vendors.
The raucous shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers, and vendors, which disturbs
the peace and quiet of the neighborhood, is prohibited.
Sec. 24-9. Use of noise to attract attention to performance, show or sale.
The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of
attracting attention, by the creation of noise, to any performance, show or sale of
merchandise is prohibited.
Sec. 24-10. Noisy vehicles generally.
The running of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded
or in such manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, jarring or rattling noise
or vibration shall be unlawful.
Sec. 24-11. Loading vehicles; opening or destruction of bales, boxes, etc.
The creation of any loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or
unloading of any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and
containers is prohibited.
Sec. 24-12. Sounding of vehicle horn or signaling device.
The continued or frequent sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle, except as a danger or warning signal, and the creation by
means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh noise for any unnecessary
and unreasonable period of time is hereby prohibited.
Sec. 24-13. Vehicle mufflers.
No automobile, truck or other vehicle shall be operated upon any roadway in the city
unless the same is provided with a muffler which is in efficient and actual working condition,
and the use of a cut-out is prohibited.
Sec. 24-14. Sound trucks--Purposes for which use permitted.
Sound trucks may be operated within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose
of:
(1) The dissemination of information of public interest and involving partisan
issues, or
(2) The dissemination of information of public interest and not involving partisan
issues.
After the obtaining of a license therefor as provided in section 24-15 and after
payment of the prescribed fee therefor.
For the purposes of this section, matters of public interest and of a partisan nature
include political announcements, music, and speeches for or against issues submitted to
voters in elections, for or against candidates for public office, and all other matters of public
interest involving partisan issues.
Matters of a public interest and not of a partisan nature include: "pay your poll tax"
campaigns by the Temple Jaycees and any matter of public interest of a noncontroversial
nature and completely lacking in partisan issues.
Sec. 24-15. Same--License.
Any person desiring to operate a sound truck upon the streets, alleys, or other public
grounds of the city shall apply to the city controller for a license and in such application shall
give the name of the owner of the vehicle, the name of the operator, the kind and character of
vehicle and apparatus to be used and the length of time for which the license is desired. The
fee for the issuance of such a license shall be:
(1) For the use of each device in connection with matters of public interest of a
partisan nature, as defined in section 24-14, or in political campaigns, five
dollars ($5.00).
(2) For the use of each device for the purpose of the dissemination of information
of public interest and of a nonpartisan nature, as defined in section 24-14, no
fee.
The license for the operation of a sound truck shall be a permit for the purpose stated
in the application only and not for more than sixty (60) days.
Sec. 24-16. Same--Use regulations.
Regulations for the use of sound amplifying equipment in the operation of sound
trucks shall be:
(1) The only sounds permitted are music or human speech.
(2) Operations are permitted for four (4) hours each day, except on Sundays, when
no operations shall be authorized. The permitted four (4) hours of operation
shall be between the hours of 11:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. and between the hours
of 4:30 p.m. and 6:30 p.m.
(3) Sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the sound truck upon
which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least ten (10)
miles per hour, except when such truck is stopped or impeded by traffic.
Where stopped by traffic the sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated
for longer than one minute at each such stop.
(4) Sound shall not be issued within one hundred (100) yards of hospitals, schools,
churches or courthouses.
(5) The human speech and music amplified shall not be profane, lewd, indecent, or
slanderous.
(6) The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible for a
distance in excess of one hundred (100) feet from the sound truck and so that
such volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing, or a
nuisance to persons within the area of audibility.
Sec. 24-17. Certain acts declared not to violate chapter.
The following acts are declared not to be noise nuisances in violation of this chapter:
(1) The operation of a sound truck duly licensed by the city and operated as
provided for in this chapter.
(2) The playing of Christmas music by the Temple Chamber of Commerce or any
of its regular committees, when the same is duly licensed by the city and is a
part of its regular Christmas activities.
Sec. 24-18. Suspension of enforcement of chapter during emergencies.
The mayor or some officer designated by him in case of emergency can suspend the
enforcement of this chapter insofar as then and there considered necessary for the purpose of
the dissemination to the public of any matter pertinent to dissemination because of disaster,
catastrophe, or any other state of affairs creating an emergency.
Chapter 25
PARKS AND RECREATION
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 25-1. Definitions.
Sec. 25-2. Establishing hours of operation for parks.
Sec. 25-3. Establishing user fees and regulations for parks.
Sec. 25-4. Use prohibited during certain hours.
Sec. 25-5. Exception and additional restrictions.
Sec. 25-6. Park curfews.
Sec. 25-7--25-11. Reserved.
Sec. 25-12. Interpretation and severability.
Sec. 25-13. Possession of Glass Beverage Containers in City Outdoor
Parks and Indoor Recreation Facilities.
Section 25-14. Consumption or Possession of Alcoholic Beverages In
Jones Park and Temple Skate Park Prohibited.
ARTICLE II. PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD
Section 25-16. Created.
Section 25-17. Purposes.
Section 25-18. Membership.
Section 25-19. Quorum; voting.
Section 25-20. Chairman and meetings.
Section 25-21. Appointment and terms.
Chapter 25
PARKS AND RECREATION
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 25-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms, names, words and phrases shall have the
meanings in this section given them:
(a) Public park or playground shall mean a park, playground, recreation area,
together with parking lot, which is operated, maintained and controlled by the City of
Temple and heretofore platted, dedicated and designated as a public park within the City of
Temple.
(b) Peace officer shall mean a sworn officer of the law, certified by the State of
Texas or employed by a federal agency, with law enforcement duties and employed by the
City of Temple, Bell County, the State of Texas or the federal government.
(c) Firemen shall mean and include any person employed by and in the employ of the
City of Temple Fire Department.
(d) Utility company employees shall mean an employee of the City of Temple
Water and Sewer Department, Southwestern Bell Telephone Company, Texas Power and
Light Company, or any other firm or corporation having a franchise from the City of
Temple and keeping and maintaining transmission or service lines in the park.
(e) Scope and course of their employment shall mean actually on duty and being
paid by their employer at the time and performing an assignment, job or task for the
employer which benefits the general public or serves the purpose for which the employer
was given a franchise by the City of Temple.
Sec. 25-2. Establishing hours of operation for parks.
The city manager is hereby authorized to establish the hours of operation for all
facilities within public parks and playgrounds.
Sec. 25-3. Establishing user fees and regulations for parks.
The City Council authorizes the City Manager, or his designee, to establish usage
fees, rental rates, and policies and regulations governing the use of all facilities, property,
equipment or programs managed or operated by the Parks and Leisure Services Department
now or in the future, including but not limited to , the Frank W. Mayborn Civic and
Convention Center; the Gober House; athletic ball fields; tennis courts; skate parks,
swimming pools; picnic pavilions, recreation membership rates; player fees; program fees;
and recreational or athletic equipment, except where the City Council has specifically
retained rate making or use regulating authority (e.g., Sammons Park Golf Course). The
Staff will provide the City Council with an annual updated fee schedule and regulations
governing the use of its facilities, equipment and programs above each September with a
summary of changes adopted during the previous year.
Sec. 25-4. Use prohibited during certain hours.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remain in, enter into or trespass upon any
public park or playground during the hours the park is closed to the public, as established in
this chapter and evidenced by a sign posted at each entrance to the park or playground,
giving notice of the hours the park or playground is open and the hours it is closed. It is a
defense to prosecution that a person charged with violating the curfew of a public park or
playground is a utility company employee, fireman or peace officer acting within the scope
and course of their employment at the time of the alleged offense.
Sec. 25-5. Exception and additional restrictions.
The chief of police is authorized to vary the hours of operation for a public park or
playground during an emergency when, in his opinion, such action is necessary to protect
the public safety, prevent a riot or preserve the peace. The chief of police may order the
closing of any public park or playground for a period of twelve (12) hours and, with the
approval of the city manager, for longer periods of time.
Sec. 25-6. Park curfews.
Park curfews shall be set by resolution of the City Council. Curfews do not apply to
events conducted or co-sponsored by the Parks and Leisure Services Department.
Sec. 25-7--25-11. Reserved.
Sec. 25-12. Interpretation and severability.
This chapter shall not be deemed to prohibit a constitutionally protected activity and
shall be so interpreted by the courts. If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or provision
of this chapter is held unconstitutional or invalid by the courts, such holding and decision
shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining portions of this chapter, it being the
legislative intent that this chapter not apply to constitutionally protected conduct shall stand
notwithstanding the invalidity of any par. [sic]
Sec. 25-13. Possession of Glass Beverage Containers in City Outdoor Parks
and Indoor Recreation Facilities.
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into or upon the outdoor sections of any
City park or other City property managed by the Parks and Leisure Services Department, or
have in his possession while thereon, any glass drinking containers of any kind. This
provision shall not apply to glass baby bottles, glass-lined vacuum bottles, glass-lined picnic
beverage coolers, and glass jars. This provision shall not apply to possession of any glass
drinking containers inside City recreational facilities or other facilities managed by the
Parks and Leisure Services Department so long as such possession is compliant with City
policy at the time.
Section 25-14. Consumption or Possession of Alcoholic Beverages In Jones
Park and Temple Skate Park Prohibited.
No person shall consume, or possess with the intent to consume, an alcoholic
beverage within the confines of Jones Park or Temple Skate Park.
ARTICLE II. PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD
Section 25-16. Created.
There is hereby created the parks and recreation board.
Section 25-17. Purposes.
The board shall have the general purpose of advising the city council and the director of
parks and recreation on matters relating to the city's parks and recreational programs.
Section 25-18. Membership.
The board shall consist of nine (9) residents of the City of Temple. The city manager shall
be an ex officio member of the board.
Section 25-19. Quorum; voting.
Five (5) members of the board shall constitute a quorum. A majority of those present shall
be sufficient to approve or disapprove any matter before the board provided that a quorum is
present.
Section 25-20. Chairman and meetings.
The board shall select one of its members as chairperson and shall adopt its own rules and
methods of procedure.
Section 25-21. Appointment and terms.
Except as provided herein, the members of the board shall be appointed by the
mayor, subject to the approval of the city council, for three-year terms. The two current
members of the board whose terms expire in 1993, and three current members of the board
whose terms expire in 1994, shall continue to serve on the board until their terms expire.
The mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall appoint three new members for a
three year term, and one new member for a one year term after adoption of this ordinance.
In the event of a vacancy in any previously appointed position, the mayor, with the approval
of the city council, will appoint an individual to fill the unexpired term.
Chapter 26
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT VENDORS
ARTICLE I. AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION
Sec. 26-1. Intent to Prohibit Certain Kinds of Aggressive Solicitation.
Sec. 26-2. Definitions.
Sec. 26-3. Aggressive solicitation prohibited.
Sec. 26-4. Culpable mental state.
Sec. 26-5. Applicability to lawful demand for payment.
Sec. 26-6 - 26-10 Reserved.
ARTICLE II. LICENSE FOR TRANSIENT AND ITINERANT PEDDLERS
AND VENDORS SELLING IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS
Sec. 26-11. Definitions.
Sec. 26.12. Required.
Sec. 26-13. Application--Generally.
Sec. 26-14. Same--Of corporation, firm or partnership.
Sec. 26-15. Photographs required of applicant.
Sec. 26-16. Physical examination if applicant proposes to sell food.
Sec. 26-17. Fee.
Sec. 26-18. Investigation by Director of Finance and decision.
Sec. 26-19. Applicant's deposit or bond.
Sec. 26-20. Issuance; contents; effect; term; display.
Sec. 26-21. Refusal of employee's license.
Sec. 26-22. Renewals.
Sec. 26-23. Appeals from decisions of Director of Finance.
Sec. 26-24. Records to be kept; Director of Finance to act as custodian of
records.
Sec. 26-25. Compensation for health officer for services rendered under this
article.
Sec. 26-26. Payment of expenses incurred under article.
Sec. 26-27. Exemption from article.
Chapter 26
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT VENDORS
ARTICLE I. AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION
Section 26-1. Intent to Prohibit Certain Kinds of Aggressive Solicitation.
The Council finds that:
(a) Solicitation in certain situations and locations is by its nature
aggressive, and by its nature disturbing and disruptive to residents and
businesses and contributes to the loss of access to and enjoyment of
public places and to a sense of fear, intimidation and disorder.
(b) Similarly, certain forms of solicitation are aggressive, e.g., approaching
or following pedestrians, repetitive soliciting despite refusals, the use of
abusive or profane language to cause fear and intimidation, unwanted
physical contact, or the intentional blocking of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic, and contribute to the loss of access to and enjoyment of public
places and to a sense of fear, intimidation and disorder.
(c) This ordinance is intended to protect citizens from the fear and
intimidation accompanying certain kinds of solicitation, and not to limit
a constitutionally protected activity.
Section 26-2. Definitions.
In this Article:
(a) AGGRESSIVE MANNER means:
(1) Touching the solicited person without the solicited person's
consent;
(2) Blocking the path of a pedestrian or a person in vehicle, or the
entrance to any building or vehicle when soliciting a person;
(3) Following behind, ahead or alongside a person who walks away
from the panhandler after being solicited;
(4) Using profane or abusive language, either during the solicitation
or following a refusal to make a donation, or making any
statement, gesture, or other communication which would cause a
reasonable person to fear for his or her safety or feel compelled to
donate.
(b)AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE means a device, linked to a
bank's account records, which is able to carry out banking transactions.
(c) AUTOMATED TELLER FACILITY means the area comprised of
one or more automatic teller machines, and any adjacent space that is
made available to banking customers.
(d)BANK includes a bank, savings bank, savings and loan association,
credit union, trust company, or similar financial institution.
(e) BUS means a vehicle operated by the City or a transit authority for
public transportation.
(f) CHECK CASHING BUSINESS means a person in the business of
cashing checks, drafts, or money orders for consideration.
(g) PUBLIC AREA means an outdoor area which the public has access and
includes, but is not limited to, a sidewalk, street, highway, park, parking
lot, alleyway, pedestrian way, or the common area of a school, hospital,
apartment house, office building, transport facility, or shop.
(h) SOLICIT means to request, by the spoken, written, or printed word, or
by other means of communication an immediate donation or transfer of
money or another thing of value from another person, regardless of the
solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value,
and regardless of whether consideration is offered.
Section 26-3. Aggressive solicitation prohibited.
(a) A person commits an offense if the person knowingly solicits in an aggressive
manner in a public area.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person solicits:
(1) in a bus, at a bus station or stop, or at a facility operated by a
transportation authority for passengers;
(2) within 25 feet of:
(A) an automated teller facility:
(B) the entrance or exit of a bank; or
(C) the entrance or exit of a check cashing business;
(3) at a marked crosswalk; or
(4) Solicits in a public place between the hours of 9 p.m. and 8 a.m.
Section 26-4. Culpable mental state.
A culpable mental state is not required, and need not be proved, for an offense
under Section 26-3 (b)(1), (2), (3) and (4).
Section 26-5. Applicability to lawful demand for payment. This Article is not
intended to proscribe a demand for payment for services rendered or goods delivered.
Sections 26-6 - 26-10 Reserved.
(Ordinance No. 2001-2804, 11-15-01)
ARTICLE II. LICENSE FOR TRANSIENT AND ITINERANT PEDDLERS
AND VENDORS SELLING IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS
Sec. 26-11. Definitions.
For the purpose of interpreting this article, the following words and terms used
herein are defined as follows:
Business area. The term "business area" shall mean any part of the area of the city
included in Zones E, F, G and H, as defined and described in the zoning ordinance and map
of the city and as amended from time to time.
Fixed place of business. The term "fixed place of business" shall mean a building or
part thereof owned or leased by the person desiring to sell goods, wares or merchandise and
in which such person actually maintains and operates his business in which he sells goods,
wares or merchandise to the general public. The temporary renting by any person of a hotel
room or a room in a rooming or boardinghouse shall not be sufficient to constitute a "fixed
place of business" within the meaning of this article.
Goods, wares or merchandise. The term "goods, wares or merchandise" shall mean
personal property of every kind and character, whether specifically mentioned herein or
not, and shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: Photographs, photographic
service, pictures, coupons, tickets, written promises redeemable in money, goods or other
things of value, seeds, coats, clothing, rugs, tapestries, shoes, shirts, furniture, stoves,
hardware, cooking utensils, dress goods, groceries, medicines, clocks, lawn mowers, tools,
cook stoves or ranges, carriages, washing machines, churns, panorama or view shows,
musical instruments, magazines, newspapers, books, monuments, brushes, vacuum
cleaners, aluminum ware, encyclopedias, almanacs, trees, shrubbery, fruit, vegetables, milk,
food of all kinds, sewing machines, cosmetics, perfume, insect and pest control services
(including the control of ants, insects, termites, carpet beetles and tree borers), and kitchen
ware of all kinds.
Residential area. The term "residential area" shall mean any part of the area of the
city included in Zones A, B, C and D, as defined and described in the zoning ordinance and
map of the city and as amended from time to time.
Transient and itinerant peddler and vendor. The term "transient and itinerant
peddler and vendor" shall mean any person who does not maintain a fixed place of business
in a business area of the city and who sells or takes orders for the sale of goods, wares or
merchandise in a residential area of the city without being first invited to do so by the
purchaser thereof.
Sec. 26.12. Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person who is a transient and itinerant peddler and
vendor to sell or take orders for the sale of any goods, wares or merchandise in any
residential area of the city, without first having obtained a license to engage in such activity
and which license is in full force and effect.
Sec. 26-13. Application--Generally.
Each person desiring to secure a license under the terms of this article shall file a
written application with the Director of Finance, which application shall give the following
information:
(1) The full name and post office address of the applicant.
(2) The state, county, city or town where the applicant has his permanent
residence.
(3) The age, height, weight, complexion, color of hair and color of eyes of the
applicant.
(4) A full and complete description of the goods, wares or merchandise which
the applicant desires to sell.
(5) Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony in any state
or federal court, and if so, the nature of the offense, the name of the court, the
date of each conviction and the time, if any, served under each conviction.
(6) The names and post office addresses of five (5) persons as references, with
which the license board may communicate for information regarding the
applicant.
Such application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant and shall be filed by
him in person with the Director of Finance.
Sec. 26-14. Same--Of corporation, firm or partnership.
If the application for a license under this article is filed by a corporation, firm or
partnership with the intention of having various employees work under such license, the
application shall be filed by an authorized official of the applicant. In such case, the
application shall give the pertinent information required in section 26-13 with respect to the
applicant and, in addition thereto, the applicant shall furnish a list of all of its employees
who will work under such license and shall certify that each of such employees is a bona
fide employee of the applicant, whose activities under such license will be covered by the
bond filed by the applicant as provided in this article. Such applicant shall be required to
obtain only one license for all of its employees, but no employee of the applicant shall be
allowed to work under such license until such employee has personally furnished to the
Director of Finance the information about himself required by section 26-14 of all
applicants, which shall be signed and sworn to by each such employee.
Sec. 26-15. Photographs required of applicant.
Each applicant for a license under this article shall file, with his application therefor,
two (2) photographic likenesses of himself of an approximate size of one and one-half (1
1/2) by two (2) inches. Such photographs shall also be furnished by each employee of a
corporation, firm or partnership required to file information by the provisions of section 26-
15.
Sec. 26-16. Physical examination if applicant proposes to sell food.
If the applicant for a license under this article proposes to sell food or food products
of any kind that are for human consumption, no license shall be granted to him until he
shall have first been examined by the city health officer for contagious or communicable
diseases, in addition to complying with all the other provisions of this article. The health
officer shall furnish a certificate of his examination to the Director of Finance. If the
certificate shows the applicant to be afflicted with any contagious or communicable
disease, the Director of Finance shall refuse to issue the license applied for. If the certificate
shows the applicant to be free of any contagious or communicable disease, the Director of
Finance shall issue the license applied for if the applicant complies with all other provisions
of this article.
Sec. 26-17. Fee.
Each individual applicant for a license under this article shall, at the time of filing
his application, pay to the Director of Finance the sum of thirty dollars ($30.00) as a fee.
Each applicant which is a corporation, firm, partnership or association which intends to
have various employees work under its license shall pay to the Director of Finance a fee of
thirty dollars ($30.00), together with an additional fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each
employee who will work under its license.
The fees required by this section shall constitute the fees of the city to cover the cost
of investigating the applicant and his goods, wares and merchandise and to cover amounts
paid to members of the license board and the health officer, and the expense of publishing
notices, the printing of application forms and licenses, and all other expenses incurred by
the city in connection with the processing of such application and issuing the license.
All fees paid under this section shall be deposited to the general funds of the city.
Sec. 26-18. Investigation by Director of Finance and decision.
(a) The Director of Finance shall examine the applicant and shall review all
information obtained from references furnished by the applicant in his application and shall
consider all evidence for and against the issuance of the license in accordance with the
requirements of this article. After the Director of Finance's investigation has been
concluded, the Director of Finance shall file his decision in writing, reciting information he
has received about the applicant and his business and describing the kind and quality of
goods, wares or merchandise which the applicant proposes to sell, and either granting the
license or denying same. A copy of said decision in writing shall be provided the applicant
within ten (10) days of the Director of Finance's decision.
(b) If the Director of Finance finds, at the conclusion of his investigation, that the
applicant is the person he represents himself to be and is not an enemy alien and has never
been convicted of a felony and is not a fugitive from justice and that he has truly stated in
his application the kind and quality of goods, wares and merchandise he proposes to sell are
of good quality and suitable to be sold to the general public, and that the application for the
license is required to be given under applicable laws, the Director of Finance shall issue a
license to sell such goods, wares or merchandise in the residential areas of the city,
provided the applicant has complied with all the provisions of this article.
(c) Should the Director of Finance find against the application on any of such
matters at the conclusion of his investigation, he shall deny said license.
Sec. 26-19. Applicant's deposit or bond.
(a) Required. If the Director of Finance has decided that an applicant is entitled to a
license applied for under this article, the applicant shall be given written notice of such
decision immediately, and the applicant shall then file with the Director of Finance a
deposit or bond in accordance with this section.
(b) Amount. If the applicant for a license under this article is an individual, the
amount of the deposit or the sum of the bond to be filed under this section shall be five
hundred dollars ($500.00). If such applicant is a corporation, firm or partnership, such
deposit or bond shall be in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(c) Surety, conditions, approval, etc., of bond. Any bond filed in accordance with
this section shall be signed by a surety or bonding company incorporated under the laws of
this state or authorized to do business in this state.
Such bond shall bind the principal and surety to pay to the city the sum prescribed in
subsection (b) for the use and benefit of any citizen of the city who may be damaged or
injured by reason of any false representation as to any goods, wares or merchandise sold to
such person by the applicant after he has received his license, or by reason of the breach or
failure of any guaranty or warranty made or given to any citizen of the city by the applicant
in the sale of such goods, wares or merchandise or services. Such bond shall further provide
that it is payable at Temple, Texas, and that it is for the use and benefit of every citizen of
the city and that, if any suit is filed by any citizen of the city against the applicant for false
representations, fraud, breach of guaranty or warranty by reason of sales made under the
license, the surety on such bond shall be made a party thereto and that any judgment
rendered against the applicant in such suit shall also be rendered against the surety on the
bond. Such bond shall be approved by the Director of Finance and shall be effective during
the existence of the license.
(d) Holding period, conditions and return of deposit. If a cash deposit is made under
this section, it shall be held for the term of the license and for ninety (90) days thereafter
and such deposit shall be for the use and benefit of all the citizens of the city and shall be
liable for the satisfaction of any and all claims established against the applicant by a court
of competent jurisdiction for false representations, fraud, breach of warranty or breach of
guaranty in the sale of goods, wares or merchandise or services under such license in favor
of any citizen of the city. If the Director of Finance is not notified of a pending suit against
the applicant before the expiration of ninety (90) days after the termination of the license,
he shall return the deposit to the applicant. If the Director of Finance is notified of the
pendency of such a suit before the expiration of ninety (90) days after the termination of the
license, he shall hold an amount equal to the amount sued for out of such deposit until final
judgment is rendered therein, returning the balance, if any on hand, to the applicant.
Sec. 26-20. Issuance; contents; effect; term; display.
(a) Upon the making of the deposit or the filing of the bond and the fulfillment of
the other requirements of this article, and upon the favorable recommendation of the
Director of Finance for the issuance of a license to an applicant, the Director of Finance
shall issue to the applicant the license to sell the goods, wares or merchandise set forth in
this application, and from and after the date of the issuance of such license, the applicant
shall be authorized to sell the goods, wares or merchandise described in his application in
the residential areas of the city for a period of one year from the date of such license. The
license shall have the photograph of the applicant attached thereto and shall bear the name
and other identifying data of the applicant upon the face of the license. The license shall be
nontransferable and nonassignable and may be used only by the person to whom it is
issued. The holder of the license shall show his license to any prospective purchaser of
goods, wares or merchandise, when requested to do so.
(b) Only one license shall be issued to each applicant, but in the event the applicant
is a corporation, firm or partnership, which will employ more than one person to work
under such license, the Director of Finance will issue to each such employee who meets the
requirements of this article, and who is approved by the Director of Finance, a separate
permit, which shall be known as an employee's license, which shall state that it is issued
under the license theretofore granted to the employer, giving the name of the employer and
the number of the employer's license. Such employee's license shall authorize the employee
to sell the goods, wares or merchandise of the employer in the residential areas of the city
during the term of his employer's license. Such employee's license shall bear the
photograph of the employee and shall contain his name and other identifying data, and it
shall be nontransferable and nonassignable and may not be used by any person except the
employee to whom it was issued, and he shall exhibit it to any prospective purchaser, when
requested to do so.
Sec. 26-21. Refusal of employee's license.
The Director of Finance shall have the right, without the hearing provided for in this
article, to refuse to grant any employee of an applicant for a license under this article the
right to work under such license, if any of the information or material furnished by the
employee, as required by this article, is unsatisfactory to the Director of Finance. As soon
as such employees have filed the information required by this article with the Director of
Finance he shall file that information with the city secretary.
Sec. 26-22. Renewals.
The Director of Finance shall be authorized to renew licenses under this article for
successive periods of one year each, without publishing a notice and without a public
hearing, upon the payment by the applicant of a renewal fee of thirty dollars ($30.00),
together with an employee's fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each employee of a firm,
corporation, partnership or association, and upon the furnishing of the information to him
required by this article in the case of an original application, and the furnishing of the bond
or cash deposit in the same manner required for the original license, together with a
certificate from the city health officer, when required by this article.
Sec. 26-23. Appeals from decisions of Director of Finance.
If the applicant for a license under this article is dissatisfied with any holding or
finding of the Director of Finance, he shall have the right to appeal to the city council by
filing a written notice of such appeal with the Director of Finance within ten (10) days after
the making and filing of such decision by the Director of Finance. Upon the filing of such
notice of appeal, the Director of Finance shall notify the city council that the same has been
filed and shall immediately forward the application and all papers and data connected with
the application in the possession of the Director of Finance to the city council, which shall
hear such appeal at its next regular meeting held after the filing of the notice of appeal. The
city council shall have the same powers and authority at the hearing of such appeal as is
vested in the Director of Finance with respect to the granting or refusal of the license
applied for.
Sec. 26-24. Records to be kept; Director of Finance to act as custodian of records.
The Director of Finance shall keep and maintain a complete file and record of all
applications for licenses under this article and evidence submitted in support thereof by
each applicant, and shall maintain a record of all such licenses issued.
Sec. 26-25. Compensation for health officer for services rendered under this article.
For services rendered in connection with the issuance of each original license under
this article, the health officer, when required to make an examination of an applicant who
proposes to sell food or food products in accordance with the provisions of this article, shall
receive a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each such examination, which shall be paid from the
fees paid by each applicant. Such fees shall not be paid to such officers for renewals of
licenses. The health officer shall be paid a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each employee he
examines which shall be paid by the employee.
Sec. 26-26. Payment of expenses incurred under article.
All expenses and costs incurred by the city in connection with the processing of
applications for licenses under this article shall be paid by the city out of the general funds
of the city.
Sec. 26-27. Exemption from article.
This article shall not apply to farmers or dairymen who sell products raised or
produced by them on their own farms or dairies, nor to churches, service clubs, boy scouts,
girl scouts, camp fire girls, nonprofit, tax-exempt organizations, nor to members or
representatives of any of such groups or organizations, when acting as representatives
thereof.
Page 1 of 39
Chapter 27
STORMWATER
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 27-1. Acronyms.
BMP means best management practices.
CBZ means a creek buffer zone.
DCDM means the City’s Drainage Criteria and Design Manual.
EPA means the federal Environmental Protection Agency.
MS4 means municipal separate storm sewer system.
NEC means no exposure certification.
NOC means notice of change.
NOI means notice of intent.
NOT means notice of termination.
NPDES means National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
PST means a petroleum storage tank.
SWP3 means a storm water pollution prevention plan.
TCEQ means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
TPDES means Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
mg/L means milligrams per liter.
Sec. 27-2. Definitions.
Page 2 of 39
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this Chapter,
will have the meanings hereinafter designated. Additionally, all references to any federal or state
regulation or act refer to the current regulation or act and any amendments thereto.
Agricultural stormwater runoff - Any stormwater or tail water runoff from orchards, cultivated crops,
pastures, range lands, forest lands, and other non-point source agricultural activities, but not discharges
from concentrated animal feeding operations as defined in 40 Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) §
122.23 or discharges from concentrated aquatic animal production facilities as defined in 40 C.F.R. §
122.24.
Best Management Practices (BMPs) - Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance or
monitoring procedures, structural controls, local ordinances, and other management practices to prevent
or reduce the discharge of pollutants. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures,
and practices to control construction site runoff, spills or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from
raw material storage areas.
Channel - A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or
periodically flowing water.
City - The City of Temple, Texas, the City Council of Temple, Texas, or its representative, employee,
agent, or designee.
City Council – the City’s elected governing body.
City Manager – the City’s city manager or their designee.
Clean Water Act (CWA) - The Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water Pollution Control
Act Amendments of 1972, Pub.L. 92-500, as amended Pub. L. 95-217, Pub. L. 95-576, Pub. L. 96-483
and Pub. L. 97-117, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et. seq.
Clearing - Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover. Vegetative cutting and mulching are
exempted from this definition.
Creek – A channel having 64 acres or greater of contributing drainage areas.
Creek Buffer Zone (CBZ) – All property located on or adjacent to a natural, vegetated, earthen, or grass
lined creek, channel, stream, or channel is hereby deemed to be within a CBZ and must comply with the
Drainage Criteria and Design Manual, Section 9, “Storm Water Best Management Practices.”
Commencement (or start) of Construction - The initial disturbance of soils associated with clearing,
grading, or excavation activities, as well as other construction-related activities (e.g., stockpiling of fill
material, demolition).
Page 3 of 39
Common Plan of Development - A construction activity that is completed in separate stages, separate
phases, or in combination with other construction activities. A common plan of development (also known
as a “common plan of development or sale”) is identified by the documentation for the construction project
that identifies the scope of the project, and may include plats, blueprints, marketing plans, contracts,
building permits, a public notice or hearing, zoning requests, or other similar documentation and activities.
A common plan of development does not necessarily include all construction projects within the
jurisdiction of a public entity (e.g., a city or university). Construction of roads or buildings in different
parts of the jurisdiction would be considered separate “common plans,” with only the interconnected parts
of a project being considered part of a “common plan” (e.g., a building and its associated parking lot and
driveways, airport runway and associated taxiways, a building complex, etc.). Where discrete construction
projects occur within a larger common plan of development or sale but are located ¼ mile or more apart,
and the area between the projects is not being disturbed, each individual project can be treated as a separate
plan of development or sale, provided that any interconnecting road, pipeline, or utility project that is part
of the same “common plan” is not included in the area to be disturbed.
Construction Activity - Includes soil disturbance activities, including clearing, grading, excavating,
construction-related activity (e.g., stockpiling of fill material, demolition), and construction support
activity. This does not include routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and
grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the site (e.g., the routine grading of existing dirt roads,
asphalt overlays of existing roads, the routine clearing of existing right-of-ways, and similar maintenance
activities). Regulated construction activity is defined in terms of small and large construction activity.
Construction Support Activity – A construction-related activity that specifically supports construction
activity, which can involve earth disturbance or pollutant-generating activities of its own, and can include,
but are not limited to, activities associated with concrete or asphalt batch plants, rock crushers, equipment
staging or storage areas, chemical storage areas, material storage areas, material borrow areas, and
excavated material disposal areas. Construction support activity must only directly support the
construction activity authorized under a general permit issued by TCEQ.
Contaminant - Any substance deleterious to the public health or the quality of the water.
Contamination - The presence of, or entry into a public water supply system, the MS4, or waters in the
State of Texas or United States of any substance, including pollutants, which may be deleterious to the
public health or the quality of the water.
Conveyance - Curbs, gutters, man-made channels and ditches, drains, pipes, and other constructed
features designed or used for flood control or to otherwise transport stormwater runoff.
Creek Buffer Zone (CBZ) – All property located on or adjacent to a natural, vegetated, earthen, or grass
lined creek, channel, or stream is hereby deemed to be within a CBZ.
Developer – A person who undertakes land disturbance activities.
Discharge – means discharge of stormwater runoff or non-stormwater discharges.
Page 4 of 39
Discharger – (a) any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible for a discharge,
including but not limited to any operator of a construction site or industrial facility; or (b) any owner or
operator of a facility that is the source of a discharge.
Domestic sewage - Waste and wastewater from humans or household operations that is discharged to a
wastewater collection system or otherwise enters a treatment works.
Drainage Criteria and Design Manual (DCDM) – A manual containing all approved methods and
design criteria for drainage and stormwater control.
Drainage way - Any creek, stream, channel, swale, or low-lying area that conveys surface runoff
throughout the site.
Drought-Stricken Area – An area in which the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s U.S.
Seasonal Drought Outlook indicates for the period during which the construction will occur that any of
the following conditions are likely: (1) “Drought to persist or intensify;” (2) “Drought ongoing, some
improvement;” (3) “Drought likely to improve, impacts ease;” or (4) “Drought development likely”.
See http://www.cpc.ncep.noaa.gov/products/expert_assessment/seasonal_drought.html.
Erosion control is a measure that prevents erosion.
Executive director – The executive director of TCEQ.
Extremely hazardous substance - Any substance listed in the Appendices to 40 C.F.R. Part 355,
Emergency Planning and Notification.
Facility – Any building, structure, installation, process, or activity from which there is or may be a
discharge of a pollutant.
Fire protection water - Any water, and any substances or materials contained therein, used by any person
other than the Fire Department to control or extinguish a fire.
Final Stabilization - A construction site status where any of the following conditions are met:
(a) All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed and a uniform (that is, evenly distributed,
without large bare areas) perennial vegetative cover with a density of at least 70% of the native
background vegetative cover for the area has been established on all unpaved areas and areas not
covered by permanent structures, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of
riprap, gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed.
(b) For individual lots in a residential construction site by either:
(1) the homebuilder completing final stabilization as specified in condition (a) above; or
Page 5 of 39
(2) the homebuilder establishing temporary stabilization for an individual lot prior to the time of
transfer of the ownership of the home to the buyer and after informing the homeowner of the need
for, and benefits of, final stabilization. If temporary stabilization is infeasible, then the homebuilder
may fulfill this requirement by retaining perimeter controls or BMPs and informing the
homeowner of the need for removal of temporary controls and the establishment of final
stabilization. Fulfillment of this requirement must be documented in the homebuilder’s storm
water pollution prevention plan (SWP3).
(c) For construction activities on land used for agricultural purposes (such as pipelines across crop or
range land), final stabilization may be accomplished by returning the disturbed land to its
preconstruction agricultural use. Areas disturbed that were not previously used for agricultural
activities, such as buffer strips immediately adjacent to surface water and areas that are not being
returned to their preconstruction agricultural use must meet the final stabilization conditions of
condition (a) above.
(d) In arid, semi-arid, and drought-stricken areas only, all soil disturbing activities at the site have been
completed and both following criteria have been met:
(1) temporary erosion control measures (for example, degradable rolled erosion control product) are
selected, designed, and installed along with an appropriate seed base to provide erosion control for
at least three years without active maintenance by the operator; and
(2) the temporary erosion control measures are selected, designed, and installed to achieve 70% of
the native background vegetative coverage within three years.
Garbage - Waste consisting of putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage
facilities, handling, and sale of produce and other food products.
Grading - The excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof.
Harmful quantity - The amount of hazardous substance the discharge or spill of which is determined to
be harmful to the environment or public health or welfare or may reasonably be anticipated to present an
imminent and substantial danger to the public health or welfare by federal or state law.
Hazardous household waste – Any waste generated in a household (including single and multiple
residences, hotels and motels, bunk houses, ranger stations, crew quarters, campgrounds, picnic grounds,
and day recreational areas) by a consumer which, except for the exclusion provided in 40 C.F.R. §
261.4(b)(1), would be classified as a hazardous waste under 40 C.F.R. Part 261.
Hazardous substance - A material where either of the following conditions are met:
Page 6 of 39
(a) the elements, compounds, and hazardous wastes are listed in Table 302.4 of 40 C.F.R. Part 302; or
(b) a solid waste, as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 261.2, which is not excluded from regulation as a hazardous
waste under 40 C.F.R. § 261.4(b), if it exhibits any of the characteristics identified in 40 C.F.R. §
261.20 through § 261.24 (e.g., ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity, or toxicity).
Hazardous waste - Any waste identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the EPA under the Federal
Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), 42 U.S.C.
§§ 6901 et seq., or the Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act, Texas Health and Safety Code, Chapter 361 et
seq.
Illicit connection - Any man-made drain or conveyance that allows an illicit discharge to enter into the
MS4.
Illicit discharge - Any discharge to the MS4 that is not entirely composed of stormwater, except
discharges pursuant to this Chapter and other local, state, or federal laws, regulations, or permits and
discharges resulting from firefighting activities.
Industrial activity - Any of the ten (10) categories of industrial activities included in the definition of
“stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity” as defined in 40 Code of Federal Regulations
(CFR) §122.26(b)(14)(i)-(ix) and (xi).
Industrial waste - Solid waste from manufacturing portions of industrial activities.
Infeasible - Not technologically possible, or not economically practicable and achievable in light of best
industry practices.
Land disturbing activity - Any activity, including but not limited to excavation, clearing, and grading,
which disturbs the natural or improved vegetative ground cover so as to expose soil to the erosive forces
of rain, stormwater runoff, or wind for residential and non-residential subdivisions and applicable city
projects. Land disturbing activity does not include any vegetative cutting and mulching. All installations
and maintenance of franchise utilities such as telephone, gas, electric, etc., will be considered land
disturbing activities.
Landowner or owner - The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to
purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land.
Large Construction Activity - Construction activities including clearing, grading, and excavating that
result in land disturbance of equal to or greater than five (5) acres of land. Large construction activity also
includes the disturbance of less than five (5) acres of total land area that is part of a larger common plan
of development or sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb equal to or greater than five (5)
acres of land. Large construction activity does not include routine maintenance that is performed to
maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the site (for example, the
Page 7 of 39
routine grading of existing dirt roads, asphalt overlays of existing roads, the routine clearing of existing
right-of-ways, and similar maintenance activities).
Maximum extent practicable - The technology-based discharge standard for municipal separate storm
sewer systems to reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges that was established by the Federal Clean
Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. A discussion of MEP as it applies to the MS4 is found at 40 C.F.R. §
122.34.
Minimize - To reduce or eliminate to the extent achievable using stormwater controls that are
technologically available and economically practicable and achievable in light of best industry practices.
Multi-sector general permit - Either the general NPDES permit issued by the EPA under 40 CFR Section
122.28, as amended, or the general TPDES permit issued by TCEQ under Chapter 205, Title 30 of the
Texas Administrative Code, as amended, that authorizes stormwater from an industrial facility to be
discharged into waters of the United States or state water, including any subsequent modifications or
amendments to the permit, any renewals of the permit, and the associated EPA or TCEQ regulations.
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) – A conveyance or system of conveyances (including
roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels,
or storm drains):
(a) owned or operated by the U.S., a state, city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or
other public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over the disposal of sewage,
industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts under state law such as a
sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an
authorized Indian tribal organization, or a designated and approved management agency under the
CWA § 208 that discharges to surface water in the state;
(b) that is designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
(c) that is not a combined sewer; and
(d) that is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined in 40 CFR §122.2.
Non-point source - Any source of any discharge of a pollutant that is not a point source.
No exposure certification (NEC) -A written submission to the executive director from a permit applicant
notifying that they intend to obtain a conditional exclusion from permit requirements by certifying that
there is no exposure of industrial materials or activities to rain, snow, snowmelt, or stormwater runoff.
Notice of Change (NOC) – A written notification to TCEQ required by EPA or TCEQ regulations or by
the terms governing a multi-sector general permit or construction general permit, informing TCEQ of
changes to information that was provided in a notice of intent or prior notice of change.
Page 8 of 39
Notice of Intent (NOI) - The notice of intent application form required by EPA or TCEQ regulations or
by the terms governing a multi-sector general permit or construction general permit to obtain NPDES or
TPDES permit coverage.
Notice of Termination (NOT) - the notice of termination required by EPA or TCEQ regulations or by
the terms governing a multi-sector general permit or construction general permit to terminate NPDES or
TPDES permit coverage.
NPDES Permit - A permit issued by the EPA that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the
United States, whether the permit is applicable to an individual, group, or generally on an area-wide basis.
Oil - Oil of any kind in any form, including, but not limited to, petroleum, fuel oil, crude oil, or any
fraction thereof which is liquid at standard conditions of temperature and pressure, sludge, oil refuse, and
oil mixed with waste.
Operator - The person or persons associated with a large or small construction activity that is either a
primary or secondary operator as defined below:
Primary Operator – the person or persons associated with construction activity that meets either of
the following two criteria:
(1) the person or persons have on-site operational control over construction plans and
specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications;
or
(2) the person or persons have day-to-day operational control of those activities at a construction
site that are necessary to ensure compliance with a storm water pollution prevention plan
(SWP3) for the site or other permit conditions (for example, they are authorized to direct
workers at a site to carry out activities required by the SWP3 or comply with other permit
conditions).
Secondary Operator – The person or entity, often the property owner, whose operational control is
limited to:
(1) the employment of other operators, such as a general contractor, to perform or supervise
construction activities; or
(2) the ability to approve or disapprove changes to construction plans and specifications, but who
does not have day-to-day on-site operational control over construction activities at the site.
Secondary operators must either prepare their own SWP3 or participate in a shared SWP3 that covers
the areas of the construction site, where they have control over the construction plans and
specifications.
Page 9 of 39
If there is not a primary operator at the construction site, then the secondary operator is defined as the
primary operator and must comply with the requirements for primary operators.
Outfall – A point source at the point where stormwater runoff associated with construction activity
discharges to surface water in the state and does not include open conveyances connecting two municipal
separate storm sewers, or pipes, tunnels, or other conveyances that connect segments of the same stream
or other water of the U.S. and are used to convey waters of the U.S.
Petroleum product - A petroleum substance obtained from distilling and processing crude oil and that
is liquid at standard conditions of temperature and pressure and capable of being used as a fuel for the
propulsion of a motor vehicle or aircraft, including, but not limited to, motor gasoline, gasohol, other
alcohol blended fuels, aviation gasoline, kerosene, distillate fuel oil, and #1 and #2 diesel. The term does
not include naphtha-type jet fuel, kerosene-type jet fuel, or a petroleum product destined for use in
chemical manufacturing or feedstock of that manufacturing.
Petroleum storage tank (PST) – (a) Any one or combination of aboveground storage tanks that contain
petroleum products and that are regulated by TCEQ; or (b) Any one or combination of underground
storage tanks and all connecting underground pipes that contain petroleum products and that are regulated
by TCEQ.
Phasing - Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each phase completed
before the clearing of the next.
Point Source – Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to, any pipe,
ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock concentrated animal feeding
operation, landfill leachate collection system, or vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are,
or may be, discharged. This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural
stormwater runoff.
Pollutant - Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. The term includes, but is not limited to,
paints, varnishes, and solvents; motor oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, and
accumulations that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform, and pathogens; dissolved and
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure;
noxious or offensive matter of any kind; biochemical oxygen demand (BOD); sediment or a parameter
that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity, or siltation); oil and grease; and any
pollutant that has been identified as a cause of impairment of any water body that will receive a discharge
from the MS4; dredged spoil; solid waste; incinerator residue; sewage sludge; filter backwash; munitions;
chemical wastes; biological materials; radioactive materials; heat; wrecked or discarded equipment; rock,
sand, and dirt; and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into any surface water in the
state. The term "pollutant" does not include tail water or runoff water from irrigation or rainwater runoff
from cultivated or uncultivated rangeland, pastureland, and farmland. For this Chapter, the term
“pollutant” includes sediment.
Page 10 of 39
Pollution - The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the contamination
of, any surface water in the state that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans,
animal life, vegetation, or property or to public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the
public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose.
Post-construction management plan – A comprehensive plan that is used to manage the quality of
discharges from a site after the completion of construction activity. This plan describes the use of
structural and non-structural stormwater controls and their maintenance as well as other best management
practices.
Premises - Any site or facility or building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or
unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips, owned or operated by a person from which
there has been, is, or may be a discharge.
Release - Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, injecting, escaping, leaching,
dumping, or disposing of a pollutant or contaminant into the MS4 or waters in the state or of the United
States.
Reportable quantity (RQ) - will be as provided by 30 Tex. Admin. Code § 101.1, except as otherwise
provided by state or federal law, regulation, or permit.
Responsible party - Any person or legal entity, individual or corporate, including an owner, operator,
contractor, or subcontractor, any or all of whom may be engaged in, consent to, or perform a construction
project or construction activity.
Rubbish - Non-putrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consists of both (a) combustible waste
materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings,
leaves, and similar materials; and (b) noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin cans,
aluminum cans, metal furniture, and similar materials that will not burn at ordinary incinerator
temperatures (1,600 to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit).
Sediment control - Any measure that prevents eroded sediment from leaving the site.
Separate storm sewer system - A conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains), designed or
used for collecting or conveying stormwater that is not a combined sewer and that is not part of a publicly
owned treatment works.
Sewage (or sanitary sewage) - The domestic sewage or industrial waste that is discharged into the City
sanitary sewer system and passes through the sanitary sewer system to a publicly-owned treatment works.
Site – The land or water area where any facility or activity, including construction activity, is physically
located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the facility or activity.
Page 11 of 39
Small Construction Activity - Construction activities including clearing, grading, and excavating that
result in land disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and less than five (5) acres of land. Small
construction activity also includes the disturbance of less than one (1) acre of total land area that is part of
a larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb equal to
or greater than one (1) and less than five (5) acres of land. Small construction activity does not include
routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or
original purpose of the site (for example, the routine grading of existing dirt roads, asphalt overlays of
existing roads, the routine clearing of existing right-of-ways, and similar maintenance activities).
Stabilization - The use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding.
Stormwater (or Stormwater Runoff) - Rainfall runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and
drainage.
Stormwater associated with construction activity – Stormwater runoff from a construction activity.
Stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity - Stormwater runoff that exits any system
that is used for collecting and conveying stormwater that originates from manufacturing, processing,
material storage, or waste material disposal areas (and similar areas where stormwater can contact
industrial pollutants related to the industrial activity) at an industrial facility described by an applicable
TPDES or NPDES permit.
Stormwater management - The use of structural or non-structural practices that are designed to reduce
stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, peak flow discharge rates, and detrimental changes
in stream temperature that affect water quality and habitat.
Stormwater management facility - Any facility that is built to control stormwater runoff in order to
comply with BMPs.
Storm water pollution prevention plan (SWP3). A plan required by a NPDES or TPDES permit that
describes and ensures the implementation of BMPs that must be used to reduce the pollutants in
stormwater discharges associated with construction or other industrial activity at the regulated facility to
water in the state and U.S.
Structural control (or practice) - A pollution prevention practice that requires the construction of a
device, or the use of a device, to reduce or prevent pollution in stormwater runoff. Structural controls and
practices may include but are not limited to: silt fences, earthen dikes, drainage swales, sediment traps,
check dams, subsurface drains, storm drain inlet protection, rock outlet protection, reinforced soil retaining
systems, gabions, and temporary or permanent sediment basins.
Surface water in the state - Lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, wetlands, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico inside the territorial limits of the state
(from the mean high water mark (MHWM) out 10.36 miles into the Gulf), and all other bodies of surface
Page 12 of 39
water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or non-navigable, and including the
beds and banks of all water-courses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or
bordering the state or subject to the jurisdiction of the state; except that waters in treatment systems which
are authorized by state or federal law, regulation, or permit, and which are created for the purpose of waste
treatment are not considered to be water in the state.
Tail water - The runoff of irrigation water from the lower end of an irrigated field.
Temporary stabilization - A condition where exposed soils or disturbed areas are provided a protective
cover or other structural control to prevent the migration of pollutants. Temporary stabilization may
include temporary seeding, geotextiles, mulches, and other techniques to reduce or eliminate erosion until
either permanent stabilization can be achieved or until further construction activities take place.
TPDES permit - A permit issued by the state through TCEQ, or any predecessor or any successor agency,
under the authority delegated by EPA pursuant to 33 U.S.C § 1342(b) (Federal Clean Water Act), as
amended, and pursuant to the Texas Water Code, as amended, that authorizes the discharge of pollutants
to water in the state or of the United States, whether the permit is applicable to a person, group, or generally
on an area-wide basis.
Turbidity – A condition of water quality characterized by the presence of suspended solids or organic
material.
Unauthorized connection – Any man-made drain or conveyance that connects to the MS4 without City
authorization.
Used oil (or used motor oil) - Any oil that has been refined with crude oil, or any synthetic oil, that has
been used, and, because of use, is contaminated by physical or chemical impurities.
Vehicle - Includes any vehicle held for personal use including automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles,
motorcycles of any type, and boats or personal watercrafts.
Watercourse – A watercourse includes a drainage path or way or the channel of a stream, to include,
without limitation, waters in the state or of the United States, in which water flows within a defined bed
and banks, even though the same may be slight, imperceptible or even absent in places, and originates
from a definite source or sources. The water need not always be present and may be intermittent if the
latter occurs with some degree of regularity, depending on the characteristics of the sources (i.e., water is
present or flowing during or after a rainfall event).
Water in the state - Groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs,
springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, wetlands, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico inside the
territorial limits of the state (from the mean high water mark out 10.36 miles into the Gulf), and all other
bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or non-navigable,
and including the beds and banks of all watercourses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly or
Page 13 of 39
partially inside or bordering the state or inside the jurisdiction of the state, except that water in treatment
systems which are authorized by state or federal law, regulation, or permit, and which are created for the
purpose of waste treatment are not considered to be water in the state.
Water quality standard - Provisions that consist of a designated use or uses for the water in the state and
water quality criteria for such waters based upon such uses. Water quality criteria consist of narrative
provisions and numerical criteria deemed by the state to be necessary to protect those uses, as specified in
30 Texas Administrative Code (TAC) Article 307, as amended.
Waters of the United States - Waters of the United States or waters of the U.S. means:
(a) all waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or
foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide;
(b) all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands;
(c) all other waters such as intrastate lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams), mudflats,
sandflats, wetlands, sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural ponds that the use,
degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce
including any such waters:
(1) which are or could be used by interstate or foreign travelers for recreational or other purposes;
(2) from which fish or shellfish are or could be taken and sold in interstate or foreign commerce; or
(3) which are used or could be used for industrial purposes by industries in interstate commerce;
(d) all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition;
(e) tributaries of waters identified in paragraphs (a) through (d) of this definition;
(f) the territorial sea; and
(g) wetlands adjacent to waters (other than waters that are themselves wetlands) identified in paragraphs
(a) through (f) of this definition.
Waste treatment systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of
federal Clean Water Act (CWA), as amended, are not waters of the U.S. This exclusion applies only to
manmade bodies of water which neither were originally created in waters of the U.S. (such as disposal
area in wetlands) nor resulted from the impoundment of waters of the U.S. Waters of the U.S. do not
include prior converted cropland. Notwithstanding the determination of an area’s status as prior converted
cropland by any other federal agency, for the purposes of the CWA, the final authority regarding CWA
jurisdiction remains with the EPA.
Page 14 of 39
Wetlands - Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency
and duration to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs,
and similar areas.
Yard waste - Leaves, grass, grass clippings, bushes, shrubs, yard and garden debris, and brush that results
from landscaping maintenance and land-clearing operations.
ARTICLE II. STORMWATER COMPLIANCE FOR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY
Sec. 27-3. In general.
(a) Purpose.
During the construction process, soil is highly vulnerable to erosion by wind and water. Clearing and
grading during construction cause the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat.
Eroded soil endangers water resources by reducing water quality and causes the siltation of aquatic habitat
for fish and other desirable species. Eroded soil also necessitates repair of drainage ways, channels, and
watercourses.
The purpose of this Article is to safeguard persons, protect property, and prevent damage to the
environment in the City. This Article will also promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating, and
controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any residential and non-residential
subdivision development and applicable City projects or other activity that disturb or break the topsoil or
result in the movement of earth within the City.
(b) Definition. For the purposes of this Article, the following definition applies:
Discharge means the drainage, release, or disposal of pollutants in stormwater and certain non-stormwater
from areas where soil disturbing activities (e.g., clearing, grading, excavation, stockpiling of fill material,
and demolition), construction materials or equipment storage or maintenance (e.g., fill piles, borrow area,
concrete truck wash out, fueling), or other industrial stormwater directly related to the construction process
(e.g., concrete or asphalt batch plants) are located.
Sec. 27-4. Applicability of Article.
(a) A person engaging in any small or large construction activity as defined by this Chapter within the
City limits must comply with the terms of this Article. This Article applies regardless of whether an
owner or developer is required to obtain any permit, including a building permit, related to the
construction activity.
(b) In determining if a project qualifies as large or small construction activity, the City will consider
whether the development is a part of a common plan. A construction activity is a part of a common
Page 15 of 39
plan if it is completed in separate stages, phases, or in combination with other construction activities.
Common plans are often, but not solely identified by plats, blueprints, contracts, zoning requests, and
building permits. Additionally, common plans may exist and erosion and sedimentation control may
be required when there is more than one operator operating in one area which is larger than five acres,
even though no single individual project is larger than five acres individually.
(c) This Article does not apply to discharges from stormwater from agricultural activities. Persons
discharging stormwater from agricultural activities must follow all applicable state, federal, and local
laws, regulations, or permits.
(d) The owner of the property on which the activity occurs, in addition to the person engaging in
construction activity, is responsible for violations of this Article. Both the owner and the person
engaging in the construction activity are responsible for any erosion of the property or construction
site which results in accumulation of sediment in streets, alleys, any channel, other private properties,
or drainage facilities stemming from the construction activity. Any accumulation or deposit of soil
material beyond the limits of the property or construction site or in city streets, alleys, channels, private
properties, or drainage facilities in an amount sufficient to constitute a threat to public safety and
comfort or adversely impact stormwater quality as determined by the City is declared a public nuisance
and is a violation of this Article.
Sec. 27-5. City of Temple Drainage Criteria and Design Manual.
(a) This Article is cumulative of the regulations found in the City’s DCDM. Although the intention of
this manual is to establish uniform design practices, it neither replaces the need for engineering
judgment nor precludes the use of information not presented. Other accepted engineering procedures
may be used to conduct hydrologic and hydraulic studies if approved by the City and allowed under
state and federal laws, regulations, or permits.
(b) Failure to abide by the regulations found in the DCDM is an offense unless approved by the City or
otherwise allowed under state or federal laws, regulations, or permits.
Sec. 27-6. Stormwater pollution prevention measures required.
(a) The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) regulates stormwater discharges from
construction sites. Prior to initiating any construction activity, a person must comply with all state and
federal requirements. If applicable, an operator of a construction site must obtain a construction
general permit or individual permit. An operator of a construction site must comply with all terms
and conditions of a construction general permit or an individual permit, whichever is obtained from
TCEQ for or applicable to the construction site. Failure to comply with all TCEQ requirements and
terms and conditions of a TCEQ issued permit is an offense.
(b) An operator of a construction site regulated under this Chapter must implement best management
practices to control and minimize the discharge into the MS4, waters of the United States, and state
water of any sediment, silt, earth, soil, or other material from the construction site. Erosion control
Page 16 of 39
elements meeting the criteria for best management practices must be installed before any construction
site is established in accordance with an installation schedule as specified in a stormwater pollution
prevention plan required by the construction general permit or individual permit. Failure to comply
with this Subsection is an offense.
Sec. 27-7. Requirements to post, notify, and make available.
(a) A responsible party for a large or small construction activity must post at the construction site the
applicable TCEQ site notice as required by TCEQ and TCEQ issued permits.
(b) A copy of the signed NOI for large construction activity and a copy of the signed and certified
construction site notice for large and small construction activity must be provided to the City within
two (2) days prior to commencement of construction activities, as applicable, by a responsible party.
(c) A responsible party must make any applicable SWP3 available to the City upon request as soon as
reasonably possible.
(d) Failure, refusal, or inability to provide a SWP3 for inspection constitutes a violation of this Section.
(e) It is unlawful for any person to engage in construction activity in violation of the elements of an
applicable SWP3.
(f) A responsible party must provide the City a copy of any notice of change (NOC) sent to TCEQ related
to a construction activity as required by a TCEQ permit. This copy must be provided to the City within
two (2) days after the date it is sent to TCEQ.
(g) A responsible party must provide the City a copy of any notice of termination (NOT), small
construction site completed site notice or large construction site secondary operator completed site
notice necessary to close out a construction activity regulated by TCEQ. This copy must be provided
to the City within two (2) days after the date it is sent to TCEQ.
(h) Where permanent improvements have been constructed, the final inspection by the City will verify
whether the final stabilization criteria have been met.
(i) Where no permanent improvements are planned, a responsible party must continue to maintain
temporary BMPs until the site has reached final stabilization.
(j) A responsible party for a site must continue to regulate the site and maintain an open, active permit
until final stabilization is achieved; and, where applicable, until a NOT or small construction site
completed site notice or large construction site secondary operator completed site notice has been filed
with TCEQ and a copy provided to the City.
Page 17 of 39
(k) Where the site has met final stabilization requirements, but the controls or measures implemented
thereafter fail, each discharge of construction related contamination by the operator constitutes a
violation of this Section.
(l) Removal of temporary BMPs will be required after the site achieves final stabilization.
(m) Failure to comply with any provision of this Section is an offense.
Sec. 27-8. Compliance monitoring.
(a) The City may enter any site in which there is construction activity regulated by this Article to ensure
compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, regulations, and permits.
(1) The responsible party related to this construction activity must:
(A) allow the City ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, records examination and copying and the performance of any additional duties;
(B) make available to the City any SWP3 or modifications to SWP3s, self-inspection reports,
monitoring records, compliance evaluations, notices of intent, and other records, reports, and
documents required by a construction general permit or an individual permit; and
(C) retain and provide to the City, upon request, any annual, semi-annual, or periodic monitoring
reports as required by a construction general permit or an individual permit.
(2) If the property owner, operator, manager, or person in charge of this construction activity has
security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into the
premises, they must make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, the City is permitted to enter without delay to inspect as
authorized by this Article.
(3) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to a property that is to be inspected
must be promptly removed by the responsible party for this construction activity at the written or
verbal request of the City and may not be replaced. The cost of clearing access to the facility must
be borne by the obstructor.
(b) The responsible party of construction activity regulated by this Article must notify the City at least
two (2) working days before each of the following:
(1) start of construction;
(2) installation of sediment and erosion measures;
(3) installation of facilities related to final stabilization; and
Page 18 of 39
(4) final acceptance of public infrastructure or prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy dependent
upon respective development stage.
(c) When phasing is requested, the erosion and sediment controls in each phase must be established,
reviewed, and approved by the City prior to the start of any subsequent phase, which will be allowed
only when there are no outstanding SWP3 violations for the development for which the request is
made.
(d) A person permitted by TCEQ for construction activity, owner, or designated agent must conduct
inspections of disturbed areas of the construction site, the site's erosion and sedimentation controls,
and any facilities on the site in accordance with the requirements of the construction general permit or
the individual permit, whichever is applicable to the site, or if not required by such permits, on a
regular basis. All inspection reports must be kept on file available for viewing upon request by the
City. Inspectors under this Subsection must direct the person responsible for the site to make any
necessary repairs or modifications to bring the site into compliance with this Chapter and all other
local, state, and federal laws, rules, and regulations.
(e) A person commits an offense if they:
(1) fail or refuse to allow the City to access the construction site for purposes of inspection, including
preventing entry through security measures;
(2) fail, refuse, or are unable to provide information or documents as required by this Section when
requested by City;
(3) fail to notify the City at least two working days before any delineated construction phase as
provided by Subsection (b), above.
(4) fail to remove any obstructions to City inspections when requested by the City.
Sec. 27-9. Offenses.
(a) Offenses. It will be an offense to this Article for a person performing any construction activity
regulated by this Article to:
(1) commence any construction activity without first obtaining a TPDES general construction permit
or individual permit if required by state or federal law;
(2) construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the same to
be done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this Article;
(3) fail to develop or implement a SWP3 in accordance with TCEQ requirements and this Article for
a construction site;
Page 19 of 39
(4) fail to install stormwater pollution prevention devices or to maintain stormwater pollution
prevention devices throughout the duration of land disturbing activities in compliance with the
SWP3 for the construction site;
(5) fail to remove off-site sedimentation that is a direct result of construction activities;
(6) allow sediment laden water resulting from below ground installations to flow from a site without
being treated through an erosion control device;
(7) fail to maintain existing stormwater pollution prevention devices, including replacement of
existing grass or sod;
(8) fail to comply with any term of a TPDES general construction permit or individual permit;
(9) discharge construction related contamination due to failure of controls or measures implemented
where the site has met final stabilization requirements; each discharge by the responsible party for
the site constitutes a separate violation;
(10) engage in any construction activity that results in a measurable volume of sediment, soil, soil
material, or other pollutants entering the City’s MS4;
(11) engage in construction activity without using BMPs necessary to protect the City’s MS4 from
runoff or other media capable of transporting sediment, soil, soil material, and pollutants into the
City’s MS4; and
(12) violate any provision of this Article.
Sec. 27-10. Administrative Enforcement.
(a) Notice of Violation.
(1) Upon observation of an alleged violation or condition the City believes constitutes a violation of
this Article, the City may issue a notice of violation letter to a responsible party for the site. The
notice of violation may be personally delivered to a responsible party for the site, if such person is
available on site; or in the absence of such person, may be posted at the construction site. Notice
of violations may also be sent by mail to the responsible party. Notice of violations will provide
three (3) 24-hour periods to correct the violation alleged. The first 24-hour period must be used
by the responsible party to remediate and remove the offending material, if any, from the City’s
MS4 or obtain and post permit documents or provide a copy of a complete SWP3 to the City, as
applicable. The next two 24-hour periods will follow immediately and must be used by the
Page 20 of 39
responsible party to appropriately install or repair the corrective BMP that was lacking or failed to
protect City property.
(2) If correction is not made timely, the City may issue a stop work order.
(3) If a corrective action is not timely accomplished to protect the City’s MS4, the City may pursue
criminal or civil remedies.
(4) Additional or cumulative enforcement action may be taken as the seriousness of the alleged
pollutant encroachment on the MS4 may warrant.
(5) Additional compliance time may be given, if within the judgment and discretion of the City,
municipal obligations to environmental health and safety and municipal stormwater compliance
obligations to enforcement agencies are not compromised.
(b) Stop work order; revocation of permit. In the event that any person violates the terms of a SWP3 or
construction general permit or individual permit, this Chapter, the DCDM, or any other federal, state,
or local law, regulation, or permit or implements site development in such a manner as to materially
adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of the public or be materially detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property, the City may suspend or revoke any City issued permit related
to this violation or injurious action, including any building or construction permits, or halt the
permitted or approved activity until the violation is abated or corrected. The City may also issue a
stop work order if the site fails any City inspection.
(1) Failure to comply with a stop work order or a revocation of a permit is an offense.
(2) Issuing a stop work order or revoking a permit is not a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against a person.
Sec. 27-11. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER RUNOFF CONTROL
Subchapter A. General Provisions
Sec. 27-12. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls
to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within
the City. This Article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives:
Page 21 of 39
(a) minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any land disturbing activity to reduce flooding, siltation,
increases in stream temperature, and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels;
(b) minimize increases in non-point source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from land
disturbing activity which would otherwise degrade local water quality;
(c) minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff which flows from any specific site
during and following land disturbing activity to not exceed the pre-land disturbing activity
hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable; and
(d) reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, and non-point source pollution,
wherever possible, through stormwater management controls and to ensure that these
management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety.
Sec. 27-13. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements
This Article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation,
statute, permit, or other provision of law. The requirements of this Article should be considered minimum
requirements, and where any provision of this Article imposes restrictions different from those imposed
by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, permit, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are
more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for public health or safety or the environment
control.
Subchapter B. Post-Construction Best Management Practices.
Sec. 27-14. Compliance with all post-construction standards.
An owner, operator, or manager of a property or their designee must comply with all post-construction
(permanent) best management practices of the DCDM as well as other parts of this manual, and all other
applicable federal, state, or local laws, regulations, and permits.
Sec. 27-15. Post-construction management plan.
(a) The responsible party for a construction site regulated under this Chapter must submit a postconstruction
management plan to the City prior to receiving any building or construction permit or
when requested by the City. This plan must provide for the use of structural and non-structural
stormwater controls and their maintenance to be used and maintained post-construction as well as
other post-construction best management practices.
(b) Such plan must comply with all requirements found within the DCDM as well as with all federal,
state, and local requirements.
Subchapter C. Maintenance and Repair of Stormwater Management Facilities.
Page 22 of 39
Sec. 27-16. Maintenance and repair plan.
The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities included in a post-construction
management plan must provide detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued
function. These plans must identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility that
need to be maintained and the equipment and skills or training necessary for adequate repair and
maintenance. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance
program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures, which meet all specifications
found in the DCDM, must be provided to the City as part of the responsible party’s post-construction
management plan.
Sec. 27-17. Records of installation and maintenance activities.
(a) Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility,
including a property owner, must make written records of the installation and of all
maintenance and repairs, and must retain the records for at least five (5) years. These records
must be made available to the City during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable
times upon request.
(b) Failure to maintain these records or make them available upon request by the City is an offense.
Subchapter D. Inspection of Stormwater Management Facilities.
Sec. 27-18. Inspection of permanent, post-construction stormwater management facilities.
(a) Inspections of permanent, post-construction, stormwater management facilities must comply with all
requirements found within DCDM related to inspections of these facilities as well as with all federal,
state, and local laws, regulations, and permits.
(b) For all privately owned and maintained stormwater maintenance facilities, the person responsible for
the facility must make regular inspections of all BMPs as required by the DCDMand state and federal
laws, regulations, and permits. If the frequency of inspection for a particular stormwater management
Page 23 of 39
facility is not provided by any applicable law, regulation, or permit, then the inspection must be
performed no less frequently than once a year or as required by the City.
(1) The purpose of such inspections must be to determine the overall effectiveness of these BMPs and
the need for additional control measures.
(2) Repair and maintenance needs may include: removal of silt, litter, and other debris from all catch
basins, inlets, and drainage pipes, grass cutting, vegetation removal, and necessary replacement of
landscape vegetation.
(3) Any repair or maintenance needs found must be addressed in a timely manner, as determined by
the City, and the inspection and maintenance requirements may be increased by the City as deemed
necessary to ensure proper functioning of a stormwater management facility.
(4) Results of inspections must be documented in written form. All these inspection reports must be
kept on file available for viewing upon request by the City.
(c) The City may inspect a stormwater management facility to ensure compliance with all
applicable federal, state, and local laws, regulations, and permits.
(d) A person responsible for a facility commits an offense if they:
(1) fail or refuse to allow the City to access to a stormwater management facility for purposes of
inspection, including preventing entry through security measures;
(2) fail to timely inspect a stormwater management facility as required by the DCDM, federal, or
state law, regulation, or permit, or as required by the City; or
(3) fail, refuse, or are unable to provide a post-construction management plan or any inspection
report when requested by the City.
Subchapter E. Enforcement and Penalties.
Sec. 27-19. Failure to maintain stormwater management facilities.
(a) If a person responsible for a post-construction stormwater management facility fails or refuses
to maintain such facility, the City may correct a violation by performing all necessary work to
place the facility in proper working condition after providing notice in writing to the person
responsible for the facility of the violation. The City may issue a written notice to the person
responsible of the facility, if such person is available at the facility; or, in the absence of such
a person, by posting the notice at the facility or by mail. The person responsible for the facility
will have three (3) days from the date a written notice is provided to perform maintenance or
repair of the facility in the manner approved by the City. If the person responsible for the
facility fails to correct the violation in a way that is approved by the City, the City may perform
Page 24 of 39
the maintenance or repair the facility and assess the owner of the facility for the cost of the
repair work.
(b) If a stormwater management facility poses an imminent danger to public safety or public health, the
City, after providing verbal notice to the person responsible for the facility, may perform the
maintenance or repair the facility and assess the owner of the facility for the cost of the repair work.
(c) Failure to pay for any of the City’s work to repair or maintain a stormwater facility under Subsections
(a) or (b), above, may result in a lien levied against the property.
(d) Failure or refusal to comply with a notice to repair or maintain a stormwater facility by the City
notice’s deadline is an offense.
(e) Failure or refusal to maintain any post-construction stormwater management facility as required by
any local, state, or federal law, regulation, or permit is an offense irrespective of whether the violation
was timely remedied after City notice.
(f) Providing notice of violation or repairing or performing maintenance on a facility by the City is not a
bar to, or a prerequisite for, the City taking any other action against a person.
Article IV. Creek Buffer Zones.
Sec. 27-20. Establishment of Creek Buffer Zones (CBZs).
All property located on or adjacent to a natural, vegetated, earthen or grass lined creek, channel,
stream, or channel is hereby deemed to be within a CBZ. When a property is located within a
CBZ, the developer, builder, operator, and owner must comply all applicable requirements of
the DCDM.
Sec. 27-21. Design Standards.
CBZs must be designed and designated by the requirements and standards found in this Chapter and in
the DCDM.
Sec. 27-22. Offense.
A person who fails to comply by any term of this Article commits an offense.
Secs. 27-23 – 27-39. Reserved.
Page 25 of 39
ARTICLE IV. REGULATION OF NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGES
DIVISION I. ILLICIT DISCHARGE PREVENTION
Sec. 27-40. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through
the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the City’s municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)
to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This Article establishes methods
for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the City’s MS4 in order to comply with requirements of
the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit and the Texas Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (TPDES) permit processes. The objectives of this Article are to:
(a) regulate the contribution of pollutants or contaminants to the City’s MS4 or waters of the state
of Texas or United States by any person;
(b) prohibit illicit discharges and illicit connections to the City’s MS4;
(c) prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated because of spills, releases, or inappropriate
dumping or disposal, to the City’s MS4;
(d) protect and preserve the functionality of watercourses and channels located within the City;
and
(e) establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring, and enforcement
procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this Article.
Sec. 27-41. Applicability.
The provisions of this Article apply to all water or substances entering the MS4 generated on any
developed or undeveloped lands throughout the corporate limits of the City unless specifically exempted
by this Article.
Sec. 27-42. Responsibility for administration; authority.
(a) The City may administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this Article. The City Manager
may designate a City employee or department as a TPDES Stormwater Manager or Inspector. Such
manager or inspectors have the authority to enforce this Article in its entirety.
(b) The City has the authority to:
(1) prohibit illicit discharges and illicit connections and unauthorized connections;
Page 26 of 39
(2) respond to and contain other releases, control the discharge of spills, and prohibit dumping or
disposal of materials other than stormwater into the MS4;
(3) require compliance with conditions in the City’s ordinances, permits, contracts, or orders;
(4) require installation, implementation, and maintenance of control measures;
(5) receive and collect information, such as stormwater plans, inspection reports, and other information
deemed necessary to assess compliance with this permit, from operators of construction sites, new
or redeveloped land, and industrial and commercial facilities;
(6) receive and collect information, such as stormwater plans, inspection reports, and other information
deemed necessary to assess compliance with the City’s General Permit to Discharge under the
Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, from operators of construction sites, new or
redeveloped land, and industrial and commercial facilities;
(7) enter and inspect private property including facilities, equipment, practices, or operations related
to stormwater discharges to the MS4, as needed;
(8) respond to non-compliance with BMPs required by the MS4 consistent with the City’s ordinances
or other regulatory mechanisms; and
(9) assess penalties, including monetary, civil, or criminal penalties.
Sec. 27-42. General Prohibitions and Requirements.
(a) A person commits an offense if they discharge or causes to be discharged any water that does not
consist entirely of stormwater into a MS4, waters of the United States, or state waters.
(b) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution to discharge the following non-stormwater sources, unless
they are determined by the City or TCEQ to be significant contributors of pollutants to the MS4 or
they are otherwise prohibited by the City:
(1) Water line flushing (excluding discharges of hyperchlorinated water, unless the water is first
dechlorinated and discharges are not expected to adversely affect aquatic life);
(2) Runoff or return flow from landscape irrigation, lawn irrigation, and other irrigation utilizing
potable water, groundwater, or surface water sources;
(3) Discharges from potable water sources that do not violate Texas Surface Water Quality
Standards;
(4) Diverted stream flows;
Page 27 of 39
(5) Rising ground waters and springs;
(6) Uncontaminated ground water infiltration;
(7) Uncontaminated pumped ground water;
(8) Foundation and footing drains;
(9) Air conditioning condensation;
(10) Water from crawl space pumps;
(11) Individual residential vehicle washing;
(12) Flows from wetlands and riparian habitats;
(13) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges that do not violate Texas Surface Water Quality
Standards;
(14) Street wash water excluding street sweeper waste water;
(15) Discharges or flows from emergency firefighting activities (firefighting activities do not
include washing of trucks, run-off water from training activities, test water from fire
suppression systems, and similar activities);
(16) Other allowable non-stormwater discharges listed in 40 CFR § 122.26(d)(2)(iv)(B)(1);
(17) Non-stormwater discharges that are specifically listed in the TPDES Multi Sector General
Permit (MSGP) TXR050000 or the TPDES Construction General Permit (CGP) TXR150000;
(18) Discharges that are authorized by a TPDES or NPDES permit or that are not required to be
permitted; and
(19) Other similar occasional incidental non-stormwater discharges such as spray park water, unless
the TCEQ develops permits or regulations addressing these discharges.
(c) The use of BMPs or the presence of pervious cover that filters pollutants or contaminants from a
discharge before the discharge reaches the MS4 will be considered an additional affirmative defense
if no pollutant or contaminant is present upon the discharge’s release into the MS4.
(d) In any civil or criminal action, the discharger has the burden of proving that a discharge in violation
of Subsection (a) is uncontaminated or falls within a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b).
Prima facie proof that a discharge is uncontaminated must be made in the form of an analysis by a
Page 28 of 39
certified laboratory, using standard methods or procedures prescribed by EPA or TCEQ regulations.
A copy of the laboratory analysis must be provided to the City.
(e) Right of entry; inspection and sampling. A discharger must comply with all requirements provided in
Section 27-53, below.
Sec. 27-43. Specific Prohibitions and Requirements.
(a) The specific prohibitions and requirements in this Section are not inclusive of all the discharges
prohibited by the general prohibitions in Section 27-42, above.
(b) A person commits an offense if he discharges or causes to be discharged into the MS4, waters of the
United States, or state water a pollutant or substance that causes or contributes in causing the City to
violate a Texas surface water quality standard, the City’s NPDES permit or TPDES permit, or state or
federal law or regulation.
(c) A person commits an offense if he discharges or allows or permits the discharge of any of the following
into the MS4:
(1) used motor oil, antifreeze, or any motor vehicle fluid;
(2) industrial waste;
(3) hazardous substance or hazardous waste, including hazardous household waste;
(4) domestic sewage, septic tank waste, grease trap waste, or grit trap waste;
(5) garbage, rubbish, or yard waste;
(6) wastewater from:
(A) any commercial vehicle washing facility, including any commercial car wash located on the
premises of any office building or in any parking garage;
(B) any vehicle washing, cleaning, or maintenance at any new or used automobile or other vehicle
dealership, rental agency, body shop, repair shop, or maintenance facility;
(C) any washing, cleaning, or maintenance of any business, commercial, or public service vehicle
(including a truck, bus, or heavy equipment) by a business or public entity that operates more
than two of such vehicles;
(D) discharge from the washing, cleaning, de-icing, or other maintenance of aircraft;
Page 29 of 39
(E) any mobile power washing operation if the wastewater contains a harmful quantity of any
soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, emulsifier, dispersant, or other cleaning substance or
pollutant;
(F) floor, rug, or carpet cleaning;
(G) the washdown or other cleaning of pavement if the wastewater contains a harmful quantity of
any soap, detergent, solvent, degreaser, emulsifier, dispersant, or other cleaning substance or
pollutant;
(H) the washdown or other cleaning of any pavement where any spill, leak, or other release of oil,
motor fuel, or other petroleum product or hazardous substance has occurred, unless all
harmful quantities of the released material have been previously removed; or
(I) a portable restroom or other temporary sanitary facility;
(7) effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor, emissions scrubber, emissions filter, or the
blow down from a boiler, except as allowed under a TPDES permit;
(8) ready-mixed concrete, mortar, ceramic, or asphalt base material, or hydromulch material, or
wastewater from the cleaning of vehicles or equipment containing, or used in transporting or
applying, such material;
(9) runoff or wash down water from any animal pen, kennel, or fowl or livestock containment area;
(10) filter backwash from a swimming pool, fountain, or spa;
(11) swimming pool water that violates Texas Surface Water Quality Standards;
(12) fire protection water containing oil or hazardous substances or materials, unless treatment
adequate to remove pollutants and contaminants occurs before discharge, except that this
prohibition does not apply to discharges or flow from emergency firefighting (emergency
firefighting does not include washing of trucks, runoff water from training activities, test water
from fire suppression systems, and similar activities);
(13) water from a water curtain in a spray room used for painting vehicles or equipment;
(14) substance or material that will damage, block, or clog the MS4;
(15) discharge from a petroleum storage tank (PST) or any leachate or runoff from soil contaminated
by a leaking PST, or any discharge of pumped, confined, or treated wastewater from the
remediation of a PST release, unless the discharge satisfies all of the following criteria: (a) is in
compliance with all state and federal standards and requirements; (b) does not contain a harmful
quantity of any pollutant; and (c) discharge does not contain more than 50 parts per billion of
Page 30 of 39
benzene, 500 parts per billion combined total quantities of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and
xylene (BTEX), or 15 mg/L of total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH);
(16) paint, finish, or paint cleaning material, including, but not limited to, auto body paint, latex paint,
wood finishing material, texturing product, varnish, paint thinner, or paint solvent of any kind; and
(17) a harmful quantity of dust resulting from sanding, grinding, cutting, sawing, or storage of any
materials.
(d) A person commits an offense if they discharge into the MS4 a harmful quantity of sediment, silt, earth,
soil, or other material associated with:
(1) clearing, grading, filling, excavating, or other construction activities; or
(2) landfilling or other placement or disposal of soil, rock, or other earth materials in excess of what
could be retained on site or captured by employing sediment and erosion control measures to the
maximum extent practicable.
(e) A person commits an offense if they:
(1) discharge motor vehicle fluid, oil, petroleum product, or used oil into the MS4, into a private
drainage system that feeds into the MS4, or into any septic tank, surface water, groundwater, or
watercourse within the City;
(2) mix or commingle motor vehicle fluid, oil, petroleum product, or used oil with any type of waste
that is to be disposed of in a landfill or directly dispose of motor vehicle fluids, oil, petroleum
products, or used oil on land or in a landfill; or
(3) apply motor vehicle fluid, oil, petroleum product, or used oil to a road or land for dust suppression,
weed abatement, or other similar use that introduces or has the potential to introduce motor vehicle
fluids, oil, petroleum products, or used oil into the MS4 or a sewer drainage system, septic tank,
surface water, groundwater, or watercourse or any part of the environment.
Sec. 27-44. Regulation of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers.
(a) Any sale, distribution, application, labeling, manufacture, transportation, storage, or disposal of a
pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer within the City must comply fully with all applicable state and federal
statutes and regulations, including, but not limited to:
(1) the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA), as amended;
(2) federal regulations promulgated pursuant to FIFRA; and
Page 31 of 39
(3) applicable provisions of Chapters 63 and 76 of the Texas Agriculture Code, as amended, and state
regulations promulgated pursuant to those chapters.
(b) A license, permit, registration, certification, or evidence of financial responsibility required by state
or federal law for the sale, distribution, application, manufacture, transportation, storage, or disposal
of a pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer must be presented to any City official, including any
environmental health officer, Public Works Department employee, City code compliance officer, and
any police officer for examination upon request.
(c) No person must, within the City, use or cause to be used any pesticide or herbicide contrary to any
directions for use on any labeling required by state or federal statute or regulation.
(d) No person may, within the City, use, dispose of, discard, store, or transport a pesticide, herbicide, or
fertilizer or a pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer container in a manner that the person knows or
reasonably should know is likely to cause, or does cause, a harmful quantity of the pesticide, herbicide,
or fertilizer to enter the MS4, waters of the United States, or state water.
Sec. 27-45. Illicit or unauthorized connections.
(a) Illicit connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance, or continued existence of any
illicit connection, as defined by this Chapter, to the MS4 is prohibited.
(b) Unauthorized Connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance, or continued existence
of any unauthorized connection, as defined by this Chapter, to the MS4 is prohibited.
(c) A person violates this Article if the person connects a line conveying domestic or industrial sewage to
the MS4 or allows such a connection to continue.
(d) These prohibitions expressly include, without limitation, currently unauthorized or illicit connections
that were made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices
applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
(e) Unauthorized or illicit connections to the MS4 in violation of this Article must be disconnected and
redirected, if necessary, by the discharger to an approved onsite wastewater management system or
the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the City at the expense of the discharger.
(f) A person who constructs, connects, maintains, permits, or allows the continued existence of an
unauthorized or illicit connection commits an offense.
(g) Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps, or an equivalent, and which
may be connected to the MS4, must be located by the owner or operator of a facility within three (3)
days following receipt of a written notice of violation (NOV) from the City. Such notice may grant a
longer time period, not to exceed sixty (60) days, but must require that the drain or conveyance be
identified as a storm sewer, sanitary sewer, or other type of conveyance and that the outfall location
Page 32 of 39
or point of connection to the MS4, sanitary sewer system, or other discharge point be identified.
Results of these investigations must be documented and provided to the City to confirm compliance
with this Article.
Sec. 27-46. Watercourses.
Watercourse Protection. Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or the
property’s occupant, lessee, tenant, agent, or manager, or the like, must keep and maintain the section of
the watercourse within this property free of trash, debris, and other obstacles that may pollute,
contaminate, or adversely retard the flow of water through the watercourse. Failure for a person to comply
with this Section is an offense.
Sec. 27-47. Notification of release.
(a) A discharger of a reportable quantity of a hazardous or extremely hazardous substance into the MS4,
waters of the United States, or state water must telephone and notify the City, TCEQ, and applicable
fire department immediately after becoming aware of the discharge. A discharger of a reportable
quantity of any of the following substances into the MS4, waters of the United States, or state water
must telephone and notify the City and TCEQ concerning the incident within twenty-four (24) hours
after its occurrence:
(1) An amount of oil that either:
(A) violates applicable water quality standards; or
(B) causes a film or sheen upon, or discoloration of, the surface of the water or an adjoining
shoreline, or causes a sludge or emulsion to be deposited beneath the surface of the water or
upon an adjoining shoreline.
(2) A harmful quantity of any other pollutant that is not a hazardous or extremely hazardous substance
but has been discharged in a quantity that exceeds surface water quality standards as set forth in
Chapter 307, Title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code, as amended.
(b) The notification required by Subsection (a) of this Section must include all the following
information:
(1) the identity or chemical name of the substance released and whether the substance is an extremely
hazardous substance;
(2) the exact location of the discharge, including any known name of the waters involved or threatened
and any other environmental media affected;
(3) the time and duration of the discharge at the moment of notification;
Page 33 of 39
(4) an estimate of the quantity and concentration, if known, of the substance discharged;
(5) the source of the discharge;
(6) any known or anticipated health risks associated with the discharge and, where appropriate, advice
regarding medical attention that may be necessary for exposed individuals;
(7) precautions that should be taken as a result of the discharge;
(8) steps that have been taken to contain or clean up the discharged substance and related material and
to minimize the impact of the discharge; and
(9) the name and telephone number of each person to be contacted for further information.
(c) Within three (3) days after a discharge under this Section, the discharger must, unless expressly
waived in writing by the City, submit a written report containing each item of information required
by Subsection (b), as well as the following additional information:
(1) the ultimate duration, concentration, and quantity of the discharge;
(2) all actions taken to respond to, contain, and clean up the discharged substances, and all
precautions taken to minimize the impact of the discharge;
(3) any known or anticipated acute or chronic health risks associated with the discharge;
(4) where appropriate, advice regarding medical attention necessary for exposed individuals;
(5) the identity of each governmental entity and private sector representative responding to the
discharge; and
(6) measures taken or to be taken by the discharger to prevent similar future occurrences.
(d) The notifications required by Subsections (b) and (c) of this Section do not relieve the discharger from
any expense, loss, damage, or other liability that may be incurred as a result of the discharge, including
any liability for damage to the City, to natural resources, or to any other person or property. The
notifications also do not relieve the discharger from any fine, penalty, or other liability that may be
imposed under this Chapter or under any other local, state, or federal law, regulation, or permit.
(e) A release report required by a state or federal regulatory authority that contains the information
described in Subsections (b) and (c) of this Section meets the reporting requirements of Subsection
(c), upon submittal of the report to the City.
(f) The owner or operator of any facility, vehicle, or other source responsible for a discharge described
in Subsection (a) of this Section must:
Page 34 of 39
(1) comply with all state, federal, and local laws, regulations, and permits requiring reporting, cleanup,
containment, and any other appropriate remedial action in response to the discharge; and
(2) reimburse the City for any costs incurred by the City in responding to the discharge.
(g) A discharger commits an offense if he:
(1) fails or refuses to report the discharge within the time required by Subsection (a) after becoming
aware of the discharge;
(2) fails or refuses to submit a written report within the time required by Subsection (c), if this
requirement was not expressly waived in writing by the City;
(3) knowingly provides false or incorrect information in a notification or report required under this
Section; or
(4) fails or refuses to take the necessary action to clean up pollution or damage to the MS4, waters of
the United States, or state water, or to other property, that is caused by the discharge.
DIVISION II. STORMWATER DISCHARGES FOR INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY
Sec. 27-48. Applicability of Division.
The provisions of this Division apply to discharges from any conveyance that is used for collecting and
conveying stormwater and that is directly related to manufacturing, processing, or raw materials storage
areas at an industrial facility, which facility is within one of the categories of facilities listed in 40 CFR
Section 122.26(b)(14), as amended, or is identified in a multi-sector general permit as being engaged in
industrial activity. The term does not include any discharge that is excluded from the EPA’s definition of
“stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity.”
Sec. 27-49. Permits required.
(a) All facilities required by state or federal law must obtain a multi-sector general permit or an individual
NPDES or TPDES permit, whichever is applicable for the activity conducted at the industrial facility.
(b) Facilities regulated under the TPDES General Permit TXR050000 may be excluded from permit
requirements if there is no exposure of industrial materials or activities from precipitation or runoff.
To qualify for a no exposure exclusion from permit requirements, the operator of a facility must
comply with all TCEQ’s requirements for exclusion. Facilities that qualify for this exclusion and that
contribute stormwater discharge to a MS4 must provide copies of the certification that industrial
facilities and materials are isolated from stormwater by storm resistant shelters to the City. Failure to
provide this certification to the City is an offense.
Page 35 of 39
(c) A person violates this Division if the person discharges, causes to be discharged, or allows to be
discharged stormwater associated with industrial activity without first having obtained a multi-sector
general permit or an individual NPDES or TPDES permit, as applicable, to do so.
Sec. 27-50. Compliance with permits.
Responsible parties of an industrial facility must comply with all terms and conditions of a multi-sector
general permit or an individual NPDES or TPDES permit, whichever is applicable for the activity
conducted at the industrial facility. A person who violates a term or condition of an applicable a multisector
general permit or an individual NPDES or TPDES permit commits an offense.
Sec. 27-51. When SWP3, NOI, NEC, NOC, and NOT are required.
(a) Responsible parties of such facilities must submit a copy of any applicable NOI, NEC, NOC, and
NOT to the City within two (2) days after submitting such document to TCEQ.
(b) Responsible parties of an industrial facility required to have a SWP3 under a multi-sector general
permit or an individual NPDES or TPDES permit must provide a copy of the SWP3 to the City upon
request.
(c) Failure to comply with this Section is an offense.
Sec. 27-52. Best Management Practices (BMPs).
(a) Responsible parties of an industrial facility governed by this Division must use best management
practices to control and minimize the discharge into the MS4, waters of the United States, and state
water of any material or substance handled, stored, or generated by the industrial facility and any
pollutant that may be attributed to those materials or substances. The applicable SWP3 must establish
BMPs. Compliance with required BMPs must be at the responsible parties’ expense.
(b) Responsible parties of an industrial facility must comply with all BMPs required by the state, federal,
or local laws, regulations, and permits.
(c) The City may require a person responsible of an industrial facility to implement, at said person’s
expense, additional BMPs, in addition to those required by TCEQ or the EPA, to prevent discharge of
pollutants or contaminants to the MS4.
Sec. 27-53. Right of entry; inspection and sampling.
(a) The City is authorized to enter the premises of any person who is discharging stormwater into the
MS4, waters of the United States, or state water to determine if the discharger is complying with all
requirements of this Chapter and of any applicable state or federal discharge permits, limitations, or
requirements.
Page 36 of 39
(b) A discharger must:
(1) allow the City ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties;
(2) retain records of all monitoring and reporting records, including records of calibration and
maintenance, and copies of all records and reports required by a TCEQ permit for a period of three
(3) years from the date of the record or sample, measurement, report, application, or certification;
(3) retain any applicable SWP3 for a minimum of one (1) year after a NPDES or TPDES general
permit is terminated or allowed to expire without renewal;
(4) make available to the City any SWP3s or modifications to plans, self-inspection reports,
monitoring records, compliance evaluations, notices of intent, and other records, reports, and
documents required by the NPDES permit or TPDES permit; and
(5) retain and provide to the City, upon request, any annual, semi-annual, or periodic monitoring
reports as required by the NPDES or TPDES permit.
(c) A person commits an offense if they fail to comply with any of the requirements provided in
Subsection (b), above.
(d) If a discharger has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before
entry into the premises, the discharger must make necessary arrangements with its security guards so
that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the City is permitted to enter without delay for the
purpose of performing the City’s responsibilities.
(e) The City has the authority to install on the discharger’s property, or to require installation of, such
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering of the discharger’s operations.
(f) The City may require a discharger that contributes, or the City believes may contribute, a harmful
quantity of a pollutant to the MS4, waters of the United States, or state water to conduct specified
sampling, testing, analysis, and other monitoring of its stormwater discharges. All such activities must
be at the discharger’s expense. The City may specify the frequency and parameters of any required
monitoring.
(g) The City may require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary at the discharger’s
expense.
(h) All required sampling and monitoring equipment must be maintained in a safe and proper operating
condition by the discharger. The discharger must ensure that each device used to measure stormwater
flow and quality is calibrated for accuracy.
Page 37 of 39
(i) Any temporary or permanent obstruction that obstructs safe and easy access to facility that is to be
inspected or sampled must be promptly removed by the discharger at the written or verbal request of
the City and must not be thereafter replaced. The costs of clearing access to the facility must be borne
by the discharger.
(j) Failure for a discharger to comply with any provision of this Section is an offense.
ARTICLE V. ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 27-54. Administrative Enforcement Remedies.
(a) Generally. Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, nothing in this Chapter limits the authority of
the City to take any action, including emergency action and filing a civil suit or criminal charges,
without first issuing any other type of notice or order provided under this Article. Compliance with
any notice issued hereunder in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations
occurring before or after receipt of any notice or order.
(b) Notification of Violation (NOV). Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter, when the City finds
that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this Chapter, the City may serve
upon that person a written NOV in person or by mail. Notice of violations may order a violator to
perform, within a prescribed period, any or all of the following actions:
(1) provide the City an explanation of the violation;
(2) provide the City a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention of reoccurrence thereof, to
include specific required actions and timelines for completion, which will be subject to City
approval;
(3) correct the violation and make any remediation necessary within a period prescribed by the City;
and
(4) perform any other action deemed necessary by the City to ensure the public’s health, safety, and
welfare and prevent property damage.
(c) If the person denies that any violation occurred or contends that no corrective action is necessary, an
explanation of the basis of any such denial or contention must be submitted to the City by a date
specified in the Notice of Violation.
(d) Failure to take timely or proper action as required by Subsection (b) or reply to the City by a specified
date as required by Subsection (c) is an offense.
Page 38 of 39
(e) All plans submitted to the City under Subsection (b)(2), above, must be approved by the City. If the
City disapproves of a plan, the City may require a submitter to modify a plan.
(1) Failure to comply with a plan approved by the City or failure to obtain City approval for a plan
under this Subsection is an offense.
(f) The City may issue a stop work order if the City does not accept a person’s denial of a violation or
contention that corrective action is not needed submitted under Subsection (c).
(g) Stop Work Orders. When the City finds that any person has violated, continues to violate, or threatens
to violate any provision of this Chapter, or any order issued by the City hereunder, the City may issue
a stop work order, which will: (1) suspend or revoke any City issued permits or approvals associated
with the regulated activity, facility, or site in question; or (2) halt the permitted or approved activity
or facility until the violation is abated or corrected.
(h) If a violator fails to timely correct a violation or make required remediation or there is an imminent
danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, the City may perform any action deemed necessary by
the City to ensure the public’s health, safety, and welfare. The City may charge the owner of the
property for any worked performed by the City under this Subsection. Failure to pay the City for this
work may result in the City filing a lien against the property.
Sec. 27-55. Criminal and Civil Enforcement.
(a) The commission of any act that is prohibited by this Chapter or the failure to perform any act that is
required by this Chapter is a violation.
(b) Penalties for violations.
(1) Criminal.
(A) A person who knowingly, intentionally, recklessly, or with criminal negligence violates any
provision of this Chapter commits an offense.
(B) A person who violates any provision of this Chapter commits a Class C misdemeanor. A person
convicted of a violation of this Chapter must be fined a minimum amount of not less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first violation, five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the
second violation, and a thousand dollars ($1000.00) for the third violation and each violation
thereafter. The maximum fined amount for any violation of this Chapter may not be more than
two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per violation.
(C) A person is criminally responsible for a violation of this Chapter if the person:
i. commits or assists in the commission of the violation or causes or permits another person to
commit the violation;
Page 39 of 39
ii. owns, operates, or manages a site or facility determined to be the cause of the violation.
(D) Each violation of this Article constitutes a separate offense, and each day or portion of a day
an offense continues will be considered a new violation for purposes of enforcing this Article.
(E) Filing criminal charges will not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against a person.
(2) Civil.
(A) The City has the authority to pursue all legal and equitable remedies to enforce provisions of
this Chapter, including, but not limited to, civil penalties of up to $5000.00 a day or a portion
of a day for each violation of this Article, injunctive relief, and all other available relief.
(B) The City has the authority to recover expenses and loss or damage to City property.
(C) Filing a suit for civil penalties will not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against a person.
(c) Remedies Nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this Section are not exclusive. The City may
take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant person.
ARTICLE VI. MISC. PROVISIONS.
Sec. 27-56. Authority to enter agreements to enforce provisions of this Chapter.
The City has the authority to enter any interagency or interlocal agreements or other maintenance
agreements, as necessary, to comply with the requirements of any state, federal, or local law or regulation
or to enforce the terms of this Chapter.
Sec. 27-57. Severability.
The provisions and sections of this ordinance must be deemed to be severable, and the invalidity of any
portion of this ordinance must not affect the validity of the remainder.
Chapter 28
POLICE
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 28-1. General duties; right of entry.
Sec. 28-2. Arrest of persons found in suspicious places or circumstances.
Sec. 28-3. Arrest of law or ordinance violators.
Sec. 28-4. Preservation of tree passage on streets, sidewalks, etc.,
protection of persons and property.
Sec. 28-5. Attendance at municipal court.
Sec. 28-6. Aid from citizens.
Sec. 28-7. Disposition of abandoned or unclaimed money in police
possession.
Sec. 28-8. Abandoned, stolen or recovered property--Definitions.
Sec. 28-9. Same--Disposition of lost, abandoned, stolen or recovered
property.
Sec. 28-10. Same--Procedure for disposal and reporting disposition.
Sec. 28-11. Same--Notice; manner of sale.
Sec. 28-12. Same--Sales for cash.
Sec. 28-13. Same--Reports by city controller; delivery of proceeds to
treasurer.
Sec. 28-14. Same--Proceeds to be credited to general fund.
Sec. 28-15. Same--Worthless property.
Sec. 28-16. Same--Nonapplicability.
Secs. 28-17--28-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. CHIEF OF POLICE
Sec. 28-26. Qualifications and general duties.
Sec. 28-27. Supervision, control, etc., of police force.
Sec. 28-28. To devote full time to office.
Sec. 28-29. To have power, authority and jurisdiction of sheriff.
Sec. 28-30. To be ex officio sergeant-at-arms of board; attendance at board
meetings.
Sec. 28-31. Execution of process and orders generally.
Sec. 28-32. Duties with respect to municipal court.
Secs. 28-33--28-40. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS
Sec. 28-41. General Provisions.
Sec. 28-42. Permit Required.
Sec.28-43. Alarm Permit Fee.
Sec. 28-44. Permit Application.
Sec. 28-45. Alarm Permit Duration, Renewal and Inspection.
Sec.28-46. Alarm systems in apartment complexes.
Sec.28-47. Duties of Permit Holder.
Sec.28-48. Duties of an Alarm Company.
Sec. 28-49. Monitoring Procedures
Sec. 28-50. False Alarm Service Fees.
Sec. 28-51. False Alarm Inspection and Notification.
Sec. 28-52. Revocation and Reinstatement of Permit.
Sec. 28-53. Reinstatement of Permit.
Sec. 28-54. Violations; Penalties; Corporations, Partnerships and Other
Legal Entities.
Sec. 28-55. Government Immunity and Disclaimer.
Chapter 28
POLICE
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 28-1. General duties; right of entry.
It shall be the duty of the policemen of the city to keep a faithful watch in the districts
assigned to them, and to arrest and detain, with or without warrant, all offenders against the
peace, and all persons who may obstruct or endanger them, or either of the, in the discharge
of their duties, or who shall be guilty of any unlawful conduct, noise, or disturbance. For this
purpose, policemen are authorized to enter in any house or other structure where any person
may take refuge or may be, who has in their presence or hearing, been guilty of any offense
against the peace of the city, or may enter in any structure where any breach of the peace is
about to be committed, or when any unusual noise, alarm, outcry or disturbance shall be
made.
Policemen are further authorized to enter, in a peaceable manner, or with force if
refused admittance after demand made, into any store, grocery, shop or other building,
enclosure or place within the city, in which any person who has committed or is suspected of
having committed a felony may take refuge, or in which any felony has been or is about to be
committed, or in which any alarm, outcry or other disturbance whatever is made.
Sec. 28-2. Arrest of persons found in suspicious places or circumstances.
It shall be the duty of each and every member of the police force to arrest, with or
without warrant, all persons found in suspicious places and under circumstances which
reasonably show that such persons have been guilty of some felony or breach of the peace, or
threaten, or about to commit some offense against the laws of the State of Texas or the
ordinances of the City of Temple.
Sec. 28-3. Arrest of law or ordinance violators.
It shall be the duty of every policeman to arrest, with or without warrant, any person
who, in his presence, violates any ordinance of the city, or when informed by any credible
person that such person to be arrested has violated any ordinance of the city or state law, and
is about to escape.
It shall be the duty of policemen, on becoming cognizant of the violation of any law or
ordinance, to forthwith arrest, with or without process, any and all persons guilty of such
violation, or of aiding, abetting or assisting therein, and to take such person or persons before
the municipal court or other competent tribunal within the city for trial.
Sec. 28-4. Preservation of tree passage on streets, sidewalks, etc., protection of
persons and property.
It shall be the special duty of policemen to see that free passage for persons and
vehicles is at all times preserved on the streets, sidewalks and other public places in the city
and to protect the rights of persons and property.
Sec. 28-5. Attendance at municipal court.
It shall be the duty of all policemen of the city to attend the municipal court as
witnesses against persons whom they shall have arrested, without being summoned, and if
any policeman shall fail to appear at the time of the trial, he may be attached and punished
for contempt of court, as witnesses duly summoned.
Sec. 28-6. Aid from citizens.
Policemen shall have, in the execution of their duties in arresting, with or without
warrant, any person accused or suspected of crime, or in the suppression of any riot or
unlawful assemblage, or in preventing the violation of any law or ordinance, power or
authority to require the aid of any citizen or bystander, and it shall be unlawful for any person
to refuse to render such aid when requested.
Sec. 28-7. Disposition of abandoned or unclaimed money in police possession.
(a) All abandoned or unclaimed money currently in the possession of the chief of
police of the City of Temple or that which may hereafter come into his possession shall be
disposed of in the manner hereinafter set out.
(b) Upon receipt of unclaimed money, the chief of police shall immediately turn the
same over to the controller who shall receipt and hold it.
(c) Notice of the fact of possession shall be posted by the chief of police on the
bulletin board in the municipal building and at two (2) other public places in the city. The
notice shall read substantially as follows:
NOTICE OF POSSESSION OF ABANDONED OR UNCLAIMED MONEY
"NOTICE is hereby given that on the _____ day of ________, 20____, the Chief of
Police of the City of Temple came into possession of abandoned and/or unclaimed
money in the amount of $________. Any person having an interest in such money or
entitled to possession thereof may apply to the Chief of Police of the City of Temple
for its return upon furnishing satisfactory proof of interest or ownership within thirty
(30) days of the date hereof.
Dated this _____ day of ___________, 20_____.
________________________________
Chief of Police
Temple, Texas"
(d) If no one claims the money and presents proof adequate to satisfy the chief of
police that the same is in fact his money within thirty (30) days of the date of posting of
notice of possession of unclaimed money, the chief shall notify the controller of such fact and
the controller shall thereupon credit such money to the general fund of the City of Temple.
(e) If within such thirty (30) day period satisfactory proof of ownership shall be
furnished to the chief of police, he shall notify the controller of such fact and request that the
money be transferred to the person proving ownership.
Sec. 28-8. Abandoned, stolen or recovered property--Definitions.
For the purposes of sections 28-9 through 28-16, and as used herein, the following
terms shall have the meanings in this section given to them:
(1) Deadly weapon. Any firearm, including but not limited to, a handgun, rifle,
shotgun or an illegal knife or club, as defined in Chapter 46 of the Texas Penal
Code as presently amended or as hereafter amended by the legislature of this
state.
(2) Prohibited weapon. Any weapon or instrument, the mere possession of which
is prohibited by law, and specifically including but without limitation, the
following:
(a) An explosive weapon;
(b) A machine gun;
(c) A short barrel firearm;
(d) A firearm silencer;
(e) A switchblade knife; or
(f) Knuckles.
Sec. 28-9. Same--Disposition of lost, abandoned, stolen or recovered property.
(a) All lost, abandoned, stolen or recovered property (including motor vehicles) which
shall remain with the police department of the City of Temple for a period of three (3)
months without being claimed or reclaimed by the owners, be sold and disposed of at public
auction as herein provided.
(b) All deadly or prohibited weapons recovered by the Temple police department and
remaining in its possession for a period of one year, without being claimed by the owners,
whether known or unknown, shall be deemed abandoned and shall be disposed of as provided
in section 28-10.
Sec. 28-10. Same--Procedure for disposal and reporting disposition.
(a) The chief of police shall give to the City of Temple a list of all property subject to
sale hereunder and shall thereafter deliver said property, except motor vehicles, deadly
weapons and prohibited weapons, to the city controller before the date of sale, and take a
receipt from said city controller showing in detail all property so delivered. Motor vehicles
shall be kept by the chief of police until a sale has been made. Deadly weapons and
prohibited weapons shall be kept by the chief of police and disposed of as herein provided.
(b) Deadly or prohibited weapons, subject to disposal under section 28-9(b) shall be
disposed of by the chief of police for the use and benefit of the City of Temple, or, at his
discretion, by destruction in such manner as to render them unusable as weapons.
(c) The chief of police shall keep a complete and accurate record of all weapons
disposed of pursuant to this section. This record shall include, as a minimum, the following:
(1) Description of the weapon, including the brand, model and serial number, if
known;
(2) Date of acquisition by the police department, if known;
(3) Name and address of the owner, if known;
(4) Date of disposal; and
(5) Manner of disposal or disposition.
(d) The chief of police shall report annually to the city controller all information
concerning weapons disposed of pursuant to paragraph (b). This requirement shall be deemed
fulfilled by the submission by the chief of police to the city controller of a copy of the record
required to be kept by him on each weapon disposed of.
Sec. 28-11. Same--Notice; manner of sale.
(a) Public auction. Thirty (30) days notice of the time and place of sale, and a
description list of the property and/or motor vehicles to be offered for sale shall be posted
any at any regular entrance to the municipal building and at one other public place in Bell
County, Texas, and a copy thereof sent by certified mail to the last-known address of the
owner, in the event the name of the owner is known to the city controller, and thereafter said
property shall be offered for sale at a public auction to the highest bidder for each piece of
property separately or assembled in lots, except that motor vehicles shall be sold separately.
(b) Private sale or disposition. The chief of police shall, prior to disposing of any
deadly or prohibited weapon by any means other than destruction, give the owner thereof
thirty (30) days notice, by certified mail to the last-known address of said owner, of the
pending disposition. Provided that said weapon has been held unclaimed for one year, no
notice is necessary if the owner is unknown or if the weapon is to be destroyed.
Sec. 28-12. Same--Sales for cash.
The public auction provided for in the preceding sections shall be conducted at the
place and hour designated in the notice, and all sales shall be for cash. The person conducting
the auction reserves the right to reject all bids.
Sec. 28-13. Same--Reports by city controller; delivery of proceeds to treasurer.
The city controller, or a designated employee of the City of Temple, shall conduct said
public auction, and he shall keep an accurate statement of each article and/or motor vehicle
sold, and the price bid and paid therefor; and shall make a complete report in writing to the
city manager of the City of Temple of the time, place and manner of conducting said sale. All
funds received on account of said auction shall be paid into the general fund of the City of
Temple.
Sec. 28-14. Same--Proceeds to be credited to general fund.
The city controller of the City of Temple is hereby required to place all funds received
by him under and by virtue of this chapter to the credit of the general fund to be thereafter
disbursed as the governing body of the City of Temple shall order.
Sec. 28-15. Same--Worthless property.
Any property which has been listed and offered for sale and for which no price or sum
has been offered, if deemed in the opinion of the city controller to be worthless and without
value, shall be disposed of in such manner as the city controller shall prescribe. The
description of all property destroyed or disposed of by the city controller as worthless or
without value shall be reported to the governing body of the City of Temple, together with
the date and manner of disposal.
Sec. 28-16. Same--Nonapplicability.
The provisions of sections 28-9 through 28-15 shall not be applicable to weapons
seized as evidence or contraband pursuant to the laws of the State of Texas or of the United
States, and which are disposed of pursuant thereto.
Secs. 28-17--28-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. CHIEF OF POLICE
Sec. 28-26. Qualifications and general duties.
The chief of police shall be well informed in the law and ordinances of the city and
shall at all times be vigilant and active in causing them to be duly enforced and obeyed
throughout the limits of the city. The chief of police shall perform such duties as may be
imposed upon him by state law or city ordinance.
Sec. 28-27. Supervision, control, etc., of police force.
The chief of police shall supervise, control and direct the police force of the city and
see that the members thereof promptly and faithfully perform their duties. He shall apportion
the police force into different areas of the city, so that the entire city may be protected at all
times, and shall assign each policeman his round of duty.
Sec. 28-28. To devote full time to office.
The chief of police shall devote his entire time and attention to the discharge of the
duties of his office.
Sec. 28-29. To have power, authority and jurisdiction of sheriff.
In the prevention and suppression of crime and the arrest of offenders, the chief of
police shall have, possess and execute like power, authority and jurisdiction as the sheriff of
a county under the laws of the state. To prevent a breach of the peace, or to preserve quiet
and good order, he shall have authority to close any theater or any other place or building of
public resort, and shall have like power, with the sheriff of the county, to execute the writ of
search warrant.
Sec. 28-30. To be ex officio sergeant-at-arms of board; attendance at board meetings.
The chief of police shall be ex officio sergeant-at-arms of the city council and shall,
either in person or by deputy, attend all of the meetings of the council.
Sec. 28-31. Execution of process and orders generally.
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to execute all process or orders issued to him
by any officer of the city having authority to issue the same, and to make returns thereof
according to law.
Sec. 28-32. Duties with respect to municipal court.
The chief of police shall, either in person or by deputy, attend the municipal court
when in session, shall preserve order therein, and shall promptly and faithfully execute all
writs of process issued therefrom.
Secs. 28-33--28-40. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS
Sec. 28-41. General Provisions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
Alarm Company means any person who sells, installs, converts, services, or monitors an
alarm system.
Alarm notification means a notification from or activation of an alarm system that is
intended to summon the police and designed either to be initiated purposely by a person or
automatically by a response to stimulus characteristic of unauthorized intrusion.
Alarm site means a single premise or location (one street address including apartment
number, suite number, etc.) served by an alarm system or systems under the control of one person.
Each tenant unit in a multi unit structure or complex shall be considered a separate alarm system if
served by a separate alarm system.
Alarm system means a device or system that emits, transmits, or relays a signal intended to
summon, or that would reasonably be expected to summon, police services of the city, including, but
not limited to, local alarms. Alarm system does not include:
(1) an alarm installed on a vehicle unless the vehicle is permanently located at a site; nor
(2) an alarm system designed to alert only the occupants or inhabitants of the premises where
the alarm system is installed, but only if such alarm notification cannot be heard outside the
premises where the alarm system is installed or which does not have a local alarm.
Applicant means the person, individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization or
similar entity, who is applying to be permit holder.
Burglary means the acts described at Texas Penal Code §§ 30.02 and 30.03.
Chief means the Chief of Police of the City of Temple or an authorized representative.
False Alarm Notification means an alarm notification to the police department, when the
responding officer, on reasonable investigation, as required by Section 214.196, “On-Site Inspection
Required,” of Chapter 214 of the Texas Local Government Code, finds no evidence of unauthorized
intrusion, attempted unauthorized intrusion, robbery, attempted robbery or other illegal activity.
Local Alarm means any Alarm System that annunciates an alarm only by an internal or
external audio device.
Monitoring means the process by which an alarm company receives signals from an alarm
system and relays an alarm notification to the city.
Permit means a certificate of authorization to operate an alarm system, issued by the police
department to the owner or person in control of the premises where a permitted alarm system is
located;
Permit Holder means any individual, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity to whom
an alarm system permit is issued or the person so designated in the application as required in this
ordinance who is responsible for responding to alarms and giving access to the site and who is also
responsible for proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed
under this ordinance.
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
Person in control means the permit holder, owner or operator of an alarm system.
Responds means the act of sending a police officer to an alarm site after the police
department receives a report of an alarm at such alarm site.
Unauthorized entry means entry of any type, whether intentional or accidental, not
authorized by the owner.
Sec. 28-42. Permit Required.
No person shall operate or cause to be operated an alarm system in the City of Temple
without a valid alarm permit issued by the Chief. A separate alarm permit is required for each alarm
system on each alarm site.
Sec.28-43. Alarm Permit Fee.
(1) The fee for a permit, permit renewal or permit reinstatement shall be due when the
application is submitted. No refund of a permit, permit renewal, or permit reinstatement fee will be
made. The City Council of the City of Temple shall set the amount of the fee by resolution.
(2) Local, state, or federal government, or any of their bona fide agencies shall be exempt
from any permit application, renewal or reinstatement fee under this section.
Sec. 28-44. Permit Application.
(1) Upon receipt of a completed application form and the required fee, the Chief shall issue
an alarm permit to an applicant unless the applicant has failed to pay a service fee assessed under
this ordinance, has had an alarm site revoked at this or any other alarm site, and the violation causing
the revocation has not been corrected, or has made a false statement of a material matter for the
purpose of obtaining an alarm permit.
(2) An application for an alarm permit must be made on a form provided by the Chief and
include the following information:
(A) The name, address (including apt/suite #), and telephones of the person who will be the
permit holder and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm
system and payment of fees assessed under this article;
(B) The name, address and telephone numbers of at least two individuals who are able and
have agreed to receive notification of an alarm activation at any time; respond to the alarm
site within 30 minutes after receiving a request from the police department to do so; and who
can grant access to the alarm site and deactivate the alarm system if such becomes necessary;
(C) The classification of the alarm site as either residential or commercial;
(D) Any business name, if used for the premises on which the alarm system is to be installed
and operated;
(E) The name, address, and phone number of the person or alarm company who will sell,
install, convert, service or monitor the alarm system and/or be responsible for selling,
installing, converting, servicing or monitoring the alarm system;
(F) The phone number of the alarm company monitoring the alarm system if different from
the installing alarm company;
(G) Other information required by the Chief as necessary for the enforcement of this
ordinance.
(3) If the applicant is an individual, the application shall be signed and verified by the
applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall be signed and verified by least one of
its general partners. If the applicant is a corporation or other entity, the application shall be signed
and verified by the president of such corporation or entity or other agent authorized on behalf of the
corporation.
(4) Information contained in the records maintained by the City pursuant to this Article and
that concerns the location of an alarm system, the name of the occupant of an alarm system site, or
the type of alarm system used is confidential and may be disclosed only as permitted by law.
Nothing in this article shall prohibit the use of such information for legitimate law enforcement
purposes and for enforcement of this ordinance.
(5) Persons operating a newly activated or reactivated alarm system must notify the police
department alarm unit (or after normal business hours, the police dispatcher's office) within twelve
(12) hours after commencing operation of the address of the alarm site, the name and the address of
the operator, and of any contact persons. Persons who give such notification are exempt from the
permit requirement for a period not to exceed five (5) calendar days.
(6) Persons operating a newly activated alarm system must immediately submit the signed
and completed Installer False Alarm Prevention Program Checklist (Appendix A) and Customer
False Alarm Prevention Program Checklist (Appendix B) to the Chief.
(7) An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another person or another alarm site and shall be
valid only for the alarm site designated in the permit. A permit holder shall inform the Chief of
Police of any change that alters any information listed on the permit application within five business
days. No fee shall be assessed for such changes.
Sec. 28-45. Alarm Permit Duration, Renewal and Inspection.
(1) An alarm permit is issued for two (2) years and must be renewed every two years upon
submission of an updated application and permit renewal fee. It is the responsibility of the permit
holder to submit an application prior to the permit expiration date. The Chief shall determine the
first expiration date of a permit.
(2) An alarm permit will be terminated for non-renewal, however, before terminating a
permit for non-renewal, the Chief shall provide 30 days period written notice to the permit holder of
the need to renew the permit and file an updated permit application. A permit shall not be renewed if
the applicant owes outstanding service fees at other alarm sites for which he is the permit holder.
(3) The permit holder for an alarm system shall keep such permit at the alarm site and shall
produce such permit or evidence thereof for inspection upon request of any member of the police
department or its designated representative. It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit, forge,
change, deface, or in any manner alter a permit issued pursuant to this article.
Sec.28-46. Alarm systems in apartment complexes.
(1) A tenant of an apartment complex shall obtain an alarm permit from the Chief before
operating or causing the operation of an alarm system in the tenant's residential unit.
(2) If an alarm system installed by an individual tenant in an apartment complex unit is
monitored, the tenant must provide the name of a representative of the apartment owner or property
manager who can grant access to the apartment to the alarm company.
(3) For purposes of enforcing this article against an individual residential unit, the tenant is
responsible for false alarms emitted from the alarm system in the tenant's residential unit.
(4) The owner or property manager of an apartment complex shall obtain a separate alarm
permit for any alarm systems operated in a nonresidential area of the apartment complex, including,
but not limited to, offices, common areas, storage and equipment areas. The permit fee for the alarm
permit or the renewal permit shall be the same as the fee for a residential alarm site.
(5) The owner or property manager of an apartment complex in which an alarm system is
installed in one or more individual residential units shall obtain a master alarm permit from the
Chief. The permit fee for the alarm permit or the renewal permit shall be the same as the fee for a
residential alarm site.
(6) For purposes of assessing service fees and enforcing this article against an individual
residential unit of an apartment complex:
(A) The tenant is responsible for payment of all service fees for any false alarm notification
emitted from the alarm system in the tenant’s residential unit; and
(B) The master alarm permit holder is responsible for payment of all service fees for any
false alarm notification emitted from the alarm system in any unoccupied residential unit in
the apartment complex.
(7) Each apartment unit shall be considered a separate alarm site.
Sec.28-47. Duties of Permit Holder.
(1) A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system shall:
(A) Maintain the premises containing an alarm system in a manner that ensures
proper operation of the alarm system;
(B) Maintain the alarm system in a manner that will minimize false alarm
notifications;
(C) Respond or cause a representative to respond within a reasonable period of time
when notified by the city to repair or inactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to
provide access to the premises, or to provide security for the premises;
(D) Not intentionally activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an
event that the alarm system was intended to report.
(2) A permit holder or person in control of a local alarm shall adjust the mechanism or cause
the mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal audible on the exterior of the alarm site will
sound for no longer than 30 minutes after being activated.
(3) Whenever a person listed on the application or listed on an amendment to the application
is unable or unwilling to perform the duties set out in this ordinance, the permit holder shall within
two (2) business days file an amendment to the permit application listing a person who is able and
will perform those duties so that at all times the application on file with the police department
designates at least two (2) persons who are able and willing to perform such duties.
(4) No person or permit holder shall operate or cause to be operated any Automatic Voice
Dialers which when activated, uses a telephone device or attachment to automatically select a
telephone line leading into the police department or other office of the City of Temple and then
transmits any prerecorded message or signal.
(5) A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system shall not allow alarm signals to
be reported through a relaying intermediary that does not comply with the requirements of this
article and any rules and regulations promulgated by the Chief or that is not licensed by the Texas
Board of Private Investigators and Private Security Agencies.
(6) No alarm system permitted and regulated by this article shall be tested by activating the
alarm notification function, without the permit holder or his agent first notifying the security
services contractor monitoring a third party central alarm station or police department before such
testing.
(7) All alarm systems permitted and regulated by this article shall be designed and function
so as to shut off any alarm notification signals after twenty (20) consecutive minutes of transmitting.
All such systems shall be designed and function to require that such systems be manually reset
before transmitting any subsequent alarm notification signal.
Sec.28-48. Duties of an Alarm Company.
(1) Any person or his agent who sells, installs, or converts, an alarm system in the City of Temple
shall:
(A) Inform permit holder or person in control of alarm system of the city ordinance requiring
permits for alarm systems;
(B) Provide proper operating instructions for alarm system to include guidelines for how to
avoid false alarms, and
(C) Leave a signed and completed Installer False Alarm Prevention Program Checklist
(Appendix A) and Customer False Alarm Prevention Program Checklist (Appendix B) with
the applicant to submit to the Chief.
Sec. 28-49. Monitoring Procedures
(1) Any alarm company engaged in the business of monitoring alarm systems in the city
shall:
(A) Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers designated by the Chief;
(B) Before requesting police response to an alarm system signal, attempt to verify
every alarm signal, except a duress, holdup, or panic alarm activation, by telephone
call to the alarm site;
(2) When reporting an alarm notification to the city, provide:
(A) The alarm permit number and the address of the alarm site from which the alarm
notification originated;
(B) All available information (north, south, front, back, floor, etc.) about the location
of the alarm;
(C) Type of alarm activation (silent or audible, interior or perimeter);
(D) Contact the permit holder or any of the individuals listed in the permit
application as persons able and agreeing to receive notification of an alarm activation
at any time of the alarm activation.
(3) Any alarm company must maintain for a period of at least two (2) years, records relating
to alarm dispatch requests for inspection by the city.
Sec. 28-50. False Alarm Service Fees.
The holder of an alarm permit or person in control of an alarm system shall pay a service fee
for each false alarm notification in excess of three that is emitted from an alarm site, or in the case of
an apartment complex from each individual residential unit, within a 12 month period. The City
Council of the City of Temple shall set the amount of the service fees by resolution.
Sec. 28-51. False Alarm Inspection and Notification.
(1) The Chief shall notify the permit holder in writing after each false alarm.
(2) The Chief shall not consider a false alarm to have occurred unless the police department
responds within thirty minutes of the alarm notification and the department determines from an
inspection of the interior or exterior of the premises that the alarm was false.
Sec. 28-52. Revocation and Reinstatement of Permit.
The Chief shall revoke an alarm permit if he determines that:
(A) There is a false statement in the application for a permit;
(B) The permit holder has violated the provisions of this ordinance;
(C) The permit holder has failed to make timely payment of a false alarm (service)
fee assessed under this ordinance.
Sec. 28-53. Reinstatement of Permit.
A person whose alarm permit has been revoked may have the permit reinstated if the person:
(A) Submits an updated application and pays a permit reinstatement fee in
accordance with this ordinance;
(B) Pays all outstanding false alarm (service) fees assessed under this ordinance for
which a bill has been issued;
(C) A reinstated permit expires the same date on which the original permit would
have expired had it not been revoked.
Sec. 28-54. Violations; Penalties; Corporations, Partnerships and Other Legal Entities.
(1) A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated an alarm system in
the City of Temple without a valid permit issued under this article.
(2) A person commits an offense if he operates an alarm system during the period in which
the alarm system is revoked.
(3) An alarm company, an alarm permit holder, or a person in control of an alarm system,
commits an offense if he violates any provision of this ordinance by either commission of an act that
is forbidden or omission of a duty or responsibility imposed upon him by this ordinance.
(4) A person who violates a provision of this ordinance is guilty of a separate offense for
each day or portion of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, permitted. Each
offense is a Class C misdemeanor which is punishable by a fine of not more than $200 for each
conviction.
(5) In addition to prohibiting or requiring certain conduct of individuals, it is the intent of this
ordinance to hold a corporation, partnership, or other association criminally responsible for acts or
omissions performed by an agent acting in behalf of the corporation, partnership, or other
association, and within the scope of employment.
Sec. 28-55. Government Immunity and Disclaimer.
(1) Registration of an alarm system is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or
obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all liability and consequential damage
resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental
immunity as provided by law is retained.
(2) By registering an alarm system, the permit holder acknowledges that police response may
be based on factor's such as: availability of police units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic
conditions, emergency conditions staffing levels.
(Ordinance No. 2010-4401, 10-21-10)
Chapter 29
PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 29-1. Indecent or obscene shows and places of amusement.
Sec. 29-2. Sunday operation of poolrooms prohibited.
Secs. 29-3--29-10. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. BINGO TAX AND REGULATION
Sec. 29-11. Legalization of bingo.
Sec. 29-12. Tax imposed.
Sec. 29-13. Adoption of state laws.
Secs. 29-14--29-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES, RODEOS, TENT SHOWS, ETC.
Sec. 29-21. Permit--Required; fee term.
Sec. 29-22. Same--Application.
Sec. 29-23. Same--Refusal or revocation.
Sec. 29-24. Not to operate within three hundred feet of residences, schools,
churches, etc.
Sec. 29-25. Not to operate during certain hours.
Sec. 29-26. Permit issued hereunder does not require city to furnish police
supervision.
Sec. 29-27. Operation after expiration or revocation of permit.
Sec. 29-28. Persons aiding or abetting in violation of this article.
Sec. 29-29. Exemptions from applicability of this article.
Sec. 29-30. Insurance Requirements.
Secs. 29-31--29-40. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. SHOOTING GALLERIES
Sec. 29-41. Liability insurance required.
Sec. 29-42. Safety regulations generally.
Sec. 29-43. Target requirements.
Sec. 29-44. Guns to be fastened to stand or counter.
Sec. 29-45. Discharge of firearms by intoxicated persons prohibited.
Sec. 29-46. Competitive shooters clubs--Authorized.
Sec. 29-47. Same--Insurance required.
Sec. 29-48. Same--Safety regulations.
Sec. 29-49. Same--Targets.
Sec. 29-50. Same--Doors and windows to be locked.
Sec. 29-51. Same--Approval by chief of police.
Sec. 29-52. Same--Failure to meet requirements.
Chapter 29
PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 29-1. Indecent or obscene shows and places of amusement.
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, run, operate or control, or be concerned
in establishing, running, operating or controlling, any indecent, obscene or vulgar theater or
like place of amusement. It shall likewise be unlawful for any proprietor, running, operating
and controlling any theater, variety show, or like place of amusement, to act in any indecent,
vulgar or obscene manner, or to dress himself or herself in any obscene, vulgar or indecent
style, or to sing any vulgar, obscene or indecent song, or to act or take part in any obscene,
vulgar or indecent play, amusement, entertainment or dance.
Sec. 29-2. Sunday operation of poolrooms prohibited.
Any owner, proprietor, manager or person in charge of any public room within this city
where pool or billiard tables are kept for public use, or the agent or employee of any such
person, who shall permit his place of business to be opened for the purpose of traffic or
public amusement, or for the purpose of permitting persons to enter for the purpose of
playing games therein on Sunday, or who shall permit the playing of any pool or billiards on
Sunday, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Secs. 29-3--29-10. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. BINGO TAX AND REGULATION
Sec. 29-11. Legalization of bingo.
The playing and conduct of bingo, as that term is defined and under the conditions set
forth in the Bingo Enabling Act, Article 179d, Vernon's Annotated Texas Statutes, within the
City of Temple, Texas, has been legally authorized by a countywide election in Bell County
on April 12, 1982, and the city council of the City of Temple hereby declares the conduct
of bingo games within the City of Temple in accordance with the Bingo Enabling Act to be
legal and valid.
Sec. 29-12. Tax imposed.
The two (2) percent gross receipts tax on the conduct of bingo games in Bell County
recently imposed by the commissioners court of Bell County is hereby recognized and
there shall hereafter be required a two (2) percent gross receipts tax imposed on the
conduct of bingo games within the City of Temple. In accordance with Section 3(d) of the
Bingo Enabling Act, there is hereby allocated the City of Temple and imposed out of that
tax a one percent tax on the taxable gross receipts generated by the conduct of bingo games
within the city. The definition of gross receipts and all other definitions contained in the
Bingo Enabling Act are hereby adopted.
Sec. 29-13. Adoption of state laws.
The Bingo Enabling Act, Article 179b, Vernon's Annotated Texas Statutes, is hereby
adopted and incorporated in this article as though fully set out, for all purposes, so far as is
applicable to a municipality. All provisions for administration, implementation and
enforcement of the two (2) percent gross receipts tax found in the Act are specifically
adopted by reference as are any subsequent amendments adopted by the Texas Legislature.
The city comptroller shall administer this article in accordance with the requirements of the
Bingo Enabling Act and any bingo regulations issued pursuant to that Act.
Secs. 29-14--29-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES, RODEOS, TENT SHOWS, ETC.
Sec. 29-21. Permit--Required; fee term.
No person shall set up or operate any carnival, circus, rodeo or tent show within the city
unless and until such person has first obtained a permit from the Parks and Leisure Services
Department and paid a permit fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Any
permit issued by the city for setting up or operating any carnival, circus, rodeo or tent show
shall expire thirty (30) days after the date of its issuance; provided, however, that one thirtyday
extension may be granted subject to approval by the Director of Parks and Leisure
Services.
Sec. 29-22. Same--Application.
Application for the required permit shall be made to the Director of Parks and Leisure
Services. The application shall be in writing and shall be made at least seventy-two (72)
hours prior to the proposed opening date. The application shall state the proposed location
of the activity; the proposed parking for the activity; the different component parts of the
activity, including all concessions, shows, amusements and businesses; the proposed
opening date and time; the period of time for which it is to run; the hours and days of the
week that the activity will be open to the public; the number of persons regularly traveling
therewith, if any; the number of local persons connected therewith and shall give a full and
complete plan of the proposed activity. Prior to approval of such application, the Director
of Parks and Leisure Services shall determine that the use of the site for such purposes
shall not cause any fire hazard, menace to the health, nor traffic hazards other than that
incident to increased volume; i.e., access to and from the site is adequate as is parking, it
being the specific intent of this article to limit the location of such activities to those
locations, if any, which may be used without disturbing residents and occupants of the
surrounding property, or creating a possible hazard for the general public.
Sec. 29-23. Same--Refusal or revocation.
If the proposed carnival, circus, rodeo or tent show consists in any part of any unlawful
game or enterprise of any kind, or does not comply with all state laws and city ordinances,
the permit shall be refused. If a permit is issued for any carnival, circus, rodeo or tent show
and it is conducted in an unlawful manner in whole or in part, the permit may be revoked by
the Director of Parks and Leisure Services and the fees paid shall be forfeited.
Sec. 29-24. Not to operate within three hundred feet of residences, schools, churches,
etc.
It shall be unlawful, and no permit shall be issued, for any carnival, circus, rodeo or tent
show to operate within the space of three hundred (300) feet from any residence, school or
church building within the corporate limits of the City of Temple, Texas.
Sec. 29-25. Not to operate during certain hours.
It shall be unlawful for any carnival, circus, rodeo or tent show to operate, to be open for
business, or to present any show or performance between the hours of midnight and 7:00
a.m. on any day except Sunday, and between midnight and 1:00 p.m. on Sunday.
Sec. 29-26. Permit issued hereunder does not require city to furnish police
supervision.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as requiring the city to furnish police
supervision to any carnival, circus, rodeo or tent show issued a license hereunder.
Sec. 29-27. Operation after expiration or revocation of permit.
It shall be unlawful for any carnival, circus, rodeo or tent show to operate in whole or in
part after its permit expires or after it is revo ked for cause, and all persons assisting in such
operation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Sec. 29-28. Persons aiding or abetting in violation of this article.
Each person aiding or abetting the holding of any carnival, circus, rodeo or tent show, or
its subsidiary shows, concessions, amusements and businesses, shall be equally guilty of a
violation of this article when such carnival, circus, rodeo or tent show commences without
a permit as requested herein.
Sec. 29-29. Exemptions from applicability of this article.
Short-term shows or activities sponsored solely by any church, school, school
organization or hospital which are operated on church, school or hospital grounds and all
the profits from which go to such church, school, school organization or hospital, shall not
be deemed to be a carnival, circus, rodeo or tent show under the provisions of this article
and shall not be required to pay the fee set out herein.
Sec. 29-30. Insurance Requirements.
In addition to the requirements of this chapter, prior to the operation of a carnival, circus,
rodeo, or tent show, the owner/operator of the carnival, circus, rodeo, or tent show required
to have a permit under Section 29-21 must also carry general liability insurance in the
amount of not less than $250,000 per person, $500,000 per occurrence for personal injury
or death, and $100,000 for property damage. The City of Temple must be named as an
additional insured on the certificate of insurance and the policy must also contain a waiver
of subrogation in favor of the City in a form which is acceptable to the City Attorney.
Secs. 29-31--29-40. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. SHOOTING GALLERIES
Sec. 29-41. Liability insurance required.
Every person operating a shooting gallery in the city shall purchase a public liability
insurance policy protecting the patrons of the shooting gallery and the general public from
damage or injury from the discharge of any firearm in such shooting gallery, or from the
discharge of any gun used in and about the premises, which policy shall be in a sum of not
less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). A copy of such policy shall be filed
with the city controller.
Sec. 29-42. Safety regulations generally.
Every person operating a shooting gallery in the city shall comply with all safety
regulations governing shooting galleries contained in any state law or city ordinance.
Sec. 29-43. Target requirements.
No person shall operate a shooting gallery within the city limits, where firearms are
discharged, unless there is first set up a target at a suitable distance from the stand from
whence such firearms are to be discharged. Such target shall be placed before a bullet-proof
screen or wall or combination thereof, extending entirely across the rear of the building,
and from the floor to the ceiling. By "bullet-proof," as used herein, is meant bullet-proof as
to the type of bullets being used in the gallery.
Sec. 29-44. Guns to be fastened to stand or counter.
Each gun used in any shooting gallery shall be fastened to the stand or counter from
which the gun is to be fired by a metal chain, which chain shall only be long enough to allow
the free use of the gun in firing at the target. Such gun shall be so fastened to the stand or
counter by such chain that the gun cannot be carried away from the stand or counter to any
other part of the room or building where the shooting gallery is located or outside of such
building.
Sec. 29-45. Discharge of firearms by intoxicated persons prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person operating any shooting gallery in the city to allow any
person under the influence of intoxicating liquor to fire or discharge any gun in such
shooting gallery.
Sec. 29-46. Competitive shooters clubs--Authorized.
Competitive shooters clubs conducting wi th and in compliance with the procedures of
the National Rifle Association are hereby authorized to construct pistol and rifle ranges in
compliance with the ordinances of the city.
Sec. 29-47. Same--Insurance required.
Every person operating a competitive shooters club in the city shall purchase a public
liability insurance policy protecting persons competing in said competitive shooters club
and the general public from damage or injury from the discharge of any gun used in and
about the premises which policies shall be in the sum of not less than twenty-five thousand
dollars ($25,000.00). A copy of such policy shall be filed with the city controller.
Sec. 29-48. Same--Safety regulations.
Every person operating a competitive shooters club shall comply with all safety
regulations governing rifle and pistol range requirements of the National Rifle Association
and all safety regulations governing such ranges contained in any state law or city ordinance
and there will be no firing of either rifle or pistol or any other weapon in such range except
under the supervision of competent, qualified and trained personnel.
Sec. 29-49. Same--Targets.
No person shall operate a pistol and rifle range at a competitive shooters club within the
city limits where firearms are discharged unless there is first set up a target at a suitable
distance from the stand from whence such firearms are to be discharged. Such target shall
be placed before a bullet proof screen or wall or combination thereof, extending entirely
across the rear of the building and from the floor to the ceiling. By bullet-proof as used
herein is meant bullet-proof as to the type of bullets being used in the firearms discharged
at such pistol and rifle range.
Sec. 29-50. Same--Doors and windows to be locked.
At pistol and rifle ranges constructed and used by competitive shooters clubs within the
city, all doors and windows shall be closed and locked which are in front of the shooters
stand.
Sec. 29-51. Same--Approval by chief of police.
Any range constructed by a competitors shooters club shall prior to its being used be
inspected by the chief of police and approved by him in writing. A copy of his approval
being furnished to the head of the competitors shooters club, the original being filed with
the city controller.
Sec. 29-52. Same--Failure to meet requirements.
In the event any pistol and rifle range constructed by competitors shooters club and
approved by the chief of police, fails to meet the requirements under this chapter pertaining
to such ranges shall have its approval withdrawn by the chief of police and withheld until
such requirements are met and such range has again been approved by a chief of police.
1
Chapter 31
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS
Sec. 31-1. Purpose, scope and applicability of regulations.
(a) The purpose and scope of these regulations is to prescribe p r o c e d u r e s
a n d standards for the construction, extension, improvement, and maintenance of recreational
vehicle parks in order to achieve and maintain an acceptable sanitary operation of and to provide
for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare within the corporate limits of the
City of Temple, Texas.
(b) These regulations will be applicable to all recreational vehicles and recreational
vehicle parks containing a combination of these facilities.
Sec. 31-2. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
(a) Building permit. Written authorization issued by the city’s building inspector
permitting new construction or reconstruction of a recreational vehicle park or a permit
authorizing the expansion or modification of an existing recreational vehicle park.
(b) Dependent recreational vehicle. A recreational vehicle which is so constructed that
it does not have a flush toilet and a bath or shower and its own independent sewage storage
tanks and is dependent on the recreational vehicle park facilities and utilities to function fully
as a temporary residence.
(c) Director of Planning. The city employee in charge of zoning map amendments,
including Conditional Use Permits (CUP).
(d) Director of Public Works. The city employee in charge of all municipal engineering
functions and public works functions.
(e) Independent recreational vehicle. A recreational vehicle which has a flush toilet
and a bath or shower and has its own independent storage tank and can function independently
of the recreational park facilities and utilities as a temporary residence. It contains a water
flush toilet, lavatory, shower, and kitchen sink, all of which are connected to water storage and
sewage holding tanks elevated within the trailer.
(f) Health District. The Bell County Public Health District.
(g) House trailer. A trailer or semitrailer, otherthan a towable recreational vehicle, that:
(a) is transportable on a highway in one or more sections;
2
(b) is less than 45 feet in length, excluding tow bar, while in the traveling
mode;
(c) is built on a permanent chassis;
(d) is designed to be used as a dwelling or for commercial purposes if
connected to required utilities; and
(e) includes plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems.
(h) Recreational vehicle. Includes a dependent recreational vehicle, an independent
recreational vehicle, a house trailer and/or a towable recreational vehicle as those terms are
defined in this Chapter.
(i) Recreational vehicle park. A parcel of land which has been planned and improved
for the placement of recreational vehicles for transient use and for the temporary parking of
recreational vehicles, placement of supplementary structures, and accessory uses not prohibited
by the City Code or the Unified Development Code and containing sanitary facilities for the
direct discharge from recreational vehicle holding tanks and utility hookups.
(j) Recreational vehicle stand. A plot of ground or constructed foundation within
a recreational vehicle park designed for the accommodation on a temporary basis of one
recreational vehicle and its towing vehicle, if any.
(k) Site plan. A line drawing or set of drawings clearly describing the recreational
vehicle park and its environs and including adequate labeling and dimensioning of all
fundamental features of the project, the legal description of the property, and showing north
point and date, which shall be drawn to engineering scale and signed and sealed by a
professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas.
(l) Towable recreational vehicle. A non-motorized vehicle that:
(a) is designed:
(i) to be towable by a motor vehicle; and
(ii) for temporary human habitation for uses including recreational camping
or seasonal use;
(b) is permanently built on a single chassis;
(c) may contain one or more life-support systems; and
(d) may be used permanently or temporarily for advertising, selling, displaying,
or promoting merchandise or services, but is not used for transporting
property for hire or for distribution by a private carrier.
3
All words and phrases not specifically defined herein are to be construed in accordance
with their customary usage in municipal standards of construction and planning and particularly
in accordance with their meanings as defined in the applicable sections of the Temple City
Code, the Unified Development Code of the City of Temple, the plumbing, electrical, fire, and
building codes, and other applicable laws of said city and the State of Texas.
Sec. 31-3. Application and Permitting Process.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, operate, alter, or extend any
recreational vehicle park within the corporate limits of the City of Temple unless they hold a
valid Conditional Use Permit (CUP) per Sec. 3.5 of the Unified Development Code (UDC).
(b) All CUP applications shall be made to the Director of Planning or their designee and
shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of the applicant;
(2) Interest of the applicant in the recreational vehicle park;
(3) Location and legal description of the recreational vehicle park area; and
(4) Complete site plans compiled by a registered professional engineer of the
proposed park or area showing:
(a) The legal description and dimension of the tract of land;
(b) The number, location, and size of all recreational vehicle parking spaces;
(c) The location, width, method of construction, and detailed type of
roads, walkways, and vehicle parking areas;
(d) The location of service buildings and other proposed structures;
(e) The location of water and sewer lines and riser pipes;
(f) Plans and specifications of the water supply, sewage disposal, collection
points of refuse, and disposal arrangement;
(g) Plans and specifications of all buildings constructed within the park or
recreational vehicle parking area;
(h) The location and details of lighting and electrical systems,
including recreational vehicle connections; and
(i) Drainage calculations showing size and placement of culverts,
collection, and disposal of drainage.
(c) When, upon review of the application by the Director of Planning, this director is
satisfied that the proposed plans meet the requirements of this Chapter and other applicable
regulations, the application will proceed to Planning and Zoning Commission for review and
recommendation, followed by City Council for consideration of issuing a CUP per UDC Sec.
3.5.
4
(d) Building permits must be obtained to perform work within any recreational vehicle
park as required by this chapter, other adopted City Code chapters, or State law regulations.
Sec. 31-4. Inspection of recreational vehicle parks.
(a) Authority to inspect. The Building Official, FireMarshal, Building Inspectors, Code
Compliance Officers, and Bell County Publi c Health District Director, or their designees,
are hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to determine
satisfactory compliance with this chapter.
(b) Authority to enter upon private premises. The Building Official or their designee or
the other officials or employees and their designees referenced in paragraph (a) above shall have
the power to enter recreational vehicle parks and their supplementary structures or facilities to
inspect and investigate conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter.
(c) Duty of owners. It shall be the duty of the owners of recreational vehicle parks,
sites, or lots contained therein, or of the person in charge thereof, including, but not limited
to, CUP holders or recreational vehicle park managers, to give authorized inspectors free
access to such areas at reasonable times t o i n s p e c t and investigate conditions related
to the enforcement of this chapter.
Sec. 31-5. Environmental, open space, and access requirements.
(a) General requirements. Condition of soil, groundwater level, drainage, and
topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants. The
site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors, or other adverse influences, and
no portion subject to unpredictable or sudden flooding, subsidence, or erosion shall be used for
any purpose which would expose persons or property to hazards.
(b) Soil and ground cover requirements. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every
recreational vehicle park shall be paved, covered with stone screenings or other solid
material, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and
eliminating objectionable dust.
(c) Site drainage requirements. The ground surface in all parts of every recreational
vehicle park area shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient
manner.
(d) Park areas for nonresident uses:
(1) No part of any recreational vehicle park should be used for nonresidential purposes,
except such uses that are required for the direct servicing and well-being of park
occupants and for the management and maintenance of the park. Convenience
stores, laundry, and similar conveniences are allowed under this chapter.
(2) Nothing contained in this paragraph should be deemed as prohibiting the sale of a
5
recreational vehicle located on a parking site, stand, or area and connected to the
pertinent utilities.
(e) Required separation between recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall be
separated from each other and from other structures by at least twenty-five (25) feet. Any
accessory structure to a recreational vehicle such as attached awnings, carports, or individual
storage facilities shall, for purposes of this separation requirement, be considered to be part of
the recreational vehicle.
(f) Density requirement. The density shall not exceed seven (7) recreational
vehicle spaces per acre of gross site area.
(g) Required recreational areas.
(1) A minimum of eight (8) percent of the gross site area for the recreational
vehicle park shall be set aside as open space for open or enclosed recreational
facilities. No recreational vehicle site, street, right-of-way, storage area, or
utility site shall be counted in meeting this requirement. Such an area shall
contain adequate facilities for recreational activities for recreational vehicle park
users and their guests which may include swings, slides, playground equipment,
picnic tables, swimming pools, trails, fishing ponds, community use
facilities for adult recreation, and other like amenities.
(i) When playground space is provided, it shall be so designated and shall be
protected from traffic, thoroughfares, and parking areas.
(2) Recreational areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards.
(3) Recreational areas must be easily accessible from all recreational vehicle
stands.
(4) Recreational areas shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and free of
safety hazards.
(h) Required setbacks, buffer strips and screening:
(1) All recreational vehicles should be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from
any public street or highway and at least fifteen (15) feet from adjacent property
lines.
(2) There should be a minimum distance of ten (10) feet between an individual
recreational vehicle and adjoining pavement of a recreational vehicle park street,
common parking area, or other common area.
(3) All recreational vehicle parks shall provide screening adjacent to nonrecreational
vehicle park residential and non-residential uses, which
6
shall be not less than six (6) feet nor more than eight (8) feet in height and
constructed of wood, stone, brick, or concrete block or other permanent
material, and having a completely solid area with no openings except for
entrances and exits along the property boundary lines separating the
recreational vehicle park and such adjacent uses. The recreational vehicle
park owner or CUP applicant may request an exception to this requirement
during the CUP process.
(i) Park street system:
(1) General requirements. All recreational vehicle parks shall be provided with safe and
convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads to each
recreational vehicle stand. Alignment and gradient shall be properly adapted to
topography. All public streets shall comply with the UDC and the City of Temple
Design and Development Standards Manual, while internal streets within the
recreational vehicle park must be constructed as provided by this section.
(2) Access. Access to recreational vehicle parks shall be designed to minimize
congestion and hazards at entrances and exits and allow free movement of traffic on
adjacent streets. The entrance road connecting the recreational vehicle park street
with a public street or road shall have a minimum road width of thirty-four (34)
feet where parking is permitted on both sides, or a minimum road width of twentyseven
(27) feet where parking is limited to one side. Where the primary entrance
road is more than one hundred (100) feet long and does not provide access to abutting
recreational vehicle spaces within such distance, the minimum road pavement width
may be twenty-seven (27) feet, provided parking is prohibited on both sides.
(3) Internal streets. Internal streets shall be privately owned, built, maintained, and
designed for safe and convenient access to all recreational vehicle stands and to
facilities for common use of recreational vehicle park occupants. Surfaced
streets shall be of adequate width to accommodate anticipated traffic and shall meet
the following minimum requirements:
a. All two-way streets—a minimum of twenty-seven (27) feet in width;
b. All one-way streets – a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width; and
c. Dead-end streets shall be limited in length to one thousand (1,000) feet; and
d. Culs-de-sac shall meet the requirements of the City of Temple Design and
Development Standards Manual.
(4) Illumination of park street systems.
a. It is recommended that all parks shall be furnished with lighting units so
spaced and equipped with luminaries placed at such mounting heights as will
7
provide the following average maintained levels of illumination for the
same movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night:
(1) All parts of the park street systems: 0.6 footcandle, with a minimum
of 0.1 footcandle; and
(2) Potentially hazardous locations, such as major street intersections
and steps or stepped ramps: Individually illuminated, with a minimum
of 0.3 footcandle.
b. All luminaires must be full-cutoff as installed.
c. Floodlights must be aimed no higher than 45 degrees below horizontal. This
can be accomplished by the use of full-cutoff fixture design, shielding, visors,
louvers, or other devices to prevent light trespass to neighboring properties
and of the sky.
(5) Street construction and design standards.
a. Street surfaces. All streets shall be provided with a smooth, hard, and dense
all-weather surface (double seal coat, one and one-half-inches hot mix, sixinch
concrete surface), which shall be durable and well drained under normal
use and weather conditions. Surface edges shall be protected to prevent
raveling of the wearing surface and shifting of the base. Street surfaces shall
be maintained free of cracks, holes, and other hazards.
b. Grades. Grades of all streets shall be sufficient to ensure adequate
surface drainage, but shall be not more than seven and one-half (7 1/2)
percent. Short runs with a maximum grade of nine (9) percent may be
permitted, provided traffic safety is assured by appropriate paving, adequate
leveling areas, and avoidance of lateral curves.
c. Intersections. Within one hundred (100) feet of an intersection, streets shall
be at right angles. A distance of at least one hundred fifty (150) feet shall be
maintained between center lines of offset intersecting streets. Intersections
of more than two (2) streets at one point shall be avoided.
(6) Required off-street parking areas.
a. Off-street parking areas shall be of the same construction as streets in all
recreational vehicle parks for the use of park occupants and guests. Such
areas shall be furnished at the rate of at least 1.25 car spaces for each
recreational vehicle site.
b. Required car parking spaces shall be so located as to provide convenient
access to the recreational vehicle, be easily accessible to occupants and
8
visitors, and not exceed a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the
recreational vehicle that it is intended to serve.
c. Required parking spaces shall be appropriately defined and marked and be so
located and regulated that no parking, or maneuvering incidental to parking,
shall be on any public street or walk.
d. Required parking spaces shall provide adequate barriers to keep any
parked vehicles from extending into or overhanging a street and be so
designed that any vehicle may be parked and unparked without requiring the
moving of any other vehicle.
(7) Recreational vehicle stands.
a. A recreational vehicle stand should not heave, shift, or settle unevenly under
the weight of a recreational vehicle due to frost action, inadequate drainage,
vibration, or other forces acting on the superstructure.
b. A recreational vehicle stand should have an asphalt, concrete, or other surface
of equivalent material which shall adequately support the weight of a
recreational vehicle placed thereon and be durable and well drained under
normal use and weather conditions.
c. Each stand site must have either a preserved tree or a two-inch DBH
(diameter-at-breast-height) planted tree from the City’s approved tree list of
Sec. 7.4.5.B., UDC.
d. Picnic tables shall be provided for use by each stand.
e. The inclusion of a grill, fire ring (at least 10 feet from recreational vehicle
stand with a metal mesh cover), or covered pavilion is required.
Sec. 31-6. Water supply.
(a) General requirements. An accessible, adequate, safe, and potable supply of water
shall be provided in each recreational vehicle park.
(b) Source of supply.
(1) The water supply shall be of acceptable quality and be capable of supplying the
needs of all occupants of the recreational vehicle park. The water supply system
shall be the City of Temple water supply system, a system managed by said city,
or an approved rural water supply system. No wells will be permitted unless
they are in conjunction with the above-mentioned water systems.
(2) No well casings, pumping machinery, or suction pipes shall be placed in any pit,
9
room, or space above ground, which is walled in or otherwise enclosed, unless
such room, whether above or below ground, shall have free drainage by gravity to
the surface of the ground.
(c) Water storage reservoirs. All water storage reservoirs shall be covered, watertight,
and constructed of impervious material. Overflows and vents of such reservoirs shall be
effectively screened. Manholes shall be constructed with overlapping covers, so as to prevent
the entrance of contaminated materials. Reservoir overflow pipes shall discharge through an
acceptable air gap.
(d) Water distribution system.
(1) The water supply system of the recreational vehicle park shall be connected by
pipes to all recreational vehicles, buildings, and other facilities requiring water.
(2) All water piping, fixtures, and other equipment shall be constructed and
maintained in accordance with state and local regulations and requirements.
Public water supply improvements shall be of a type and in locations approved
by the City’s Public Works Department or the approved rural water system,
while private water supply improvements shall be approved by the appropriate
inspector.
(3) Every recreational vehicle site shall be provided with an individual branch
service line delivering safe, pure, and potable water. The outlet of the branch
service line shall terminate on the left side of the site of the recreational
vehicle.
(4) Water service lines to each recreational vehicle site shall be sized to provide a
minimum of eight (8) gallons per minute (gpm) at the point of connection with
the recreational vehicle distribution system.
(5) A backpressure backflow preventer or reduced pressure principle backflow
preventer shall be installed on the branch service line to each independent
recreational vehicle at or near the trailer service connection. Backflow
preventive devices shall be of an approved type certified by a recognized testing
agency as to compliance and performance outlined herein. Valves shall be
designed and maintained to close drip tight at a reduced pressure of not less than
one (1) nor more than five (5) pounds per square inch. Valves must be identified
with the manufacturer's name and model number.
(6) A separate service shutoff valve shall be installed in each branch service line on
the supply side of the backflow preventer device.
(7) The individual branch service line shall be not less than one-half (1/2) inch in
diameter; no rigid pipe may be used. Flexible metal tubing is permitted. Fittings
at either end shall be of a quick disconnect type not requiring any special tools
10
or knowledge to install or remove.
(e) Service buildings.
(1) Each recreational vehicle park shall have at least one service building to provide
necessary sanitation and laundry facilities. Those parks serving independent
recreational vehicles are required to have the minimum sanitation and laundry
fixtures and facilities as provided by this section (e).
(2) Service buildings shall be of permanent construction with an interior finish of
moisture-resistant material which must withstand frequent washing and
cleaning; service buildings shall be well lit and ventilated at all times.
(3) The service buildings of independent recreational vehicle parks shall have a
minimum of the following sanitation and laundry fixtures as follows:
(a) For women:
i. One laundry tray;
ii. One bathroom with flush toilet and sink; and
iii. One shower or bathtub.
(b) For men:
i. One laundry tray;
ii. One bathroom with flush toilet and sink; and
iii. One shower or bathtub.
(4) The service buildings in recreational vehicle parks that accommodate
dependent recreational vehicles shall have a minimum of the following sanitation
and laundry fixtures as follows:
(a) For women:
i. One laundry tray;
ii. Two (2) toilet stalls with flush toilets;
iii. One sink; and
iv. One shower or bathtub.
(b) For men:
11
i. One laundry tray;
ii. One toilet stall with flush toilet;
iii. One urinal;
iv. One sink; and
v. One shower or bath tub.
(c) One slop-water closet for emptying containers of human waste.
(d) The fixtures required in subsect ions 31-7(e)(4)(a) and (b)
above are for a maximum o f ten (10) dependent
recreational vehi cles.
i. For every ten (10) additional dependent recreational vehicles the
following additional fixtures shall be provided: one laundry tray and one
shower or bathtub for each sex and one toilet stall with flush toilet for
each sex.
(e) No dependent vehicle shall be parked at any time in a space designed and
designated for an independent recreational vehicle unless public toilet and
bath facilities are available within two hundred (200) feet of the dependent
recreational vehicle.
(5) Hot and cold water shall be provided for all sanitation and laundry fixtures
except toilets and urinals. All slop-water closets shall be provided with hot and
cold water faucets over the bowl in addition to the flushing mechanism
(preferably a flushometer valve).
(6) Each toilet, slop-water closet, bathtub, and shower, shall be in a separate
compartment, with self-closing doors on all toilet compartments (toilet stalls).
Shower stalls shall be a minimum of three (3) feet wide by three (3) feet long in
area. Women’s shower stalls must have a separate dressing compartment with a
stool or bench.
(7) All rooms containing toilets, slop-water closets, bathtubs, and showers shall be
screened to prevent direct view of the interior of the room when the exterior doors
are open.
(8) A floor drain (minimum of three (3) inches) shall be installed in each toilet
room and laundry room.
(9) Service buildings shall be screened from other activities by visual barriers such
as fences, walls, or natural growth and shall be separated from any recreational
12
vehicle space by a distance of at least fifty (50) feet.
(f) Materials. Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, all plumbing fixtures,
piping, drains, appurtenances, and appliances designed and used in a recreational vehicle
park sanitary sewer collection and water supply system and service connections shall be
installed in conformance with all applicable State and local regulations.
(g) Sanitary Sewer Collection System.
(1) The main sewer and sewer laterals shall be installed in a separate trench not less
than five (5) feet from the park water service or distribution.
(2) The minimum size of pipe in any recreational vehicle park sewer system shall be
four (4) inches for services and six (6) inches for mains.
(3) Each recreational vehicle shall be considered as six (6) fixture units in
determining discharge requirements in the design of park drainage and sewage
disposal systems.
(4) Minimum grade for sewers shall be so designed that the flow will have mean
velocity of two (2) feet per second when the pipe is flowing half full.
(5) The discharge of a recreational vehicle park drainage system shall be
connected to a public sewer. Where a public sewer is not available, an individual
sewage disposal system shall be installed of a type that is acceptable and
approved by the administrative authority or other law enforcement agency
having jurisdiction over this regulation.
(6) Manholes and/or cleanouts shall be provided as required in the City Code of
Ordinances, and Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ)
regulations. Manholes and cleanouts shall be accessible and brought to grade.
(7) The main sewer shall be provided with a minimum four-inch vent, not more than
five (5) feet downstream from its upper trap, and long mains shall be provided
with additional relief vents at intervals of not more than two hundred (200) feet
thereafter, if the manhole covers are not of the perforated type. These relief
vents shall be a minimum of four (4) inches and shall be securely supported and
extended a minimum of ten (10) feet above the ground.
(8) Branch lines or sewer laterals to individual recreational vehicles shall be not less
than four (4) inches in diameter.
a. Sewer inlets shall be four (4) inches in diameter and extend above grade three
(3) inches to six (6) inches. Each inlet shall be provided with a gas-tight seal
when connected to a recreational vehicle and have a gas-tight plug for use
when not in service.
13
b. Each recreational vehicle site shall be provided with a house trap. Sewer
laterals over thirty (30) feet shall be properly vented and provided with a
cleanout brought to grade.
c. To provide the shortest possible drain connection between the
recreational vehicle outlet and drain inlet, all drain inlets shall terminate with
reference to the site location of the recreational vehicle.
d. Drain connection shall slope continuously downward and form no traps. All
pipe and connections shall be installed and maintained gas- and water- tight.
e. No sewage, wastewater, or any other effluent shall be allowed to be
deposited on the surface of the ground.
f. Upon completion and before covering, the sanitary sewer collection system
shall be subjected to a static water test. The water test shall be applied to
the drainage system either in its entirety or in sections. If applied to the
entire system, all openings in the piping shall be tightly closed, except the
highest opening, and the system shall be filled with water to point of
overflow.
If the systemis tested in sections, each opening shall be tightly plugged except
the highest opening of the section under test, and each section shall be filled
with water, but no section shall be tested with less than a ten-foot head of
water.
In testing successive sections at least the upper ten (10) feet of the next
preceding section shall be tested, so that no joint or pipe in the system shall
have been submitted to a test of less than a ten-foot head of water. The water
shall be kept in a system, or in the portion under test, for at least fifteen
(15) minutes before inspection starts; the system shall then be tight at all
points.
(h) Recreational vehicle connections; responsibility.
(1) When it is evident that there exists, or may exist, a violation of these rules, the
owner, operator, lessee, person in charge of the r ecr ea t ional vehi c l e
park, or any other person causing a violation shall correct the violation
immediately or disconnect the service connection and recreational vehicle
drain connection from the respective park branch service line and sewer
lateral, or both as required for health and safety reasons.
(2) Recreational vehicle drain connections shall be of approved semi-rigid or
flexible reinforced hose having smooth interior surfaces of not less than three
(3) inches inside diameter. Drain connections shall be equipped with a standback
14
quick disconnect screw or clamp-type fitting, not less in size than the outlet.
Drain connections shall be gas-tight and no longer than necessary to make the
connection between the recreational vehicle outlet and the trip inlet on the site.
(i) Maintenance. All devices or safeguards required by this chapter shall be maintained
in good working order. The owner, operator, lessee, person in charge of the r ecr ea t ional
vehicle park, or his or her designated agent shall be responsible for their maintenance.
Sec. 31-7. Sewage disposal.
(a) General requirements. An adequate, safe sewage system shall be provided in all
recreational vehicles for conveying and disposing of all sewage. Where an approved public
system is available, such system will be used. Where a public system is not available, a
recreational vehicle park system will be developed. Such system shall be designated,
constructed, and maintained in accordance with state and local laws and will be approved by
the appropriate health agency. In the event a "package" sewage disposal plant is used, a permit
must be obtained from TCEQ and comply with applicable sections of the City Code.
(b) Sanitary stations; dump station.
(1) A sanitary station shall be provided consisting of at least a trapped four-inch
sewer riser pipe, connected to the recreational vehicle parking area sewerage
system, surrounded at the inlet end by a concrete apron at least one hundred
(100) square feet in area and sloped to the drain, which shall be provided with a
suitable hinged cover and a water outlet, with the necessary appurtenances,
connected to the recreational vehicle park area water supply system to permit
periodic washdown of the immediate adjacent areas.
(c) Sewer lines. All sewer lines shall be located in trenches of sufficient depth to be
free of breakage from traffic or other movement and shall be separated from the park water
supply system at a safe distance. Sewers shall be at a grade which will ensure a velocity of two
(2) feet per second when flowing at one-half capacity or one-half full. All sewer lines shall be
constructed of materials approved by the applicable authority, shall be adequately vented, and
shall have watertight joints.
(d) Individual sewer connections.
(1) Every ind ep end ent recreational vehicle shall provide a gas- and watertight
connection for sewage disposal which shall be connected to an
underground sewage collection system discharging into a public or private
disposal system.
(2) The sewer riser pipe shall have at least a four-inch diameter, shall be trapped
below the ground surface, and shall be located on the recreational vehicle stand
so that the sewer connection to the recreational vehicle drain outlet will be
approximately a vertical position.
15
(3) The sewer connection shall have a nominal inside diameter of at least three (3)
inches, and this slope of any portion thereof shall be at least one-fourth (1/4)
inch per foot. The sewer connection shall consist of one pipe line only without
any branch fittings. All joints shall be watertight.
(4) All materials used for sewer connections shall be semi-rigid, corrosive
resistant, nonabsorbent, and durable. The inner surface shall be smooth.
(5) When a recreational vehicle site or dump station is not occupied, the sewer
pipe must be capped. The rim of the pipe must be at least four (4) inches above
ground elevation, and drainage shall be diverted away from it.
(6) Installation of all risers, underground traps, septic tanks, and drain fields will be
accomplished under the supervision of a plumber licensed by the State of Texas.
(7) Where septic tanks and drain fields are used in recreational vehicle parks,
individual septic systems for each recreational vehicle stand will be used.
Exceptions to this requirement may be granted by the Director of Public Works
where reasonable justification is presented by the applicant.
Sec. 31-8. Electrical distribution system.
(a) General requirements. Every recreational vehicle park shall contain an electrical
wiring system consisting of wiring, fixtures, equipment, and appurtenances which shall be
installed and maintained in accordancewith the applicable codes and regulations governing such
systems. All installation work of electrical fixtures will be accomplished in accordance with all
applicable State and local regulations.
(b) Power distribution lines.
(1) If individual recreational vehicle spaces are connected to the electrical wiring
system, an approved type of disconnection device and overcurrent protective
equipment shall be one hundred twenty (120) volts AC, fifteen (15) amperes
and/or thirty (30) amperes.
(2) Outlet receptacles at each recreational vehicle stand shall be located not more
than twenty-five (25) feet from the overcurrent protective devices in the
recreational vehicle and a three-pole, four-wire grounding type shall be used.
Receptacles shall be of weatherproof construction and configurations shall be in
accordance with American Standard Outlet Receptacle C-73.1.
(3) A minimum of number six (6) American Wire Gauge (AWG) copper wire or
its equivalent will be used from service drop to metering equipment,
overcurrent protection devices, and receptacle.
16
(4) Reserved.
(5) When the calculated load of the recreational vehicle is more than fifty (50)
amperes, either a second outlet receptacle shall be installed or electrical service
shall be provided by means of permanently installed conductors.
(c) Required grounding. All exposed noncurrent carrying metal parts of recreational
vehicles and all other equipment shall be grounded by means of an approved grounding
conductor with branch circuit conductors or other approved method of grounding metallic
wiring. The neutral conductor shall not be used as an equipment ground for recreational
vehicles or other equipment.
Sec. 31-9. Service building and other community service facilities.
(a) Generally. The requirements of this section shall apply to service buildings,
recreation buildings, and other community service facilities such as:
(1) Management offices, repair shops, and storage areas;
(2) Sanitary facilities;
(3) Laundry facilities;
(4) Indoor recreation areas; and
(5) Commercial uses supplying essential goods or services for the exclusive use of
park occupants and guests.
(b) Service buildings.
(1) A service building containing the necessary toilet and other plumbing fixtures
specified in this chapter shall be provided in recreational vehicle park areas
which provide stands for dependent recreational vehicles. Service buildings
shall be conveniently located within a radius of approximately three hundred
(300) feet to these stands.
(2) When a recreational vehicle park area requiring a service building is operated in
connection with a resort or other business establishment, the number of
sanitary facilities for such business establishment shall be in excess of those
required by this chapter for recreational vehicle stands and shall be based on
the total number of persons using such facilities as determined by the Director of
Public Works.
(c) Structural requirements for service buildings, recreation buildings, and other
community service facilities.
17
(1) All portions of these structures shall be properly protected from damage by
ordinary uses and by decay, corrosion, termites, and other destructive elements.
Exterior portions shall be of such materials and be so constructed and protected
as to prevent entrance or penetration of moisture and weather.
(2) All rooms containing sanitary or laundry facilities shall:
a. Have sound-resistant walls extending to the ceiling between male and
female facilities. Walls and partitions around showers, bathtubs,
toilets, and other plumbing fixtures shall be constructed of dense,
nonabsorbent, waterproof materials or covered with moisture-resistant
material.
b. Have at least one window which can be easily opened or a mechanical
device which will adequately ventilate the room.
(3) Illumination levels shall be maintained as follows:
a. General seeing tasks--five (5) footcandles;
b. Laundry room work area--forty (40) footcandles; and
c. Toilet room, in front of mirrors--forty (40) footcandles.
(d) Barbeque pits, grills, fireplaces, and stoves. Cooking shelters, barbeque pits,
grills, fireplaces, woodburning, gas, and propane stoves shall be so located, constructed,
maintained, and used as to minimize fire hazards and smoke nuisance both on the property
where it is used and as well as on adjacent property. No open fire shall be left unattended. No
fuel shall be used and no material burned which emits dense smoke or objectionable odors.
Sec. 31-10. Refuse handling.
(a) The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse in the recreational vehicle park area
shall be so conducted as to create no health hazard, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas,
accident or fire hazards, or air or water pollution. Disposal of garbagewill complywith State and
local regulations pertaining to disposal of municipal solid waste.
(b) All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodentproof containers which shall
be located not more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from any recreational vehicle space or
stand. Containers shall be in sufficient number and capacity to properly store all refuse and
shall be supplied by the owner, operator, lessee, or person in charge of the recreational
vehicle park or their designated agent.
(c) Garbage collection stands shall be provided by the CUP holder, owner, operator,
lessee, or person in charge of the recreational vehicle park or their designated agent for all
refuse containers. Such container stands shall be so designed as to prevent containers frombeing
tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration, and to facilitate cleaning around these
containers and stands.
18
(d) All garbage shall be collected at least twice weekly. Where suitable collection
service is not available from municipal or private agencies, CUP holder, owner, operator,
lessee, or person in charge of the recreational vehicle park or their designated agent, shall
provide the service. All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles or covered
containers.
(e) Where municipal or private disposal service is not available, the recreational vehicle
park operator shall dispose of the refuse by an approved incineration or method of transporting
to a disposal site approved by the health authority. Such site must comply with state health
department and local solid waste disposal regulations.
(f) Reserved.
Sec. 31-11. Insect and rodent control.
(a) Grounds, buildings, and structures shall be maintained so to be free of insect and
rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control
insects and rodents shall conform with the requirements of the health authority.
(b) Recreational vehicle parksshall bemaintained so to be free of accumulations of debris
which may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, and other pests.
(c) Storage areas shall be so maintained as to prevent rodent harborage. Lumber, pipe,
and other building material shall be stored at least one foot above the ground.
(d) Where the potential for insect and rodent infestation exists, all exterior openings in
or beneath any structure shall be appropriately screened with wire mesh or other suitable
materials to prevent such infestation.
(e) The growth of brush, weeds, and grass shall be controlled to prevent harborage
of ticks, chiggers, and other noxious insects. Recreational vehicle parks and their environs
shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, poison
sumac, and other noxious weeds considered detrimental to health. Open areas shall be
maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description.
Sec. 31-12. Fuel supply and storage.
(a) Natural gas system.
(1) Natural gas piping systems when available and utilized shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with applicable City and State codes and regulations
governing such systems.
(2) Each recreational vehicle space or stand provided with pipe gas shall have an
approved manual shutoff valve installed up stream of the gas outlet. The outlet
19
shall be equipped with an approved cap to prevent accidental discharge of gas
when the outlet is not in use.
(b) Liquefied petroleum gas system.
(1) Liquefied petroleum gas (“LPG”) systems shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with applicable City and State codes and regulations governing such
systems.
(2) Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive pressures and
shall be arranged so that the discharge terminates at a safe location.
(3) Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting off gas. Such
means shall be located outside the recreational vehicle and shall be maintained in
effective operating condition.
(4) All LPG piping outside of the recreational vehicles shall be well supported and
protected against mechanical injury. Undiluted LPG in liquid form shall not be
conveyed through piping equipment and systems in recreational vehicles.
(5) LPG containers installed on a recreational vehicle stand shall be securely, but
not permanently fastened, to prevent accidental overturning. Tanks fastened
to recreational vehicles shall not be less than five
(5) nor more than sixty (60) U.S. gallons gross capacity.
(6) No LPG vessel shall be stored or located inside or beneath any storage cabinet,
carport, recreational vehicle, or other structure, unless such installation is
approved by the health authority or fire department.
(c) Fuel oil supply systems.
(1) All fuel oil supply systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with
applicable City and State codes and regulations governing such systems. All
piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to recreational vehicles shall
be permanently installed and securely fastened in place.
(2) All fuel oil storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely fastened in place and
shall not be located inside or beneath any recreational vehicle or less than five
(5) feet from a recreational vehicle exit.
(3) Storage tanks located in areas subject to traffic shall be protected against
physical damage.
Sec. 31-13. Fire protection.
(a) The recreational vehicle park areas shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the
20
City Code, Fire Marshal, and City of Temple Fire Department and any other applicable local,
state and national fire codes or regulations.
(b) Recreation vehicle parks shall be kept free of litter, rubbish, and other flammable
materials.
(c) Portable fire extinguishers of an approved type shall be kept in service buildings and
at all other locations designated by the Fire Marshal or their designee and shall be maintained in
good operating condition.
(d) Fires shall be made only in stoves, fire rings or pits, and other equipment intended for
such purpose. All fire rings and pits shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet away from any structure
or vehicle, including a recreational vehicle, and shall have a mesh metal cover.
(e) Fire hydrants shall be installed if the park or area water supply system is capable of
serving them in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) The water supply system permits the operation of minimum of two (2) oneand-
one-half (1 ½) inch hose streams.
(2) Each of two (2) nozzles, held four (4) feet above the ground, is capable of
delivering at least seventy-five (75) gallons of water per minute at a flowing
pressure of at least thirty (30) pounds per square inch at the highest elevation
point of the park or area.
(f) Fire hydrants, if provided, shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of any
recreational vehicle service building or other structure in the recreational vehicle park or
area.
(g) The name of each recreational vehicle park shall be displayed on a sign having
dimensions of not less than eighteen (18) square feet and shall be displayed in a conspicuous
place when viewed from a public street or highway. Lettering shall not be less than eight (8)
inches in height.
Sec. 31-14. Miscellaneous requirements.
(a) General responsibilities for persons responsible for recreational vehicle park.
Parties responsible for the recreational vehicle park, including, but not limited to, the CUP
holder, property owner, recreational vehicle park operator, lessee, or management and their
designees, shall operate the park in compliance with this c h a p t e r a nd other regulations
issued hereunder and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the recreational vehicle
park and its environs, facilities, and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary
condition.
(b) Notification of park occupants of their duties and responsibilities. Parties
responsible for the recreational vehicle park, including, but not limited to, the CUP holder,
21
property owner, recreational vehicle park operator, lessee, or management and their designees,
shall notify recreational vehicle park occupants of all applicable provisions of this chapter and
inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this chapter issued hereunder.
(c) Supervision of recreational vehicle stand placement. Parties responsible for the
recreational vehicle park, including, but not limited to, the CUP holder, property owner,
recreational vehicle park operator, lessee, or management and their designees, shall supervise
the placement of each recreational vehicle stand, which includes securing its stability and
installing all utility connections.
(d) Maintenance of register. Parties responsible for the recreational vehicle park,
including, but not limited to, the CUP holder, property owner, recreational vehicle park
operator, lessee, or management and their designees, shall maintain a register containing the
names of all recreational vehicle park occupants.
(e) Designation of park office. Parties responsible for the recreational vehicle park,
including, but not limited to, the CUP holder, property owner, recreational vehicle park
operator, lessee, or management and their designees, if a manager of the recreational vehicle
park is living as a resident of the park, shall designate an office within the r e c r e a t i o n a l
v eh i c l e park. In the absence of a manager of the recreational vehicle park living on site, the
listed responsible parties must have posted a conspicuous sign indicating the telephone number
of a local management representative.
(f) General responsibilities of recreat ional vehi c l e occupants. Recreational
vehicle park occupants shall comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter and shall
maintain their recreational vehicle stand and environs, its facilities, and equipment in good
repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
(g) Placement of r e c r e a t i o n a l vehicle o n stand. Recr eat ional vehicl e
pa rk occupant s shall be responsible for the proper placement of their recreational vehicles
on stands and proper installation of all utility connections in accordance with the instructions
and under the supervision of the parties responsible for the recreational vehicle park,
including, but not limited to, the CUP holder, property owner, recreational vehicle park
operator, lessee, or management and their designees.
(h) Animals.No owner or person in care, custody, or control of a dog, cat or other animal
shall permit it to run at large or to commit any nuisance within the limits of any recreational
vehicle park or its environs.
(i) Restrictions on occupancy. A dependent recreational vehicle shall not be occupied
for dwelling purposes unless it is properly placed on a stand and connected to water, sewerage,
and electrical utilities.
(j) Compliance with city regulations. The parties responsible for the recreational
vehicle park, including, but not limited to, the CUP holder, property owner, recreational vehicle
park operator, lessee, or management and their designees, and all park occupants shall fully
22
comply with all other applicable sections of the Temple City Code, the UDC, and all other
local ordinances, regulations, and state and federal laws, as amended.
Sec. 31-15. Permanent occupancy prohibited.
(a) No recreational vehicle park shall be used as a permanent place of abode or dwelling.
Continuous occupancy extending beyond six (6) months in any twelve-month period shall be
presumed to be permanent occupancy and is prohibited.
(b) Any action toward removal of the wheels of a recreational vehicle, except for
temporary purposes of repair or to attach the trailer to the ground for stabilization, is prohibited.
Sec. 31-16. Enforcement.
(a) Criminal Penalties.
(1) An offense of this Chapter is a Class C misdemeanor, fine-only offense,
punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
(2) The State is not required to prove a culpable mental state for offenses of this
chapter.
(3) Each separate occurrence of a violation and each day a violation continues will
constitute a separate offense.
(b) Civil Remedies.
(1) The City of Temple may petition the applicable court of competent jurisdiction
for injunctive relief, civil penalties, or both, whenever it appears that a person
has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter pertaining to
the preservation of public health or safety.
(2) The City of Temple may seek temporary or permanent injunctions that prohibit
any conduct that violates any provision of this chapter or an order compelling
the specific performance of any action that is necessary for compliance with any
provision of this chapter.
(c) The City of Temple may revoke or modify any CUP issued under this chapter as
provided by Sec. 3.5.6, UDC.
(d) Enforcement under this chapter does not preclude enforcement or prosecution by
the State, or any other authority under local, state, or federal law.
(e) The City’s decision to pursue civil or criminal remedies is not exclusive; the City
may pursue criminal or civil remedies, or both, for any violation of this chapter.
23
Updated by Ordinance No. 2018-4915 (June 7, 2018)
Chapter 32
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 32-1. General duties of city engineer relative to streets and sidewalks.
Sec. 32-2. Obstructions generally.
Sec. 32-3. Littering prohibited.
Sec. 32-4. Deposit of nails, glass, wire, etc., in streets.
Sec. 32-5. Permits for certain uses of streets, alleys, etc.
Sec. 32-6. Closing of streets and alleys for paving.
Sec. 32-7. Guards and signals for paving operations.
Sec. 32-8. Use of streets or alleys being paved.
Sec. 32-9. Residence and Building Address Numbering.
Sec. 32-10. Sidewalk Preservation.
Sec. 32-11. Maintenance of sidewalks in clean condition.
Sec. 32-12. Reserved.
Sec. 32-13. Gates and doors opening on streets and sidewalks generally.
Sec. 32-14. Covering and doors for vaults and cellars in streets and
sidewalks.
Sec. 32-15. Washing vehicles on streets or sidewalks.
Sec. 32-16. Escape of grease, wastewater, etc., onto streets or sidewalks.
Sec. 32-17. Interfering with or injuring street lighting system.
Sec. 32-18. Obstruction of sidewalks, streets, and alleys by trees or branches
of trees prohibited.
Sec. 32-19. Height obstructions at corners prohibited; penalty.
Sec. 32-20. Prohibiting operation of vehicles larger than certain weight to
operate on city streets; penalty.
Section 32-21. Street Use or Encroachment License.
Secs. 32-22--32-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. STREET CONTRACTORS
Sec. 32-31. Definition.
Sec. 32-32. Bond--Required; amount; condition; approval.
Sec. 32-33. Same--Suits and recoveries.
Sec. 32-34. Same--Revocation or cancellation.
Sec. 32-35. Work permit required.
Sec. 32-36. Work to conform to prescribed plans, specifications, lines and
grades.
Sec. 32-37. Removal of unapproved improvements.
Sec. 32-38. Certifi cate of acceptance of work required.
Secs. 32-39--32-50. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. EXCAVATIONS
Sec. 32-51. Permit required; exceptions.
Sec. 32-52. Information to be furnished with applications; repairing
excavations.
Sec. 32-53. Bond.
Sec. 32-54. Specifications for work.
Sec. 32-55. Not to be expense to city.
Sec. 32-56. Penalty.
Sec. 32-57. Barricades and flares.
Secs. 32-58--32-69. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. UTILITY FIXTURES IN STREETS, ALLEYS, ETC.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 32-70. Inspection.
Sec. 32-71. Location of poles near trees.
Sec. 32-72. Poles to be run on one side of street only; exception.
Sec. 32-73. Two lines of poles prohibited on same side of street.
Sec. 32-74. Poles to be stamped.
Sec. 32-75. Supports for electric conductors.
Sec. 32-76. Number of wires permitted on poles.
Sec. 32-77. Insulation of arc lamps.
Sec. 32-78. Franchises and permits subject to division.
Secs. 32-79--32-90. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. RENTAL CHARGE
Sec. 32-91. Definitions.
Sec. 32-92. Imposed; amount; when payable.
Sec. 32-93. Report of gross receipts of payor.
Sec. 32-94. Report of industrial and governmental customers by payor.
Sec. 32-95. Examination of books and records of payor.
Sec. 32-96. Receipt for payment.
Sec. 32-97. Charge is not a tax, but is additional to taxes.
Sec. 32-98. Division grants no relief from other laws and ordinances.
Sec. 32-99. Division does not grant franchise; cancellation of privileges and
refund of rental.
Sec. 32-100. Right of city to adopt restrictions, regulations, etc.
Sec. 32-101. Certain persons exempt from payment of charge.
Sec. 32-102. Penalty for nonpayment.
Secs. 32-103--32-111. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. DRIVEWAYS, SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND GUTTERS
Sec. 32-112. Definitions.
Sec. 32-113. Permits.
Sec. 32-114. Drive approach standards adopted as an advisory guideline.
Sec. 32-115. Appeals.
Sec. 32-116. Inspections and approval.
Sec. 32-117. Warranty.
Sec. 32-118. Safety.
Sec. 32-119. Contractor's bond.
Sec. 32-120. Construction standards.
Sec. 32-121. City or state control.
Sec. 32-122. Violations.
Sec. 32-123. Defacing public structures prohibited.
Sec. 32-124. License for pasting or painting street address numbers.
Sec. 32-125. Application by a corporation, firm or partnership.
Sec. 32-126. Conditions of license.
Sec. 32-127. Fees.
Sec. 32-128. Grant of license.
Sec. 32-129. Deposit or bond.
Sec. 32-130. Penalty.
Appendix to Chapter 32 - Repealed by Ord. No. 2010-4413,
Adodpted December 16, 2010
Chapter 32
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 32-1. General duties of city engineer relative to streets and sidewalks.
The city engineer shall maintain a grade of all streets and public grounds of the city
and exercise general supervision over all work undertaken on the streets and public grounds.
He shall make plans and estimates and give and furnish instructions as to the grading and
construction of sidewalks.
Sec. 32-2. Obstructions generally.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any barrel, box, stone, brick, iron,
firewood or other obstruction on any street or sidewalk in the city. No person shall have or
maintain any bootblack stand or chair or other similar device for polishing boots and shoes,
or candy stand, confectionery stand, hucksters' stand or other stall on any sidewalk, street,
or alley in the city.
Any article or substance placed upon any street, sidewalk, alley, gutter or public
ground, except such as are permitted by the ordinances of the city, so as to obstruct the
same is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Nothing in this section shall be so construed as to
prevent any merchant from occupying not to exceed one-half (1/2) of any sidewalk in front
of the building occupied by him, in receiving and forwarding goods, wares and merchandise;
provided that such goods, wares and merchandise shall not remain on the sidewalk for a
longer period than two (2) hours.
Sec. 32-3. Littering prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter, throw or deposit any paper, peelings,
hulls, garbage, trash or other refuse or litter upon any street, sidewalks or alley in the city.
Sec. 32-4. Deposit of nails, glass, wire, etc., in streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, throw or leave upon any public street or
ground any nails, glass, bottles, or wire, or any lumber, boxes or other things whatever
having therein any nail.
Sec. 32-5. Permits for certain uses of streets, alleys, etc.
(a) Definition. An event is defined as a parade, a footrace, a walk-a-thon, a rally, a
march or a demonstration that will require the use of city streets, rights-of-way and/or
require escort services for the safety and security of the participants.
(b) Permit required. Anyone wishing to conduct or sponsor an event requiring the
use of city streets, right-of-way, or related property shall first obtain an event permit from
the City of Temple.
(c) Application. Persons wishing to conduct or sponsor an event shall complete an
application for an event permit at least thirty (30) days before the event. Applications for an
event permit can be picked up in the Parks and Leisure Services Department at 1909 Curtis
B. Elliott Drive. A ten dollar ($10.00) processing fee will be required at the time of
application.
(d) Review of applications. The Director of Parks and Leisure Services shall review
and approve, where appropriate, all applications for a permit under this section.
(e) Provision of city services. Depending upon the time required or required duties
that have priority, the city shall determine whether it is feasible for the city to furnish the
requested services, and shall so notify the applicant at the time the application for a permit
is approved or denied.
Sec. 32-6. Closing of streets and alleys for paving.
No person paving or repaving any street, avenue, alley or public square of the city
shall be permitted to keep the same closed longer than is necessary to properly complete
the same for use.
Sec. 32-7. Guards and signals for paving operations.
Any person engaged in paving or repaving any street, avenue, alley or public square
of the city shall erect and maintain a railing, guard or rope at the end of the same so as to
exclude persons from the area which is being paved, and, in the nighttime, shall also keep
lights and danger signals warning persons against the use of same and the danger incident to
travelling on, over or across same.
No person shall injure, interfere with or remove any railing, guard, rope, light or
signal or anything used for the purpose of preventing persons, animals or vehicles from
going upon any unfinished pavement.
Sec. 32-8. Use of streets or alleys being paved.
No person shall walk upon or ride or drive any animal or drive or operate any vehicle
of any kind on, over or across any street, avenue, alley, or public square of the city while the
same is being paved or repaved, until the same has been reopened for the purpose of travel
and traffic.
Section 32-9. Residence and Building Address Numbering.
(a) The purpose of this Section is to identify the location of a building during an
emergency.
(b) Each owner of record shall display address numbers on all new and existing
residences and buildings in such a manner and in such a position as to be
plainly visible and readable from the center of the street fronting the
property.
(c) Numbers shall be made of durable materials and shall be of a contrasting
color to the background.
(d) Individual address numbers shall be:
(1) At least 3” in height in areas zoned Residential;
(2) At least 6” in height for apartments and areas zoned Commercial or
Industrial.
(3) Arabic numerals or alphabet letters.
(4) Placed in a horizontal, vertical, or 45 degree angle line.
(e) Residential Requirements.
(1) All address numbers shall be located within a four-foot area of the
front entrance.
(a) If the front door to a residence is more than 100 feet from
the street of record, or if the landscaping makes it difficult
to see the front door, the owner of record must install a
name plate sign (two square feet in surface area) at the
driveway entrance to the street fronting the property.
(b) If the front door does not face the street, the address shall
appear on the corner of the building nearest the driveway.
(c) It is an exception to the requirements above where the
resident owner maintains a brick, stone, or masonry
mailbox, permanently installed in the right-of-way,
containing numerals 3 inches in height or higher with
contrasting background, where such is plainly visible from
the center of the street fronting the property.
(d) It is an exception to the requirements above where the
residence includes a front-load garage, connected to the
residence, located closer to the street than the front door,
and the garage contains address numerals 3 inches in height
or higher, with contrasting background, and which is plainly
visible from the center of the street.
(f) Rear Access and Alleyway Access.
Where the residence or building is accessible through an alleyway or through
rear access, address numbers may be placed on fence or garage, but must be
plainly visible from the access road. All other requirements of size and
contrast remain the same.
(g) Mobile Homes.
Mobile homes must be addressed as for all other residences and buildings
in this section. Additionally, the location of the address shall be on the
side of the mobile home directly adjacent to, i.e. in front of, the street or
road providing access to the mobile home.
(h) Numbering within multi-building complexes.
(1) A building of multiple structures or occupancies must have an official
number assigned to each building and each unit within the building.
(2) The official number assigned to each building must be conspicuously
posted and displayed both at the front and rear of the building, if the
building design permits, or so displayed that it is visible from the
nearest vehicular access.
(3) The official number for each unit within the building must be
conspicuously posted on the unit and must meet the size and contrast
requirements.
(4) In a complex of multiple structures or occupancies, where the number
is not visible from the street or alleyway by reason of design of the
building or roadway, a sign directory shall be placed in front of the
building. In such cases, a diagram of the complex shall be furnished by
the owner to the fire and police departments. This shall be updated and
departments notified within 30 calendar days of any changes.
(i) Compliance.
(1) New Construction: The address conforming to this section shall be
displayed on all buildings prior to the buildings being occupied.
(2) Existing Buildings: The address conforming to this section shall be
displayed on all existing buildings within 90 days upon approval of the
ordinance by City Council.
(j) Enforcement.
It shall be a class C misdemeanor to fail to comply with this ordinance.
It shall be a class C misdemeanor to alter, tamper, or change addressing
without the owners permission.
No culpable mental state is required under this Chapter.
(Note: Section 32-9, “Residence and Building Address Numbering,” was added by adoption of Ordinance No. 2004-
3962 on June 17, 2004)
Sec. 32-10. Sidewalk Preservation.
No person shall damage, demolish or remove a serviceable sidewalk on public
right-of-way without repairing or rebuilding the sidewalk to meet the city's specifications
and typical construction details. No person shall, in constructing or repairing any sidewalk
in the city, diminish the width thereof as established by the city or elevate or lower the
same above or below the grade established therefor, or in case there is no grade established
therefor, elevate or lower the same above or below the sidewalks of the adjoining property.
Sec. 32-11. Maintenance of sidewalks in clean condition.
Whoever shall allow the sidewalk in front of any property owned or controlled by
him to become unclean in any manner shall, after reasonable notice from the health officer
or city engineer, remove such uncleanness and, in default after such notice, he shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor in disregarding such notice.
Sec. 32-12. Reserved.
Sec. 32-13. Gates and doors opening on streets and sidewalks generally.
No person shall erect or maintain any gate or door opening upon any street or
sidewalk, unless such gate or door is constructed or hung so as to be self closing.
Sec. 32-14. Covering and doors for vaults and cellars in streets and sidewalks.
Whoever shall dig or cause to be dug in any street or sidewalk a vault and shall not
arch or cover over the same, and secure the grating or covering thereof in such a manner as
to prevent persons, animals and vehicles from falling therein, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
Whoever shall keep or leave open any cellar door or covering or grating of any vault
on any street or sidewalk, or suffer any such door, covering or grating belonging to the
premises occupied by him on any such place to be in an insecure condition, whereby
passers may be in danger of falling into a cellar or vault, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
Sec. 32-15. Washing vehicles on streets or sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person operating any garage or service station and for any
employee, agent or servant of any such operator or owner of such garage or service station
to wash any vehicle on any street, alley or sidewalk of the city.
Sec. 32-16. Escape of grease, wastewater, etc., onto streets or sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any wastewater, grease, or greasy or
sandy water used in washing or cleaning any vehicle or machinery commercially to escape
from any private premises onto any street, alley or sidewalk of the city. It shall likewise be
unlawful for any operator, manager, agent or employee of any gasoline service station,
garage or laundry to permit any grease or greasy or gritty water used in washing or cleaning
any vehicle or machinery or laundry wastewater to escape from any private premises onto
any street, alley or sidewalk in the city.
Sec. 32-17. Interfering with or injuring street lighting system.
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized to do so to turn on or turn off any
lamp used in lighting the streets or other public places of the city or to break or otherwise
injure any such lamp or lampstand or lamppost; or to injure in any manner whatsoever any
other light or any of the apparatus or belongings thereto used in lighting the streets of the
city; or to cut any electric light wire or otherwise injure the same or to break or injure any
globe or other apparatus of any electric light used in lighting the streets of the city; or to
obstruct, by any awning, sign or in any other manner, the light from any such lamp or light
whatsoever.
Sec. 32-18. Obstruction of sidewalks, streets, and alleys by trees or branches of
trees prohibited.
(a) Obstruction prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any
real property within the city to permit the limbs or branches of any trees located on such
premises to be lower than seven (7) feet above the sidewalk immediately abutting said
property or to be lower than thirteen (13) feet above any portion of a street or alley which
abuts or is adjacent to said property.
(b) Location of tree. This section shall apply regardless of whether the tree or any
portion of same is located on the premises of such owner or occupant, located in the
parkway, or is located in the abutting or adjacent sidewalk, street, or alley.
(c) Notice to remove limbs and branches. The director of public works or his
designee shall notify by certified mail, return receipt requested, the owner or occupant of
any such property, which notice shall further advise said owner or occupant that he has ten
(10) days to cut and remove the limbs and branches which are in violation of this section.
No such owner or occupant shall be prosecuted for violation of this section until he has
been given the above ten (10) days written notice by the director of public works. If the
owner or occupant does not take action to remove the obstructing limbs and branches within
ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice, the City of Temple Street Department will
cut the trees to comply with this ordinance and the owner or occupant shall be responsible
for the reasonable costs of cutting or trimming the obstructing limbs or branches. The City
of Temple shall bill the owner or occupant for the reasonable costs of removing the
obstructing limbs and branches.
(d) Penalty for violation of section. Any such owner or occupant who shall violate
the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be held guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined not less than one dollar nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and that
every day or portion of a day which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted
shall be considered a separate violation.
Sec. 32-19. Height obstructions at corners prohibited; penalty.
(a) It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit to remain any fence or any bushes or
other plants on a corner lot within fifteen (15) feet of the intersecting point of the street
right-of-way lines which obstructs the view at a height of more than three (3) feet above the
level of the adjacent street pavement.
(b) It shall be unlawful to construct, rebuild, or move any structure, fence, garage,
building, house, etc., upon a corner lot within fifteen (15) feet of the intersecting point of
the street right-of-way lines which obstructs the view at a height of more than three (3) feet
above the level of the adjacent street pavement.
(c) The central business district, as defined in the zoning ordinances of the City of
Temple, shall be excluded from the provisions of this section.
(d) Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section shall be
fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for
each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which any such obstruction to the view is permitted to remain after notice from the police
department, or any official of the city, to remove the same.
Sec. 32-20. Prohibiting operation of vehicles larger than certain weight to operate
on city streets; penalty.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any vehicle hauling ready-mixed concrete and having a
tandem axle load exceeding thirty-six thousand (36,000) pounds, a single axle load
exceeding twelve thousand (12,000) pounds, and a gross load which exceeds forty-eight
thousand (48,000) pounds, to operate upon the public roads, streets and highways of the
City of Temple, Texas.
(b) Any person violating, disobeying or refusing to comply with any of the
provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be
punishable by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than two hundred dollars
($200.00) for each offense.
Section 32-21. Street Use or Encroachment License.
(a) Term. A street use or encroachment license may be granted for a term not to exceed
fifteen (15) years, unless sooner terminated according to the terms and conditions of this
section. At the end of the applicable period, the owner may request an extension or renewal
of the license.
(b) Fee. Fees for street use or encroachment licenses shall be set by Resolution of the
City Council.
(c) Purpose. A description of the property and the specific purpose for which the
license is being granted shall be included in the street use license.
(d) City Manager Authorized to Issue. The City Manager, or his designee, shall cause
such application for a street use license application to be reviewed by the City Staff, and
where appropriate, by utility companies. The City Manager, or his designee, is authorized to
issue a street use or encroachment license on behalf of the City of Temple provided that the
license meets the terms and conditions required under this ordinance. Where an applicant
seeks a variance of a material term or condition of this ordinance, or where a utility
company raises an objection to the issuance of a street use license, the City Manager, or his
designee, shall present such application to the City Council for a decision on whether a
street use or encroachment license should be issued, and under what terms and conditions.
A decision of the City Council shall be final.
(e) Conditions of License. A street use or encroachment license shall be granted
subject to the following conditions, terms, and reservations:
1. Licensee shall be required to maintain the encroachment area at all times in a
neat, attractive, and orderly manner. A sufficient area of the public street, rightof-
way, easement, alley, sidewalk, or other public property shall remain open
after the encroachment, unobstructed and preserved for pedestrian or vehicular
traffic (including access for impaired or handicapped persons), as appropriate.
The City Manager, or his designee, may authorize minor existing encroachments
by fences, accessory buildings and enclosures within public right-of-way or
newly-created non-enclosed encroachments, e.g., fences, decks, slabs, trellis and
other landscaping improvements, or subdivision informational signs within public
rights-of-way, provided access by the City or private utility companies is not
substantially impaired, and the applicant agrees to all conditions of this ordinance
(including specifically the requirement to remove the encroachment if required
by the City). City Council approval is required for newly-created encroachments
involving new buildings (whether occupied or accessory) or for existing
encroachments involving any part of an occupied building (residential,
commercial or industrial).Licensee shall be required at all times to allow access
to utilities and trash receptacles located within the encroachment area. Groundmounted
signs, with the exception of subdivision informational signs, may not be
authorized by street use license, within street right of way, but the City Manager,
or his designee, may authorize existing or proposed encroachments by on
premise, ground-mounted signs in City easements or other public property, if the
granting of a street use license would not unduly interfere with use of such
easement by authorized utilities.
2. Licensee shall be required to restore the encroachment area to its original
condition at the end of the license period, unless renewed or extended, or in the
event that this license is terminated by the City as provided herein. If Licensee
fails to maintain the encroachment area as provided herein, or fails to restore the
encroachment area when the license is expired or terminated, the City may cause
such work to be done, the costs of which shall be born by Licensee.
3. In the event that City requests removal of any encroachments in the
encroachment area, Licensee shall remove said encroachments at his own
expense within thirty (30) days of notice thereof. In the event that Licensee fails
to remove the encroachments within the required thirty day period, the City
reserves the right to remove the encroachments, and Licensee agrees to
reimburse the City for the expense of removing said encroachments, and
Licensee further agrees to hold the City harmless for any and all claims arising
out of the removal of encroachments or maintenance of the encroachment area.
City shall not be required to restore the encroachments, which shall be the sole
responsibility of Licensee.
(f) Right of Cancellation. Street use or encroachment licenses are made
subordinate to the right of the City to use encroachment area for a public purpose, and in
addition to any other reservations made in the license, it is understood and agreed that
should the City of Temple deem it in the public interest to use the encroachment area,
or any portion thereof for a public purpose, or for any utility service which will require
the use of said area, then in that event, the City shall give the Licensee thirty (30) days
written notice of its intention to cancel the license. Licensee shall likewise have the
same right of cancellation upon giving the City thirty (30) days written notice of its
intention to cancel. In either event, upon the termination or cancellation by the City or
Licensee, as the case may be, this license shall become null and void, and Licensee or
anyone claiming any rights under this instrument shall be required to remove any
improvements and encroachments from said area at Licensee's expense. Failure to do so
shall subject Licensee to the provisions of subsection (d)(2) above. All work shall be
done at the sole cost of the Licensee and to the satisfaction of the Director of Public
Works. Any decisions of the City Council in this matter shall be final and binding upon
all parties insofar as the City's determination as to the public necessity of the use of the
area for public use.
(g) Compliance with Laws. Street use or encroachment licenses are subject to all
State and Federal laws, the provisions of the Charter of the City of Temple as it now
exists or as it may hereafter be adopted or amended, and the ordinances of the City of
Temple now in effect or those which may hereafter be passed and adopted. The City of
Temple shall have the right to increase or decrease the compensation to be charged for
this license upon its renewal or extension.
(h) Hold Harmless.
1. As a condition of a street use or encroachment license, Licensee shall agree and
be bound to hold the City whole and harmless against any and all claims for
damages, costs, and expenses, to persons or property that may arise out of or be
occasioned by the use, occupancy and maintenance of the public property by
Licensee, or from any act or omission of any representative, agent, customer, or
employee of the Licensee, and such indemnity provision shall also cover any
personal injury or damage suffered to City property, City employees, agents or
officers. The license shall also cover any claim for damages that any utility,
whether publicly or privately owned, may sustain or receive by reason of
Licensee's use of the license for Licensee's improvements and equipment
located thereon.
2. Licensee shall never make any claim of any kind or character against the City of
Temple for damages that it may suffer by reason of the installation, construction,
reconstruction, operation, and/or maintenance of any public improvement or
utility, whether presently in place or which may be constructed or installed,
including but not limited to, any water and/or sanitary sewer mains, and/or storm
sewer facilities, and whether such damage is due to flooding, infiltration, natural
causes or from any other cause of whatsoever kind or nature.
3. It is the intention of the indemnity agreement on the part of the Licensee and a
condition of a street use license, that it shall be a full and total indemnity against
any kind or character or claim whatsoever that may be asserted against the City of
Temple by reason or a consequence of having granted permission to Licensee to
use and maintain the public property described in the street use license. Licensee
shall agree to defend any and all suits, claims, or causes of action brought against
the City of Temple on account of same, and discharge any judgment or judgments
that may be rendered against the City of Temple in connection therewith.
(i) Acceptance by Licensee. Licensee shall accept the provisions of a street use or
encroachment license by signing the agreement through its duly authorized officer within
thirty (30) days after the license shall have become fully effective. In the event said
acceptance is not signed as provided for herein, then the license shall be of no further
effect and shall be considered as having been canceled fully.
(Ordinance No. 2006-4065, 03-02-06)
Secs. 32-22--32-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. STREET CONTRACTORS
Sec. 32-31. Definition.
The following terms in this article shall have the following meanings:
(a) Contractor. A person constructing, repairing, rehabilitating, or improving,
demolishing or removing streets or public ways in the city, whether doing the work for
themselves or others.
(b) Public sidewalk. the portion of a public street between the curb lines or lateral
lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines that is improved and designed for or is
ordinarily used for pedestrian travel.
Sec. 32-32. Bond--Required; amount; condi tion; approval.
Any person engaged in the construction, repair or improvement of the streets or
public ways of the city as defined by the city map and its additions and revisions1, shall be
required to execute a good and sufficient bond in the sum of three thousand dollars
($3,000.00), payable to the city and conditioned that such contractor will faithfully perform
such work in accordance with the provisions of this article. Such bond shall be approved by
the Director of Finance and deposited with him before any such contractor shall engage in
the business of making, constructing, laying, removing or repairing roadbeds, surfaces or
structures or other street improvements in the streets or public ways of the city.
Sec. 32-33. Same--Suits and recoveries.
Any person having a cause of action against any contractor because of defective or
faulty materials or workmanship with respect to any street construction work done or
performed by such contractor is hereby authorized to sue on the bond filed in accord with
section 32-32, without impleading the city, or the city may maintain such suit. Such bond
shall not be exhausted by the first recovery, but shall be subject to successive recoveries
for damage accruing to any person or the city, by reason of any defective or faulty material
used by or by reason of any defective or faulty workmanship of the contractor.
Sec. 32-34. Same--Revocation or cancellation.
Any violation of this article by a contractor shall be sufficient grounds for the City
Council to revoke and cancel the bond theretofore filed by the contractor. Such revocation
or cancellation shall be in addition to any penalty imposed upon the conviction for such
violation.
1 Note--The city map referred to above is not included herein, but is on file in the Office of the Director
of Public Works.
Sec. 32-35. Work permit required.
Any contractor contracting for the construction, repair, or demolition of any of the
streets and public ways of the city shall first obtain a permit from the Director of Public
Works before commencing any such work.
Sec. 32-36. Work to conform to prescribed plans, specifications, lines and grades.
All street construction work by a contractor shall be performed according to the
plans and specifications on file in the office of the city engineer at the time of such work
and the lines and grades furnished by the Director of Public Works, or in accordance with
such plans and specifications as may be prescribed and adopted by the City Council.
Sec. 32-37. Removal of unapproved improvements.
Any street subgrade, surface, structure or other street improvement not approved by
the city engineer, because of any defective or faulty material or workmanship, or because
such work fails to comply with the prescribed plans and specifications, shall be removed by
the contractor or his bondsmen free of cost or expense to the owner or the city, and the
work area restored to a condition approximating the natural condition existing prior to the
beginning of the work.
Sec. 32-38. Certificate of acceptance of work required.
When the contractor completes any work done under a permit issued in accord with
this article, he shall obtain a certificate of acceptance of the work from the Director of
Public Works.
Secs. 32-39--32-50. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. EXCAVATIONS
Sec. 32-51. Permit required; exceptions.
No person, firm or corporation, or combination of them, shall hereafter dig any
holes or trenches upon, through, or beneath the streets, avenues, alleys, squares, and public
grounds of the City of Temple, nor lay any pipes, mains, laterals, or any connecting or
service pipes, nor any underground sewer or underground wiring along, across or beneath,
the streets, avenues, alleys, squares and public grounds of said city, without first having
filed with the city engineer an application and plan in writing to do so and without having
first obtained a formal written approval of such application and map and a permit to perform
such work, except in the following cases:
(1) No permit shall be required of any utility company to set utility poles in any
street or alley, but each utility company shall once each calendar month make
a report in writing to the city engineer, giving the location of each utility pole
which it has set in the traveled portion of any and all streets and alleys in the
City of Temple during the preceding calendar month; and
(2) In cases of emergency, utility companies may cut or puncture the traveled
portions of streets and alleys without first getting a permit to do such work,
provided that where such cuttings or punctures are made by any such utility
company in the traveled portion of a street or alley, such company shall apply
for and obtain a permit for such work on the first working day after the work
is done.
Sec. 32-52. Information to be furnished with applications; repairing excavations.
Such application for a permit shall be submitted in such form as the city engineer
may prescribe from time to time, and, insofar as applicable, shall follow generally the
requirements prescribed by the city ordinances of the City of Temple for applications for
building permits, in addition to any other information prescribed by the city engineer. Such
application shall be accompanied by a map or plan of such proposed work.
(1) The permit application shall specify that applicant (permittee) shall cause said
excavation to be repaired in accordance with the terms and provisions of
section 32-54(1) hereof.
(2) Permittee may, if necessary to preserve the city street and insure it is not
unnecessarily damaged by poor or delayed repair, by so requesting in the
permit application, obtain the services of the City of Temple Street
Department to repair said excavation. Repair of any such excavations by said
city shall be limited to the required repairs from the level of backfill, as set
forth in section 32-54(1) hereof, to the installation of the asphalt.
(3) In the event permittee specifies that services of the street department are
required to properly and timely repair the excavation as provided in (2)
hereinabove, said specification shall be an agreement by permittee to pay the
reasonable cost of labor, materials and ove rhead to the City of Temple for
said repair.
(4) The Superintendent of the Street Department may, based upon scheduled
demands on said department, the size of the excavation and job, the
unavailability of materials or labor and his judgment that repair by the city is
not immediately necessary to prevent damage to said street, refuse the
request to repair any such excavation. In that event, the permittee shall be
notified that the City of Temple will not perform said repair work and, if a
permit is issued, permittee shall cause the excavation and repair to be in
accordance with the terms and provisions of section 32-54(1) hereof.
Sec. 32-53. Bond.
No such permit shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation until such person,
firm or corporation shall have filed a bond in the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00)
with a good and sufficient surety with the Director of Finance. Said bond shall be effective
as to any permit for a period of one year after such permit is issued and shall cover all
permits issued to the principal of such bond as long as such bond is on file. The form of the
bond shall be as follows:
State of Texas
County of Bell
Know all men by these presents:
That we, ___________________________, as principal and
________________________, as surety, are held and firmly bound unto the City
of Temple, Texas, in the penal sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), to the
payment of which well and truly to be made, we hereby bind ourselves, our heirs,
executors, administrators, successors and assigns by these presents:
The condition of the above obligation is such that, whereas the above principal has
obtained a permit and/or permits to puncture, open, dig, or excavate a street, alley,
highway, park or public ground within the City of Temple, Texas, in accordance with
an application and/or applications heretofore filed by him with said City of Temple:
Now, if the above bound principal, his heirs, executors, administrators, successors,
and/or assigns, shall well and truly keep, do and perform all laws and ordinances of
the City of Temple regulating excavations in and puncturing of streets, alleys,
highways, parks, and/or public grounds of the City of Temple and will refill said
excavations or punctures according to the ordinances and specifications prescribed
by the City of Temple, and will replace all pavement as required by said
specifications and will hold the City of Temple harmless from all damages that may
accrue by reason of said punctures, holes or excavations made by said principal, for a
period of one year from the date each said permit is issued, then this obligation shall
be null and void; otherwise to be and remain in full force and effect. Successive
recoveries may be made on this bond and one or more recoveries thereon shall not
exhaust or terminate this bond.
Witness the execution hereof, on this the _____ day of ________________,
20___.
Principal
Surety
Approved this the _____ day of __________________, 20__.
Director of Finance
Sec. 32-54. Specifications for work.
Such work must be performed strictly according to the requirements of the city
engineer of the City of Temple, and not otherwise; and shall be performed under his
supervision and in such manner and at such times as the city engineer shall prescribe and
approve. The excavations and the depth, grade, and location of any such pipes, mains,
laterals, sewer or wiring shall be as prescribed by the city engineer in each case, provided
that: All excavations made within the right-of-way of any street or alley or across any
square or public grounds within the city limits of the City of Temple, shall be made in
accordance with the following specifications:
(1) If any excavation is made in any street that is now improved with any type of
paving, no material from the excavation shall be used to backfill such
excavation, except that amount necessary to bed pipe, cable, or conduit to a
point six (6) inches above the top of said pipe, cable or conduit. This material
shall be thoroughly tamped or compacted by a suitable means to ensure
maximum compaction. The remaining excavated depth of the excavation shall
be backfilled with gravel of a grade known as road gravel, and compacted
either by tamping, pounding or jetting. Backfill shall be placed to the grade of
the finished surface of the surrounding area and opened to traffic for a period
of not less than seventy-two (72) hours. Where required, concrete slab shall
be placed immediately after expiration of the seventy-two-hour compaction
period. The concrete slab shall be closed to traffic not less than twenty-four
(24) hours before asphalt surfacing is replaced.
Where excavation is in an improved area, all edges shall be cut to a straight
line before concrete slab is poured. After backfill has reached maximum
compaction, material shall be removed to a depth as specified below and an
area extending six (6) inches beyond area of excavation shall be excavated to
the same depth and a slab of class B concrete shall be placed over area so
excavated:
(a) If area is now improved with any type of asphalt surfacing, excavation
shall be made to a depth of six and one-half (6 1/2) inches and
concrete slab shall be five (5) inches in thickness.
(b) If area is improved with brick pavement, the concrete slab shall be of a
thickness not less than the existing base and brick surface.
(c) If area is now improved with concrete pavement, the concrete slab
shall be the same thickness and reinforced as the original pavement.
(2) In all other streets, whether unimproved or surfaced with gravel, backfill shall
be made in the same manner as provided for other areas, but no concrete slab
shall be required.
(3) If excavation is made in any alley that is improved with any type of asphalt,
brick or concrete pavement, backfilling and replacing of surfacing shall be
made in the same manner as specified for excavations made in improved
streets.
(4) When excavation is made in any improved area, either streets or alleys, all
unused excavated material shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours
after backfill is completed.
(5) When excavation is made in any unimproved street or alley, the backfilling of
said excavation may be made as follows:
(a) Excavated material may be used as backfill to a point within twelve
(12) inches of the surrounding area. Backfill shall be placed in layers
of not more than eight (8) inches and each layer shall be thoroughly
compacted by approved methods. The remaining twelve (12) inches of
backfill shall be a good grade of road gravel and said gravel backfill
shall be compacted by wetting and tamping. All unused excavated
material shall be removed from said alley within twenty-four (24)
hours after backfilling is completed, or if feasible, it may be spread as
fill in low places in the street or alley.
No excavated material that is of the consistency of mud shall be used as a
backfill material.
All of said excavations, backfill and repair in streets and alleys shall be in
accordance with the drawings, respectively, appearing on Exhibit A attached
hereto and made a part hereof.2
(6) When excavation is made in an area between curb line and sidewalk line,
excavated material may be used for backfill, material shall be thoroughly
compacted and area finished in a manner equal to that as originally existed.
Sec. 32-55. Not to be expense to city.
All such work shall be performed at the sole expense of the person, firm or
corporation making such application, and without expense to the city.
Sec. 32-56. Penalty.
2Editor's note--Exhibit A is not included herein, but is on file with the Director of Public Works
Any person, firm or corporation which violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses
to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of, any of the provisions of section 32-51
through 32-55 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punishable by
a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00), and each day any violation or noncompliance continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.
Sec. 32-57. Barricades and flares.
Any person performing any work for which a permit is required by this article shall
protect the same with such barricades, fences or flares as may be required by the city
engineer.
Secs. 32-58--32-69. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. UTILITY FIXTURES IN STREETS, ALLEYS, ETC.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 32-70. Inspection.
The city fire official, electrical inspector, police officers, and other persons
designated by the city shall have the power and it shall be their duty to examine and inspect
from time to time, all telegraph, telephone, electric light or other poles, gas pipelines,
pipes and other fixtures in, across, or under the streets, alleys or other public places within
the city for the purpose of seeing that all of same are in a safe and suitable condition.
Whenever any such item is found to be unsafe or unsuitable for the purpose of which it is
used, the person using, possessing or maintaining the same shall be notified and required to
place the same in a safe and suitable condition.
Sec. 32-71. Location of poles near trees.
It shall be unlawful for any post, pole or similar contrivance to be erected nearer to
the body of any tree standing upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground in the city
than four (4) feet.
Sec. 32-72. Poles to be run on one side of street only; exception.
Each line of poles shall be run on one side of the street only, except where
absolutely necessary to run such poles to the other side and then only with the permission
of the City Council.
Sec. 32-73. Two lines of poles prohibited on same side of street.
Not two (2) lines of poles shall be erected on the same side of any street or avenue.
Sec. 32-74. Poles to be stamped.
All poles erected or maintained in or along any street, avenue, alley or other public
place shall be stamped or branded with the initials of the company owning the same at a
point not less than five (5) nor more than seven (7) feet above the surface of the sidewalk.
Sec. 32-75. Supports for electric conductors.
All supports of electric conductors located in or along any street, alley or public
place must be constructed of substantial and durable material capable of sustaining a weight
of ten (10) times that normally upon them.
Sec. 32-76. Number of wires permitted on poles.
Not more than forty (40) electric wires, exclusive of cables, shall be carried on any
pole located in or along any street, alley or public place.
Sec. 32-77. Insulation of arc lamps.
All arc lamps located in or along any street, alley or public place must have the
frames and exposed parts carefully insulated from the circuit.
Sec. 32-78. Franchises and permits subject to division.
All franchises and permits granted by the city shall be subject to the preceding
sections of this division.
Secs. 32-79--32-90. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. RENTAL CHARGE
Sec. 32-91. Definitions.
For the purposes of this division, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them:
Governmental users and consumers. The term "governmental users and consumers"
shall be construed to mean service to federal, state, county, or city governments and
subdivisions and agencies thereof.
Industrial users and consumers. The term "industrial users and consumers" shall be
construed to include service to or for boiler installations and central heating plants
(exclusive of residential use) and service at a location where the purchaser is engaged in an
activity, such as the operation of factories, mills, machine shops, refineries, pumping
plants, cleaning and dyeing works, creameries, canning establishments, stockyards, and
without limitation by reason of the above enumeration, all other extractive, fabricating or
processing activities.
Sec. 32-92. Imposed; amount; when payable.
Every person occupying or using the streets, avenues, highways, easements, alleys,
parks or other public ways and places in the city with electric poles, pipes or other fixtures,
or with gas pipe lines, pipes or other fixtures, shall, as a condition to such further
occupancy, pay to the city annually for such privilege a rental charge equal to two (2)
percent of the gross receipts received by such person from the sale of electric light and
power or gas within the corporate limits of the city, excluding, however, the receipts from
industrial and governmental users and consumers. Such charge shall be paid on or before the
first day of February of each year and shall be based upon such gross receipts during the
preceding year ending December thirty-first.
Sec. 32-93. Report of gross receipts of payor.
All persons using or maintaining any electric light poles, pipes or other fixtures, or
any gas pipe lines, pipes or other fixtures, in any of the streets, avenues, highways,
easements, alleys, parks or other public ways or places within the corporate limits of the
city, shall, on or before the first day of February of each and every year file, with the
Director of Finance a sworn report showing the gross receipts, exclusive of receipts from
industrial and governmental users and consumers, from the sale of electric light and power
or gas within the corporation limits of the city during the preceding calendar year ending
December thirty-first.
Sec. 32-94. Report of industrial and governmental customers by payor.
All persons required to file the report provided for by section 32-93 shall, on or
before the first day of February of each year, file with the Director of Finance a sworn
report showing by name the industrial and governmental users and consumers served by
such persons during the preceding calendar year ending December thirty-first.
Sec. 32-95. Examination of books and records of payor.
The City Council may, when it sees fit, have the books and records of the person
rendering the reports required in this division examined by a representative of the City to
ascertain whether such reports are accurate, but nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent the city from ascertaining the facts by any other method.
Sec. 32-96. Receipt for payment.
Upon receipt of the rental charge imposed by this division by the City, the Director
of Finance shall deliver to the person paying the same a receipt therefor, which receipt shall
authorize such person to use and occupy the streets, avenues, highways, easements, alleys,
parks and other public ways and places of the city in carrying on its business for twelve (12)
months from January first of the year is which such rental is paid.
Sec. 32-97. Charge is not a tax, but is additional to taxes.
The rental charge imposed by this division is not charged as a tax but is made for the
privilege now enjoyed and to be enjoyed by the persons upon whom it is imposed of using
the streets, avenues, highways, easements, alleys, parks, and other public ways and places of
the city in the conduct of their respective businesses, and such charge is additional to all ad
valorem and franchise taxes and to all taxes of every nature whatsoever against such
persons.
Sec. 32-98. Division grants no relief from other laws and ordinances.
Nothing in this division is intended to relieve any person of any condition,
restriction or requirement imposed by any law or ordinance of the city.
Sec. 32-99. Division does not grant franchise; cancellation of privileges and refund
of rental.
This division does not grant a franchise to any utility or person to use the streets,
avenues, highways, easements, alleys, parks and other public ways and places and shall never
be so construed by the courts or otherwise, and the city reserves the right to cancel the
privileges granted hereunder and refund the unearned rentals paid to the city.
Sec. 32-100. Right of city to adopt restrictions, regulations, etc.
The city hereby reserved the right to put into effect at any time other restrictions and
regulations as to the erection and maintenance of poles, wires, pipes, and other
appurtenances in the streets, avenues, highways, easements, alleys, parks and other public
ways and places of the city and from time to time to require such poles, pipes, wires and
other property, equipment and fixtures as it may deem proper to be removed and to require
wires to be run in conduits on such terms as the city may deem proper.
Sec. 32-101. Certain persons exempt from payment of charge.
No person who has, on the first day of February of any year, a legally enforceable
contract with the city for the payment of a fixed sum of money as rental, for such calendar
year, for his use of the streets, avenues, highways, easements, alleys, parks and other public
ways and places, shall be subject or liable to pay, for such year, the rental charge imposed
by this division. This section does not relieve any such person from the requirement to file,
for any year, the reports provided for in this division.
Sec. 32-102.
Every person who shall operate any business without the payment of the rental
charge provided for in this division shall be subject to a penalty of five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each and every day that such person shall conduct such business using and
occupying the streets, avenues, highways, easements, alleys, parks or other public ways and
places of the city, without the payment of such rental, which sum may be recovered by the
city in a court of competent jurisdiction by a suit filed therein.
Every person and the local manager or agent for every such person failing or
refusing to make the reports required by this division or failing or refusing to allow the
examination provided for in this division shall, upon conviction, be fined in any sum not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and every day's failure or refusal, as mentioned in
this section, shall be deemed a separate offense.
Secs. 32-103--32-111. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. DRIVEWAYS, SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND GUTTERS
Sec. 32-112. Definitions.
The following terms in this article and in the attached Drive Approach Standards3
shall have the following meanings:
(a) Administrator. The administrator of this article shall be the director of public
works.
(b) Bond. A surety approved by the Director of Finance.
(c) Commercial drive approach. Any drive approach serving a retail, office, or
commercial business use, excluding industrial uses, and including residential development
with five (5) dwelling units or more. A commercial development drive approach shall also
include any institutional use.
(d) Contractor. Shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation or other legal
entity engaged in constructing drive approaches in the City of Temple.
(e) Corner clearance. The straight line distance between the beginning of the drive
approach and radius point or springpoint of a street intersection.
(f) Drive approach or curb cut. The area between the points where the curb is
removed or omitted and back to the property line, excluding any flares or radii. The drive
approach or curb cut connects betwe en the traveled portion of the public street and the
private property and shall be constructed of concrete or an approved equivalent material.
3Editor's Note --The Drive Approach Standards are not set out herein but are on file and available for
inspection in the office of the city secretary.
(g) Driveway. A driving surface providing access between the drive approach or curb
cut and the particular use on the property.
(h) Edge clearance. Distance between the inside edge of the curb cut and the
adjacent property line.
(i) Frontage. The length of a single piece of property under review for a curb cut
along the roadway right-of-way line or that area between the property edges. Property
situated on a corner will have separate frontages along each roadway.
(j) Industrial drive approach. Any drive approach serving an industrial land use.
(k) Joint access curb cuts. A curb cut serving more than one tract.
(l) Permit. Shall mean the form promulgated by the city inspections department
showing approval of proposed drive approaches.
(m) Residential drive approach. Any drive approach serving a residential use
containing less than five (5) dwelling units.
(n) Safety zone. All parts of the street right-of-way between the curb or shoulder
line and the right-of-way along a property frontage, except the areas contained in the drive
approach.
(o) Site plan. A scaled plan of the property identifying the land use and showing in
detail property lines, curblines or edges of adjacent streets, alleys, off-street parking,
buildings, or structures and including vehicular access, doorways or docks on the lot, and all
existing and proposed curb cuts, method of construction, and contractor.
Sec. 32-113. Permits.
(a) A drive approach permit shall be obtained from the city inspections department
before any contractor removes, alters, or constructs any curb, approach or gutter on public
property or right-of-way.
(b) A contractor shall obtain a permit and said permit shall expire one hundred eighty
(180) days (1) after issuance if related building permit work has not been started, or (2)
when a separate building permit is not necessary, if the approach has not been started within
this time period. Provided, however, this time period may be extended by the administrator
for good causes.
(c) The fee for such permit shall be eleven dollars and twenty-five cents ($11.25).
Sec. 32-114. Drive approach standards adopted as an advisory guideline.
(a) Drive approach standards attached to this article as Exhibit "A" are adopted by the
City Council as an advisory guideline for development in the City of Temple and are made a
part of this ordinance for that purpose.
(b) In evaluating an application for a drive approach permit, the administrator will use
these drive approach standards.
(c) All drive approaches authorized by the administrator shall conform to the
standards attached to this article except as indicated below.
The administrator may permit or require drive approaches which deviate from these
drive approach standards, but not from any other requirement of this article, if it is his
judgment that such deviations are more likely to satisfy the intent of these standards, and if
such deviations are compatible with the public health, welfare and safety. The administrator
shall not have the authority to deviate from a drive approach approval which was the result
of an approved zoning change or subdivision plat. In such instance a zoning change and/or
replat shall be required to assure proper notification to effected property owners.
Whenever the administrator allows or requires curb cuts which deviate from these
standards, he shall indicate on the face of the permit the approved plan and the justification
for his decision. If the property owner considers the administrator's decision too
restrictive, an appeal may be requested to the planning commission and, if necessary, to the
City Council as provided for in section 32-115, Appeals.
Sec. 32-115. Appeals.
Any property owner contesting any decision, interpretation, or application of any
regulation in this section shall have the right of filing a written request with the director of
public works to request an appeal from such decision to the planning commission. The
planning commission shall schedule a hearing as soon as practical and shall render a
decision on the requested appeal. Issues to be evaluated by the planning commission in
rendering its judgment on this article may include, but are not limited to, land uses, tract
size and frontage along the street, type of street, and effect to the public safety if an appeal
is granted. If the requested appeal is approved by the planning commission, a driveway
approach permit shall be issued by the city inspections department.
A property owner may appeal the decision of the planning commission to the City
Council after filing a written request with the director of public works. The City Council
shall schedule a hearing as soon as practical and shall render a decision on the requested
appeal. The decision of the City Council shall be final unless the property owner challenges
that decision in a court of competent jurisdiction with thirty (30) days of the decision.
Sec. 32-116. Inspections and approval.
(a) Upon approval of an application the inspections department shall issue the permit
which shall be posted at the work site.
(b) When the contractor has the drive approach ready for the pouring of concrete, he
shall notify the city inspections department. An inspector shall, as soon as practical, and not
longer than one working day, inspect the preparation and either approve or disapprove the
preparation and note his approval or disapproval in the appropriate place upon the permit.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any contractor to pour concrete or to begin any drive
approach without the approved inspections department permit being displayed on the site.
(d) Any drive approach or other improvement not approved by the city inspections
department because of defective material, faulty workmanship, or failure to comply with
plans and specifications shall be corrected to comply by the contractor or his bondsman
free of cost or expense to the owner or the city.
Sec. 32-117. Warranty.
A contractor shall maintain any drive approach erected by him free from structural
defects for a period of one year from date of final approval and acceptance by the city of
the drive approach, free of cost or charge to the owner for any defect caused by defective
material, faulty workmanship, or noncompliance with this article.
Sec. 32-118. Safety.
A contractor shall erect and maintain barricades, lights, and similar protective
devices as necessary to protect the public from damage or injury due to the construction
and shall keep the work site in as safe a condition as reasonable, including cleanup of debris
and other materials not in use.
Sec. 32-119. Contractor's bond.
(a) Prior to engaging in drive approach construction, a contractor shall execute and
file with the Director of Finance a bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00),
payable to the City of Temple and conditioned that the contractor will faithfully perform
according to the provisions of this article.
(b) Any person suing a contractor because of substandard driveway construction
need not implead the City of Temple.
(c) The bond shall be subject to successive recoveries for substandard driveway
construction.
(d) Bonds now approved by the Director of Finance are sufficient, however, all new
bonds or renewal of present bonds shall meet the above requirements.
Sec. 32-120. Construction standards.
Construction of all drive approaches, sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be in
accordance with the city's specifications and typical construction details.
Sec. 32-121. City or state control.
All construction of driveways within the City of Temple shall be pursuant to this
article except roads which are controlled by the Texas Highway Department when the State
Department of Highways and Public Transportation wishes to apply different standards to
roads which are exclusively within its jurisdiction.
Sec. 32-122. Violations.
should any person, firm, corporation or partnership violate any of the provisions of
this article, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a
fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00), and a violation of this article shall be sufficient grounds for the city to revoke
and cancel the violator's bond. Each act done in violation of this article shall constitute a
separate offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished as such.
Sec. 32-123. Defacing public structures prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, paste or paint any words, letters,
numbers, symbols, pictures, graffiti or other marks on any sidewalk, curb, gutter, street or
other public structure, without first obtaining a license as required by this article or to fail
to comply with the requirements of this article.
Sec. 32-124. License for pasting or painting street address numbers.
Each person desiring to secure a license under the terms of this article for placing,
pasting or pointing street address numbers on public structures shall sign and file in person,
a sworn, written application with the construction safety and services department of the City
of Temple, giving the following information:
(1) The full name and address of the applicant;
(2) The state, county, city or town where the applicant has a permanent residence;
(3) The age, height, weight, complexion, color of hair, and color of eyes of the
applicant;
(4) A complete description of the words, letters, numbers, symbols, pictures or
other marks that applicant wishes to place, paste or paint on public structures;
(5) A complete description of the locations and structures applicant desires to
paste or paint, and the methods applicant intends to use;
(6) Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony in any state
or federal court, and if so, the nature of the offense, the name of the court,
the date of each conviction, and the sentence, if any, served under each
conviction;
(7) The names and addresses of five persons as references who may be contacted
for information regarding the applicant.
Sec. 32-125. Application by a corporation, firm or partnership.
If the application for a license under this article is filed by a corporation, firm or
partnership with the intention of having various employees work under such license, the
application shall give the pertinent information required in paragraph (a) [section 32-124]
with respect to the applicant, and, in addition thereto, the applicant shall furnish a list of all
its employees who will work under such license and shall certify that each of such
employees is a bona fide employee of the applicant, whose activities under such license
will be covered by the bond filed by the applicant as provided in this article. Such applicant
shall be required to obtain only one license for all its employees, but no employee of the
applicant shall be allowed to work under such license until such employee has personally
furnished to the construction and safety services department the information about himself
required by section 32-124 of all applicants, which shall be signed and sworn to by each
employee. Each applicant for a license under this article shall file with his application
therefor, two (2) photographic likenesses of himself of an approximate size of one and onehalf
(1 1/2) by two (2) inches. Such photograph shall be furnished by each employee of a
corporation, firm or partnership required to file information by the provisions of this
section.
Sec. 32-126. Conditions of license.
Each applicant shall be required as a part of the issuance of the license to comply
with the following conditions which shall be incorporated and made a part of his license
agreement:
(1) The applicant, his agents, representatives and employees shall at all times
represent that they are private enterprises, and are not, in any way, working
for or endorsed by the City of Temple.
(2) The applicant, his agent, representatives and employees shall not place, paste
or paint street addresses on any public street, sidewalk, or any public property
within the city, unless the owner or occupant of the abutting private property
has agreed in writing to have the applicant perform these services.
(3) All placing, pasting or painting of street address numbers on public structures
shall be in accordance with the following requirements:
(a) Words, letters, numbers, symbols, pictures or other marks shall be
uniform and done in such a fashion that the words, letters, numbers,
symbols, pictures or other marks are readily identifiable and do not
detract from the overall appearance or the property values in the
surrounding neighborhood.
(b) Street address numbers shall be painted in such a way that they are
uniform in size and are painted in a reflective -color paint which is
similar to the paint used on other street numbers painted in the
neighborhood. All street address numbers shall be painted on a
fourteen-inch blue background with white letters not more than three
(3) inches high with a minimum one-inch spacing between letters.
(4) Applicant, his agents, representatives and employees shall solicit orders for
their service solely by leaving a pamphlet fully explaining their services and
the fee for same securely fastened to the front door of the occupant of any
residence within the city between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. any
day between Monday and Saturday of any week.
Sec. 32-127. Fees.
Each individual for a license under this article shall, at the time of filing his
application, pay to the Director of Finance the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) as a fee. Each
applicant which is a corporation, firm, partnership or association which intends to have
various employees working under its license shall pay the Director of Finance a fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00), together with an additional fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each employee
who will work under its license. All fees paid under this section shall be deposited to the
general funds of the City of Temple.
The fees required by this section shall constitute the fees of the city to cover the
cost of investigating the applicant and his services and to cover any additional amounts
necessary to cover the administrative costs of conducting inspections, publishing notices,
holding public hearings and paying any other expenses incurred by the city in connection
with the processing of such application and issuing the license.
Sec. 32-128. Grant of license.
The Superintendent of Construction Safety and Services shall examine the applicant
and shall review all information obtained from references furnished by the applicant in his
application and shall hear all evidence for and against the issuance of the license, and, after
his investigation has been concluded, render a decision.
If the Superintendent of Construction Safety and Services finds, at the conclusion of
his investigation, that the applicant is the person he represents himself to be, and has never
been convicted of a felony and is not a fugitive from justice, and that the services which he
intends to render are in compliance with the requirements of this article, a license shall be
issued, containing the restrictions set forth in this article.
If it is found, however, that the application does not meet the requirements of this
article, the application shall be denied and the applicant shall be notified in writing of the
reasons for denial.
Sec. 32-129. Deposit or bond.
(a) Required. If the Superintendent of Construction Safety and Services has decided
that an applicant is entitled to a license applied for under this article, the applicant shall be
given written notice of such decision immediately, and the applicant shall then file with the
Director of Finance a deposit or bond in accordance with this section.
(b) Amount. If the applicant for a license under this article is an individual, the
amount of the deposit or the sum of the bond to be filed under this section shall be five
hundred dollars ($500.00). If such applicant is a corporation, firm, or partnership, such
deposit or bond shall be in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(c) Surety, conditions, approval, etc., of bond. Any bond filed in accordance with
this section shall be signed by a surety or bonding company incorporated under the laws of
the state or authorized to do business in this state.
Such bond shall bind the principal and surety to pay to the city the sum prescribed in
subsection (b) above for the use and benefit of any citizen of the city who may be damaged
or injured by reason of any false representation as to any goods, wares or merchandise or
services sold to such person by the applicant after he has received his license, or by reason
of the breach or failure of any guaranty or warranty made or given to any citizen of the city
by the applicant in the sale of such goods, wares, merchandise or services. Such bond shall
further provide that it is payable at Temple, Texas, and that it is for the use and benefit of
every citizen of the city and that, if any suit is filed by any citizen of the city against the
applicant for false representations, fraud, breach of guaranty or warranty by reason of sales
and services made under this license, the surety on such bond shall be made a party thereto
and that any judgment rendered against the applicant in such suit shall also be rendered
against the surety on the bond. Such bond shall be approved by the Director of Finance and
shall be effective during the existence of the license.
(d) Holding period, conditions and return of deposit. If a cash deposit is made
under this section, it shall be held for the term of the license and for ninety (90) days
thereafter and such deposit shall be for the use and benefit of all the citizens of the city and
shall be liable for the satisfaction of any and all claims established against the applicant by a
court of competent jurisdiction for false representations, fraud, breach of warranty or
breach of guaranty in the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or services under such license
in favor of any citizen of the city. If the Director of Finance is not notified of a pending suit
against the applicant before the expiration of ninety (90) days after the termination of the
license, he shall return the deposit to the applicant. If the Director of Finance is notified of
the pendency of such a suit before the expiration of ninety (90) days after the termination
of the license, he shall hold an amount equal to the amount sued for out of such deposit
until final judgment is rendered therein, returning his balance, if any on hand, to the
applicant.
(e) Issuance, contents, effect, term and display. Upon the making of the deposit or
the filing of the bond and the fulfillment of the other requirements of this article, the
Superintendent of Construction and Safety Services shall issue to the applicant the license
to place, paste or paint street address numbers as set forth in his application, to be effective
for a period of one year from the date of issuance. The license shall have the photograph of
the applicant attached and shall bear the name and other identifying data of the applicant
upon the face of the license. The license shall be nontransferable and nonassignable and
may be used only by the person to whom it is issued. The holder of the license shall show
his license to any prospective customer when requested to do so.
Only one license shall be issued to each applicant, but in the event the applicant is a
corporation, firm or partnership, which will employ more than one person to work under
such license, the Superintendent of Construction Safety and Services will issue to each such
employee who meets the requirements of this article, and who is approved by the license
board, a separate permit, which shall be known as an employee's license, which shall state
that it is issued under the license theretofore granted to the employer, giving the name of
the employer, and the number of the employer's license. Such employee's license shall bear
the photograph of the employee and shall contain his name and other identifying data, and it
shall be nontransferable and nonassignable and may not be used by any person except the
employee to whom it was issued, and he shall exhibit it to any prospective customer, when
requested to do so.
Only one license shall be issued to each applicant, but in the event the applicant is a
corporation, firm or partnership, which will employ more than one person to work under
such license, the Superintendent of Construction Safety and Services will issue to each such
employee who meets the requirements of this article, and who is approved by the license
board, a separate permit, which shall be known as an employee's license, which shall state
that it is issued under the license theretofore granted to the employer, giving the name of
the employer, and the number of the employer's license. Such employee's license shall bear
the photograph of the employee and shall contain his name and other identifying data, and it
shall be nontransferable and nonassignable and may not be used by any person except the
employee to whom it was issued, and he shall exhibit it to any prospective customer, when
requested to do so.
(f) Renewals. The Superintendent of Construction Safety and Services shall be
authorized to renew licenses issued under this article for a successive period of one year
each, upon the payment by the applicant of the renewal fee of fifty dollars ($50.00)
together with the employee's fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each employee of the firm,
corporation, partnership, or association, and upon the furnishing of the information to him
required by this article in the case of an original application, and the furnishing of the bond
or cash deposit in the same manner required for the original license.
(g) Appeals from decisions of Superintendent of Construction Safety and
Services. If the applicant for a license under this article is dissatisfied with any holding or
finding concerning his application, he shall have the right to appeal to the City Council by
filing a written notice of such appeal with the Superintendent of Construction Safety and
Services within ten (10) days after the applicant receives notice of the decision. Upon the
filing of such notice of appeal, the Superintendent of Construction Safety and Services shall
notify the City Council that the same has been filed and shall immediately forward the
application and all papers and data connected with the application to the City Council, and
shall provide a copy of all said materials to the applicant. The City Council shall hear such
appeal at its next regular meeting held after the filing of the notice of appeal. The City
Council shall have the same power as an authority at the hearing of such appeal as is vested
in the Superintendent of Construction Safety and Services with respect to the granting or
refusal of the license. The decision of the City Council shall be final, subject only to the
right of the applicant in the case of a denial by the Council to appeal to a court of competent
jurisdiction, provided said appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days of the date that the City
Council renders its final decision.
(h) Records to be kept. The Superintendent of Construction Safety and Services
shall maintain a file and record of all applications for licenses under this article and
evidence submitted in support thereof by each applicant, and shall maintain a record of all
such licenses issued.
Sec. 32-130. Penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, paste or paint any words, letters,
numbers, symbols, pictures, graffiti or other marks on any sidewalk, curb, gutter, street or
other public structure, without first obtaining a license as required by this article or to fail
to comply with the requirements of this article.
APPENDIX TO CHAPTER 32
Exhibit A. Drive Approach Standards
Exhibit B. Dirve Approaches (construction standards)
Exhibits C and D. Typical Access Layout
EXHIBIT A. DRIVE APPROACH STANDARDS
Sec. 1. Applicability.
These drive approach standards, adopted in conjunction with Ordinance Number
[1819], shall serve as an advisory guide in the determination of drive approaches in the City
of Temple. These standards address factors including curb cut placement, width, angle,
number of approaches per tract and other elements as appropriate to provide adequate and
safe access between private property and the public street system in the city.
Sec. 2. Residential drive approaches.
(a) A new residential drive approach, as defined above, is prohibited on arterial
streets, unless:
(1) The lot is oriented in a fronting condition to an arterial street on a final
subdivision plat approached prior to the adoption of this ordinance; or
(2) A variance is approved which allows lots fronting an arterial street on a
final subdivision plat approved by the planning commission and city
commission. In this case, the administrator shall review and approve drive
approach location in order to minimize conflicts on the arterial street.
(b) Joint access curb cuts are encouraged where lots are less than fifty (50) feet in
width.
(c) A residential curb cut shall observe a minimum corner clearance of fifteen (15)
feet.
(d) The minimum radius for a residential curb cut shall be two and one-half (2 ½)
feet .
(e) Where a circle residential curb cut is proposed for a corner tract, both curb
cuts must meet the minimum fifteen-foot corner clearance as defined herein.
(f) Exhibit B is provided for reference purposes.
Sec. 3. Commercial drive approaches.
(a) a commercial drive approach shall conform to the standards identified in Table
1.
TEMPLE CODE
Sec. 3
TABLE 1. COMMERCIAL DRIVE APPROACH STANDARDS
(See Exhibits C and D)
A B C D E
Property
Frontage
(feet)
Curb Return
Radii
Minimum
Maximum
(feet) (feet)
Island
Width
Suggeste
d
Minimum
(feet)
Corner
Clearance
Minimum
(feet)
Two-Way
Curb Cut
Width
Minimum
Maximum
(feet) (feet)
Maximum
Number of
Two-Way
Curb
Cuts Per
Frontage
Up to
100
2.5 30 10 15 24 45 2
101-200 2.5 30 15 15 24 45 3
201-300 2.5 30 20 20 24 45 4
301-400 2.5 30 25 20 24 45 5
401-500 2.5 30 30 20 24 45 6
501-600 2.5 30 35 20 24 45 7
601 and up: The planning g commission will review and approve curb cuts for
commercial tract sizes in excess of six hundred (600) feet.
(b) Maximum drive approach widths and maximum number of drive approaches
shall be used only where the frontage is sufficient to achieve minimum corner clearance, curb
return radii, and suggested minimum island width. In no instance may the amount of curb cut
exceed fifty (50) percent of the lot frontage.
(c) One-way access curb cuts are permitted, but may not be less than fifteen (15)
feet in width. The combination of one-way curb cut widths shall not exceed the maximum
width for a two-way curb cut based on lot frontage.
(d) A minimum edge clearance of five (5) feet shall be provided, unless a joint
access drive approach is provided.
(e) Joint access curb cuts are encouraged for tracts with frontage widths less than
one hundred (100) feet in conjunction with curb cut permit review.
Sec. 4. Industrial drive approaches.
(a) An industrial drive approach shall conform to the standards identified in Table
2.
TABLE 2. INDUSTRIAL DRIVE APPROACH STANDARDS
(See Exhibits C and D)
A B C D E
Property
Frontage
(feet)
Curb Return
Radii
Minimum
Maximum
(feet) (feet)
Island
Width
Suggeste
d
Minimum
(feet)
Corner
Clearance
Minimum
(feet)
Two-Way
Curb Cut
Width
Minimum
Maximum
(feet) (feet)
Maximum
Number of
Two-Way
Curb
Cuts Per
Frontage
Up to 200 15 50 15 15 35 50 3
201-400 15 50 20 15 35 50 5
401-600 15 50 25 15 35 50 7
601-800 15 30 30 15 35 50 9
801-
1,000
15 30 35 15 35 50 11
1,001 and up: The planning commission will review and approve curb cuts for
industrial tract sizes in excess of 1,000 feet.
(b) Maximum drive approach widths and maximum number of drive approaches
shall be used only where the frontage is sufficient to achieve minimum corner clearance, curb
return radii, and suggested minimum island width.
(c) One-way access curb cuts are permitted, but may not be less than twenty-five
(25) feet. The combination of one-way curb cut widths shall not exceed the maximum width
for a two-way curb cut based on lot frontage.
Sec. 5 Drive approaches; special considerations.
(a) A tract with curb cuts existing at the time of the adoption of these standards
which does not conform to these regulations is not to conform. If a change in curb cuts or an
additional curb cut is proposed which would result in an additional conflict with these
regulations, the planning commission shall determine the appropriateness of the request.
(b) Property frontage shall determine the maximum number of drive approaches
allowed under this ordinance, as shown in Tables 1 and 2. Platting or replatting that reduces
the frontage will make the resulting tract subject to the standards in Tables 1 and 2.
(c) In conjunction with curb cuts approved under these standards, medians,
signage, striping, or other traffic control devices may be required to be installed at the time of
permit approval or at some time in the future as needed for public safety and/ or welfare.
(d) Commercial and Industrial drive approaches may provide an angle of between
forty-five (45) and ninety (90) degrees from two-way roadways. One-way egress or ingress
drive approaches may be reduced to an angle of thirty (30) degrees.
(e) Where access to properties is desired at more frequent intervals than
permitted by these standards, service roads or acceleration/ deceleration lanes may be
installed by the property owner after review and approval of plans by the appropriate
authorities, including the State Department of Highways and Public Transportation where it
has jurisdiction, and then by the planning commission.


Chapter 33
SUBDIVISIONS
Repealed by Ordinance No. 2010-4413,
Adopted December 16, 2010
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE
ARTICLE VI. DEVELOPMENT ON LOOP 363
Sec. 33-120. Definitions.
Sec. 33-141. Provision of loop and frontage road right-of-way.
Sec. 33-142. Access standards.
Sec. 33-143. Standards and specifications.
Sec. 33-144. Administrative procedures.
EXHIBITS
Exhibit E: Addressing/ Street Numbering Handbook
Chapter 34
SWIMMING POOLS
Sec. 34-1. Adoption of Standard Swimming Pool Code.
Sec. 34-2. Additional provisions.
Chapter 34
SWIMMING POOLS
Sec. 34-1. Adoption of Standard Swimming Pool Code.
The City of Temple, Texas, hereby adopts as Chapter 34 of the City Code, entitled,
"Swimming Pools," as part of its building regulations, the Standard Swimming Pool C ode,
1985 Edition, of the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., as it now exists
and as it may be revised from time to time, save and except Sections 105.1.4, 105.6, 106.1,
107.1, 304.1, 308.2, 309 and 315. Additions to the Standard Swimming Pool Code,
Southern Building Code International, Inc., 1985 Edition, shall be incorporated in the
Code, including Sections 105.3.7, 304.1.1, 304.1.2, 304.1.3, 308.2.1, 308.2.2 and 318.
Sec. 34-2. Additional provisions.
The following be, and hereby are, adopted as Sections 105.1.4, 105.3.7, 105.6,
106.1, 304.1, 304.1.1, 304.1.2, 304.1.3, 308.2, 308.2.1, 308.2.2, 309, 315 and 318 to be
used in conjunction with the Standard Swimming Pool Code, Southern Building Code
Congress International, Inc., 1985 Edition, as adopted hereinabove, as it applies within the
City of Temple, Texas:
(a) 105.1.4. No person shall permit any other person to do or cause or permit to be
done any swimming pool work under any permit secured by such persons.
(b) 105.3.7. No portion of a swimming pool outside a building shall be located at a
distance of less than five (5) feet from any side or rear property line, measured from the
property line to the outside wall of the pool. Pumps, filters and pool water disinfection
equipment installations shall be located in conformity with the zoning regulations
controlling accessory buildings.
(c) 105.6. Schedule of fees. For each swimming pool:
Public ................................................................................................................... $40.00
Private .................................................................................................................... 25.00
Electrical and plumbing fees will be in accordance with ordinances implemented by
the building official.
(d) 106.1. Inspection required. All swimming pool installations or alterations,
including equipment, piping and appliances, shall be subject to inspection by the
administrative authority to ensure compliance with all the requirements of this code.
(e) 304.1. Materials. Swimming pool walls and floors shall be constructed of any
impervious material which will provide a tight tank with white or light-colored finish and
easily cleaned surfaces. The floor or bottom surfaces of the pool shall have a nonslip finish
as smooth as possible.
304.1.1. Underground swimming pools shall be designed to withstand pressure from
without the pool of two thousand two hundred (2,200) pounds per square foot.
304.1.2. The pool wall may be vertical for thirty (30) inches from the water level,
below which the wall may be curved to the bottom with a radius at any point equal to the
difference between the depth at that point and thirty (30) inches.
304.1.3. All swimming pools shall be of the recirculation type in which circulation
of the water is maintained through the pool by pumps; the water drawn from the pool being
clarified and disinfected before returned to the pool.
(f) 308.2. Disposal:
308.2.1. Swimming pool water may be disposed of through either the public sanitary
sewer or the storm drain system, provided a storm drain is located within five hundred
(500) feet of the pool and no point of water collection is located at any point along the five
hundred (500) feet.
308.2.2. Wastewater (backwash) from a swimming pool shall be disposed of
through a public sanitary sewer. A deep seal trap shall be installed on the lower terminus of
the building drain and the tall piece from the trap shall extend a minimum of three (3)
inches above finished grade and below finished floor grade. This trap need not be vented if
within ten (10) feet of the building drain. The connection between the filter waste discharge
piping and the trap shall be made by means of an indirect connection.
(g) 309. Separation tank. A separation tank of an approved type may be used in lieu
of the aforementioned means of wastewater disposal when connected as a reclamation
system only when swimming pool water is disposed of through the storm drain system.
(h) 315. Enclosure required. All outdoor private swimming pools shall be enclosed
by a fence at least five (5) feet high. All outdoor public swimming pools shall be enclosed
by a fence at least six (6) feet high. All gates shall be equipped with a self-closing and selflatching
device. The fence and gates shall be constructed of weather-resistant material. If
wire is to be used, such wire shall be of a size of at least nine (9) gauge. If the fence is
constructed in the form of a mesh, one side of the mesh shall be not more than six (6)
inches long. Fence posts shall be decay- or weather-resistant and shall be set in concrete
bases. It shall not be necessary to construct a fence if a pool is to be located in an area
already closed by a fence and gates meeting the above requirements.
These provisions shall apply to all swimming pools constructed or installed after the
effective date of this section as provided in the Charter of the City of Temple, Texas;
swimming pools constructed or installed prior to the effective date of this section shall be
governed by the swimming pool fence regulations as they existed at the time of
construction or installation.
(i) 318. Safety equipment. Every swimming pool shall be equipped with one or more
throwing ring buoys (U.S. Coast Guard approved) not more than fifteen (15) inches in
diameter and having sixty (60) feet of three-sixteenths-inch line attached, and one or more
light but strong poles with "shepherd's hook" ends and not less than twelve (12) feet in
length, for making reach assists or rescues.
Chapter 35
TAXATION
Sec. 35-1. Seal of tax receiver's office.
Sec. 35-2. Adoption of state law relative to adjustment of assessments.
Sec. 35-3. Occupation taxes.
Sec. 35-4. Sales and use tax-Adoption.
Sec. 35-5. Same-Continuance.
Sec. 35-6. Homestead exemption-Granted; additional exemption.
Sec. 35-7. Same-Proof of eligibility.
Sec. 35-8. Hotel occupancy tax-Definitions.
Sec. 35-9. Hotel Occupancy Tax—Levy, Rate, Exceptions.
Sec. 35-10. Collection; reimbursement fee.
Sec. 35-11. Reports; payment of occupancy tax.
Sec. 35-12. Rules and regulations.
Sec. 35-13. Use of proceeds from hotel occupancy tax.
Sec. 35-14. Special fund.
Sec. 35-15. Penalties for violation of sections 35-8 through 35-14.
Sec. 35-16. Additional legal remedies.
Sec. 35-17. Additional penalty on delinquent ad valorem taxes.
Sec. 35-18. Taxation of telecommunications services.
Section 35-19. Taxation of Tangible Personal Property in Transit.
Chapter 35
TAXATION
Sec. 35-1. Seal of tax receiver's office.
The seal of the tax receiver's office in the city shall be the coat of arms of the State of
Texas in a circle, with the words, "Collector of Taxes, City of Temple," engraved around the
margin thereof and with the letters "T-E-X-A-S" engraved between the five (5) points of the
coat of arms and inside of the engraving on the margin.
Sec. 35-2. Adoption of state law relative to adjustment of assessments.
House Bill No. 456, adopted by the 46th Legislature of the State of Texas at its regular
session, amending Article 7345 of the Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas of 1925, as
amended, by adding thereto another section to be known as 7345d, is hereby adopted and
made applicable to the city, provided that nothing herein shall be construed as authorizing the
board of appraisement and equalization or the board of commissioners to remit any penalty,
interest or costs that have accrued, but all such penalties, interest and costs shall be collected
on the adjusted assessment of any and all property as is or may be authorized by existing law
and/or ordinances. The board of appraisement and equalization shall perform the functions
conferred in said House Bill on the commissioners court of a county.
Sec. 35-3. Occupation taxes.
There shall be and is hereby levied, and there shall be collected from every person
pursuing any occupation now or hereafter taxed by the general laws of the state, and which
occupation is permitted to be taxed by cities, an annual occupation tax equal in each instance
to one-half (2) of the state occupation tax, which taxes shall be paid annually in advance,
except where otherwise provided by the state law, in which event the same may be paid as is
provided by the state law. Such occupation taxes shall be payable to and collectible by the
controller of the city.
Sec. 35-4. Sales and use tax-Adoption.
(a) There came on to be considered the returns of an election held on the fifth day of
December, 1967, upon the question of the adoption of a local sales and use tax for the benefit
of said city in accordance with the provisions of House Bill No. 207, 60th Legislature,
Regular Session, 1967, and it appearing that said election was in all respects legally held and
that said returns were duly and legally made and that there were cast at said election
seventeen hundred eighty-two (1,782) votes, of which number fifteen hundred forty-four
(1,544) votes were cast "FOR adoption of a one percent local sales and use tax within the
City," and two hundred thirty-eight (238) votes were cast "AGAINST adoption of a one
percent local sales and use tax within the City," and said question or proposition having been
approved by fifteen hundred forty-four (1,544) votes.
(b) The majority of the qualified voters having voted for the adoption of said local
sales and use tax, the said tax is hereby imposed in said city and shall become effective as
provided in said House Bill 207, and the city secretary is hereby instructed to forward to the
comptroller of public accounts, State Capitol, Austin, Texas, by registered or certified mail a
certified copy of this chapter and a map of this city clearly showing the boundaries thereof.
Sec. 35-5. Same-Continuance.
(a) The tax heretofore imposed by the city pursuant to the provisions of the Local
Sales and Use Tax Act is hereby continued on the sale, production, distribution, lease or
rental of and the use, storage of other consumption of gas and electricity for residential use.
(b) The sale, production, distribution, lease or rental of and the use, storage or other
consumption of gas and electricity for residential use shall not be exempt from the tax
imposed by the city under the Local Sales and Use Tax Act.
(c) The city secretary is hereby directed to transmit, on or before April 1, 1979, a
certified copy of this section by registered or certified mail to the comptroller of public
accounts of the State of Texas.
Sec. 35-6. Homestead exemption-Granted; additional exemption.
(a) Terms defined. The term residence homestead, and other terms used herein, shall
be defined and have the same meanings given to those terms as in Section 11.13 of the
Property Tax Code of the State of Texas, V.A.T.C.S.
(b) Exemption established. There is hereby established for adult residence homestead
owners who are sixty-five (65) or older a ten thousand dollar ($10,000.00) exemption from
ad valorem taxation of the appraised value of the residence homestead of an adult residence
homestead owner who is sixty-five (65) or older to be effective starting in the tax year 1984
in accordance with the requirements of Article 11.13 of the Property Tax Code.
(c) Additional exception. In addition to the above exemption, there is hereby
established and adopted an exemption from ad valorem taxation in the amount of twenty (20)
percent of the appraised value of the residence homestead of any residence homestead owner
within the City of Temple to be effective starting in the tax year 1984; provided, however, in
no event shall this exemption amount to less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) of the
appraised value in any tax year when applied to a particular residence homestead in
accordance with subsection N of Section 11.13 of the Property Tax Code.
Sec. 35-7. Same-Proof of eligibility.
In order to secure the benefit of the exemption, the owner shall, between January 1st
and April 30th of each year, file with the city tax assessor collector, a sworn inventory of
such property owned on January 1st of each year for which the exemption is claimed, and
shall initially furnish proof of age by a sworn affidavit stating the age of such claimant on the
1st day of January of the year such exemption is initially claimed and a statement setting
forth the family relationship for which said residential homestead exemption is claimed. The
tax assessor-collector may provide such forms and require such other information needed for
the implementation of claiming the above exemption by said claimants, including, but not
limited to, further proof of age of claimant.
Sec. 35-8. Hotel occupancy tax-Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases are for the purposes of section 35-8 through 35-15,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, defined as follows:
(a) Hotel shall mean any building, buildings or parts thereof in which the public may,
for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels,
tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, mobile homes, inns, rooming houses, trailer
houses, trailer motels, railroad Pullman cars parked on a siding, apartments not occupied by
"permanent residents," as that term is hereinafter defined, and all other buildings where
rooms or sleeping facilities are furnished for a consideration, but "hotel" shall not be defined
so as to include hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes.
(b) Consideration shall mean the cost of the room or other facility in such hotel only if
the room or other facilities are ordinarily used for sleeping. This term shall not include the
cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of the room not related
to the cleaning and readying of the room for occupancy.
(c) Occupancy shall mean the use or possession, or the right to use or possession, of
any room in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant's use,
possession, or right to use or possession extends for a period less then thirty (30) days.
(d) Occupant shall mean anyone, who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a
right to use or possess any room or rooms of facilities in a hotel under any lease, concession,
permit, right or access, license, contract, or agreement if the room or facility is ordinarily
used for sleeping.
(e) Person shall mean any individual, company, partnership, corporation, association,
or other entity owning, operating, managing, or controlling any hotel.
(f) Calendar quarter shall mean a period of three (3) consecutive months of the year.
(g) Permanent resident shall mean any occupant who has or shall have the right to
occupancy of any room or rooms or sleeping space or facility in hotel for at least thirty (30)
consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year.
(h) City tax assessor-collector shall mean the tax assessor and collector for the City of
Temple.
Any other terms or phrases used herein shall be defined and construed in accordance
with the definitions and usages given those terms and phrases under Article 1269j-4.1, Texas
Annotated Civil Statutes.
Sec. 35-9. Hotel Occupancy Tax—Levy, Rate, Exceptions.
(a) There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any room or space
furnished by any hotel, where the cost of occupancy is at a rate of two dollars ($2.00) or
more per day. The tax is hereby set and established at seven (7) percent of the consideration
paid by the occupancy of such room, space or facility to such hotel, exclusion of other
occupancy taxes imposed by other governmental agencies.
(b) No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident of a hotel.
(c) No tax shall be imposed on employees of the United States government, including
military personnel, traveling on official business.
(Section 35-9 amended by Ordinance No. 2009-4324, 11-05-09)
Sec. 35-10. Collection; reimbursement fee.
(a) Every person owning, operating, managing, or controlling any hotel shall collect
the tax imposed in section 35-9 hereof for the City of Temple, except that any such person
shall withhold from the payment to the city, as reimbursement for the cost of collecting the
tax, an amount not to exceed one percent of the amount of tax collected and required to be
reported herein. Such reimbursement shall be automatically forfeited upon the failure to pay
the tax or to file reports as required by section 35-11.
(b) The one percent reimbursement fee as provided herein shall become effective only
on those amounts due and payable after the effective date of this chapter.
Sec. 35-11. Reports; payment of occupancy tax.
(a) A person required to collect the tax imposed by this chapter shall pay the tax
collected during the preceding reporting period and at the same time shall file with the
Director of Finance a report stating:
(1) the total amount of the payments made for rooms at the person's
hotel during the preceding reporting period;
(2) the amount of the tax collected by the person during the preceding
reporting period; and
(3) other information that the Director of Finance requires to be in the
report.
(b) Each calendar month is a reporting period and the taxes imposed by and collected
under this chapter are due and payable to the Director of Finance on or before the 20th day of
the month following the end of each calendar month.
Sec. 35-12. Rules and regulations.
The City Manager of the City of Temple shall have the power to make such rules and
regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax levied herein, and shall upon
reasonable notice have access to all books and records necessary to enable him to determine
the correctness of any report filed as required by section 35-11 and the amount of taxes due
under the provisions of section 35-9. Provided, however, that no rules and regulations
hereunder shall be inconsistent with this chapter or inconsistent with the provisions of Article
1269j-4.1 of Vernon's Annotated Texas Civil Statutes.
Sec.35-13. Use of proceeds from hotel occupancy tax.
The revenue derived from the occupancy tax levied hereunder may only be used for:
(1) The acquisition of sites for the construction, improvement, enlarging,
equipping, repairing, operation and maintenance of convention center facilities
including, but not limited to, civil center convention buildings, auditoriums,
coliseums, civic theaters, museums, and parking areas or facilities for the
parking or storage of motor vehicles or other conveyances located at or in the
immediate vicinity of the convention center facilities;
(2) The furnishing of facilities, personnel and materials for the registration of
convention delegates or registrants;
(3) The advertising for general promotional and tourist advertising of the city and
its vicinity, and conducting a solicitation and operating program to attract
conventions and visitors either by the city or through contracts with persons or
organizations selected by the city;
(4) For the payment of bonds which the city may issue for the construction,
improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operation, and maintenance of
convention facilities including; but not limited to: civic center convention
buildings, auditoriums, coliseums, civic theaters, museums, and parking areas
of facilities for the parking or storage of motor vehicles or other conveyances
located at or in the immediate vicinity of the convention center facilities.
Sec. 35-14. Special fund.
All proceeds from the hotel occupancy tax hereby levied shall be held and set aside in
a special fund to be used exclusively for the expansion, promotion, retirement and service of
debt, operation, advertisement, repair, maintenance, acquisition of necessary capital
improvements and equipping of the Frank W. Mayborn Civic and Convention Center of the
City of Temple, Texas; or any similar civic and convention center facility which may
hereafter be constructed in accordance with the purposes set forth in section 35-13 herein.
To the extent that said tax revenues are not expended for operational, capital or debt service
in the year received, they shall be accrued as reserves and thereafter expended solely for the
purposes herein provided. Provided, however, that the placing of any said funds in a
"treasury fund" established by the controller of the City of Temple, so long as accounting
procedures established by the city controller maintain a separate account for these proceeds
and assure that the funds will not be dispersed for any purposes not set forth in this chapter,
shall not be considered a violation of this section.
Sec. 35-15. Penalties for violation of sections 35-8 through 35-14.
(a) If any person required by the provisions of sections 35-8 through 35-13 to collect
the tax imposed herein, or make reports as required herein, shall fail to collect such tax, file
such report, or pay such tax, or if any such person shall file a false report or commit any other
violations of this section, such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), and shall pay
to the city the tax due for each thirty (30) days that the same is not timely filed.
(b) If any person shall fail to file a report as required herein or shall fail to pay to the
city tax assessor-collector the tax as imposed herein when said report or payment is due, he
shall forfeit five (5) percent of the amount due as a penalty, and after the first thirty (30) days
he shall forfeit an additional five (5) percent of such tax as an additional penalty and not as
interest. Provided, however, that the penalty shall never be less than one dollar ($1.00).
Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of six (6) percent per annum beginning sixty
(60) days from the date due. Provided, however, no penalty or interest charged hereunder
shall ever be in excess of the amount of penalty or interest allowed by law.
(c) The tax assessed, together with any penalties provided by statute, shall be a prior
and superior lien on all property of the hotel.
Sec. 35-16. Additional legal remedies.
(a) The penalties provided for herein shall be cumulative of all other remedies
provided by state law and the power of injunction; as provided by applicable sections of the
Texas Civil Statutes as they may now read or afterwards be amended, may be exercised in
enforcing this chapter whether or not there has been a criminal complaint filed.
(b) The City of Temple hereby retains any and all remedies, both at law and at equity,
which it may have to enforce provisions of this act including the right to bring suit against
any person who is required to collect the tax imposed by section 35-9 or Article 1269j-1.4,
Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes and to pay the collections over to the city and who has
failed to file a report or pay the tax when it is due to enjoin the person from operating a hotel
in the city until the tax is paid or the report is filed or both, as applicable and as provided in
the injunction.
Sec. 35-17. Additional penalty on delinquent ad valorem taxes.
(a) That in addition to penalty and interest incurred on delinquent ad valorem taxes
pursuant to Section 33.01 of the Property Tax Code, there shall be imposed an additional
penalty in the amount of fifteen (15) percent of the delinquent tax, penalty and interest that
remains delinquent on July 1st of the year in which the tax became delinquent in accordance
with Section 33.07 of the Property Tax Code.
(b) That the additional penalty shall be applied only to taxes which become delinquent
during 1987 or subsequent years.
(c) That the additional penalty shall not be imposed unless a notice of delinquency and
of the additional penalty is delivered to the property owner at least thirty (30) and not more
than sixty (60) days before July 1 of the year the tax became delinquent.
(d) That an attorney or law firm that collects delinquent taxes under a contract with the
city shall reimburse the city for use of facilities such as office space, computer terminals and
supplies, telephone use and access to tax files in an amount established in the contract. The
amount of reimbursement may be established as a percentage of the additional collection fee
due the attorney under the contract.
Sec. 35-18. Taxation of telecommunications services.
(a) A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services in consummated at
the location of the telephone or other telecommunications device from which the call or other
communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is
consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed.
(b) The application of the exemption provided for in Article 321.210(a) of the Texas
Tax Code, V.A.T.C.S. is hereby repealed by the City of Temple, Texas, as authorized by
Section 4(b) thereof.
(c) The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the
City of Temple, Texas, for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature
of the State of Texas.
(d) The city secretary shall forward to the comptroller of the State of Texas by United
States registered or certified mail a certified copy of this chapter along with a copy of the
minutes of the City Council's vote and discussion on this section.
(e) This section shall become effective as of November 3, 1988.
Section 35-19. Taxation of Tangible Personal Property in Transit.
(a) Definitions. The following terms have the same meaning as defined in Section 11.253
of the Texas Tax Code, as amended.
(1) The terms “Dealer’s motor vehicle inventory,” “dealer’s vessel and outboard
motor inventory,” “dealer’s heavy equipment inventory,” and “retail
manufactured housing inventory” have the meanings assigned by Subchapter
B, Chapter 23 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended.
(2) The term “Goods-in-transit” is defined to mean tangible personal property that:
a. is acquired in or imported into this state to be forwarded to another location
in this state or outside this state;
b. is detained at a location in this state in which the owner of the property
does not have a direct or indirect ownership interest for assembling,
storing, manufacturing, processing, or fabricating purposes by the person
who acquired or imported the property;
c. is transported to another location in this state or outside this state not later
than 175 days after the date the person acquired the property in or imported
the property into this state; and
d. does not include oil, natural gas, petroleum products, aircraft, dealer’s
motor vehicle inventory, dealer’s vessel and outboard motor inventory,
dealer’s heavy equipment inventory, or retail manufactured housing
inventory.
(3) The term “Location” means a physical address.
(4) The term “Petroleum product” means a liquid or gaseous material that is an
immediate derivative of the refining of oil or natural gas.
(b) A person is not entitled to an exemption from taxation of the appraised value of that
portion of the person’s property that consists of goods-in-transit. A person’s property
consisting of goods-in-transit is hereby subject to ad valorem taxation pursuant to Section
11.253 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended.
(Ordinance No. 2007-4779, 12-06-07)
Chapter 36
Public Transportation
CHAPTER I. IN GENERAL
A. Franchise required.
B. Engaging nonfranchised transportation prohibited.
C. Franchise procedures.
D. Determination of public convenience and necessity.
E. Terms and conditions.
F. Indemnity.
G. Insurance.
H. Drivers to be considered employees.
I. Franchise administrator.
CHAPTER II. TAXICABS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
A. Definitions.
B. Franchise required.
DIVISION 2. VEHICLES
A. Vehicle permits.
B. Inspection.
C. Condition of vehicles.
D. Suspension or revocation of vehicle permit.
DIVISION 3. DRIVERS
A. Responsibility for hiring qualified drivers.
B. Taxicab driver's permit.
C. Suspension or revocation of taxicab driver's permit.
D. Uniforms.
DIVISION 4. FARES
A. Rates.
B. Taximeters.
DIVISION 5. OPERATIONS
A. Smoking prohibited.
B. Transportation of alcoholic beverages.
C. Unlawful use.
D. Return of articles left in taxicabs.
E. Maximum time driver may operate.
F. Cruising prohibited; exception.
G. Soliciting patronage unlawful.
H. Fixed place of business.
I. Taxi stands and call boxes.
J. Daily manifest.
CHAPTER III. HORSE-DRAWN VEHICLES
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
A. Definitions.
B. Franchise required.
DIVISION 2. VEHICLES
A. Vehicle permits.
B. Carriages.
C. Suspension or revocation of vehicle permit.
DIVISION 3. DRIVERS
A. Drivers.
DIVISION 4. FARES
A. Rates.
DIVISION 5. OPERATIONS
A. Route limitations.
B. Stopping, standing and parking.
C. Diapering apparatus required.
D. Treatment of animals.
Chapter 36
Public Transportation
CHAPTER I. IN GENERAL
A. Franchise required.
No public transportation service for which a franchise is required under this Chapter
or the City Charter shall be operated on public streets in the City of Temple without first
obtaining a franchise from the city council, which is in full force and effect.
B. Engaging nonfranchised transportation prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to engage any public transportation
which is operated in the same or similar manner employed by a franchise holder, unless such
transportation is a duly authorized operation under franchise from the city.
C. Franchise procedures.
An ordinance granting a franchise for public transportation service is subject to the
provisions of Article 10 of the City Charter, in addition to the provisions of this chapter.
D. Determination of public convenience and necessity.
No franchise shall be granted by the city council to any person for the operation of any
public transportation service until the council shall have first determined that the public
convenience and necessity require the service for which the application is being made. In
determining whether public convenience and necessity require the granting of such franchise,
the city council shall take into consideration whether the demands for public convenience and
necessity require such proposed or such additional service within the city; the financial and
moral responsibility and character of the applicant; the number, kind, type and ownership of
equipment, and the color scheme to be used by the applicant; the increased traffic congestion
of the streets of the city which may result, and whether the safe use of the public streets of
the city by the public both vehicular and pedestrian, will be unduly endangered by the
granting of such additional franchise; and such other relevant facts as the city council may
deem advisable or necessary.
E. Terms and conditions.
A franchise granted under this Chapter shall be for such period of time and upon such
terms and conditions as the city council may specify.
F. Indemnity.
Every holder of a franchise for public transportation service shall agree and be bound
to hold the city whole and harmless against any and all claims for damages, costs, and
expenses, to persons or property that may arise out of or be occasioned by the operation of
the franchise, or from any act or omission of any representative, agent, customer, or
employee of the franchise holder, and such indemnity provision shall also cover any personal
injury or damage suffered to city property, city employees, agents or officers. The franchisee
shall agree and be bound to defend any and all suits, claims, or causes of action brought
against the city on account of same, and discharge any judgment or judgments that may be
rendered against the city in connection with the operation of the franchise.
G. Insurance.
(1) Insurance required. A franchisee shall, at its own expense, purchase, maintain and
keep in force for the duration of a public transportation franchise, public liability insurance in
the following amounts:
Commercial general liabilityC$250,000 for each person and $300,000 for each
single occurrence for bodily injury or death and $100,000 for each single
occurrence for injury to or destruction of property or $300,000 combined
single limit.
Automobile liability-$20,000 for each person and $40,000 for each single
occurrence for bodily injury or death and $15,000 for each single occurrence
for injury to or destruction of property.
A franchisee shall not commence operations under a franchisee until it has obtained all the
insurance required for the franchise and such insurance has been approved by the city
attorney. All insurance policies provided under the franchise shall be written on an
"occurrence" basis and cover every vehicle operated under the franchise.
(2) Additional insured; waiver of subrogation. The city shall be named as an
additional insured on the commercial general liability policy. The insurance policy shall
contain the appropriate additional insured endorsement signed by a person authorized by that
insurer to bind coverage on its behalf, and provide a waiver of subrogation in favor of the
city.
(3) Notice of cancellation. Each insurance policy required by this section shall be
endorsed to state that coverage shall not be suspended, voided, canceled, reduced in coverage
or in limits, except after thirty (30) days prior written notice has been provided to the city.
(4) Authorized carriers. Insurance is to be placed with insurers with a Best's rating of
no less than A:VII. The company must also be duly authorized to transact business in the
State of Texas.
(5) In the event that any insurance policy is canceled upon the request of the surety or
insurer, and no insurance policy is filed by the franchise holder before the cancellation the
franchise to operate taxicabs granted to such person shall be automatically revoked.
H. Drivers to be considered employees.
Every person who operates a vehicle subject to provisions of this Chapter shall be
regarded as the employee, agent or representative of the holder of the franchise, regardless of
whether the franchise holder owns, leases, contracts for or otherwise legally controls the
vehicle operated in the service of the franchise holder.
I. Franchise administrator.
Transportation franchises shall be administered by the city manager or his designee.
CHAPTER II. TAXICABS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
A. Definitions.
(1) Cruising means any movement of unoccupied taxicabs over the streets of the city
except in the following instances:
(a) Unoccupied taxicabs proceeding to answer a request for taxicab service
by prospective passengers.
(b) Unoccupied taxicabs returning by the most direct route to the location
where such taxicab is customarily kept or to the taxi stand of the
operator of the taxicab nearest to the place of discharge of its last
passenger.
(c) Unoccupied taxicabs moving over public streets by the most direct
route to a garage or other place for automotive repairs or for the
purpose of being repaired or stored.
(2) Driver or taxicab driver means the person actually driving the taxicab.
(3) Franchise holder or franchisee means any person holding a taxicab franchise in
the city from the city council.
(4) Manifest means a daily record prepared by a taxicab driver of all trips made by
such driver showing time and place of origin, destination, number of passengers and the
amount of fare for passengers.
(5) Motor vehicle means every motor propelled vehicle used for the transportation of
persons over the public streets of the city.
(6) Operate a taxicab means the driving of a vehicle so marked as to indicate that it is
a taxicab on any street of the city, and shall also be construed to mean the driving of any
vehicle containing a passenger over any street of the city for any monetary fare unless such
vehicle is being operated pursuant to a:
(a) franchise issued by the city for public transportation or ambulance
service;
(b) permit issued by the Texas Railroad Commission ; or
(c) permission duly granted by the city council.
Public transportation service that is offered without a separate charge in conjunction with
provision of a service other than transportation shall not be considered operating a taxicab.
(7) Operator means the person to whom a franchise has been granted and under which
franchise the particular taxicab is being operated.
(8) Street means any street, alley, avenue, lane, public place or highway within the
city.
(9) Taxicab means each private passenger vehicle, regardless of how it is propelled,
that provides passenger taxicab transportation services for compensation, is designed for
carrying no more than eight (8) passengers, and is operated:
(a) within the jurisdiction of the city;
(b) on property owned by the municipality, singly or jointly with one or
more other municipalities or public agencies;
(c) on property in which the municipality possesses an ownership interest;
or
(d) by transporting from the municipality, municipal property, or property
in which the municipality has an interest and returning to it.
(10) Waiting time means all time when a taxicab is not in motion, occupied by a
passenger and the time consumed while standing at the direction of the passenger or person
who has engaged the taxicab.
B. Franchise required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab or cause a taxicab to be
operated within the city without first having obtained, and having then in force, a taxicab
franchise as provided by this chapter.
DIVISION 2. VEHICLES
A. Vehicle permits.
(1) Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or cause to be
driven or operated, any taxicab upon or over any public street in the city unless the operator
shall first have applied for and obtained a vehicle permit for the taxicab.
(2) Fee. A vehicle permit shall be valid for the duration of the calendar year during
which the permit was issued. The fees for vehicle permits shall be established by resolution
of the city council. Vehicle permits are not transferable.
(3) Application. Applications for vehicle permits shall be filed with the franchise
administrator on forms furnished by the administrator. Information required on application
forms shall include the name and address of the operator, vehicle number, Texas license plate
number, vehicle identification number, seating capacity, and such other relevant information
as may be deemed advisable and necessary by the administrator.
(4) Issuance. A vehicle permit shall be issued with three (3) working days from the
administrator's receipt of the permit fee and a complete application showing that the vehicle,
franchise operation and proof of insurance meet all of the requirements of this chapter.
B. Inspection.
Inspections of the records, equipment or vehicles of the franchisee may be conducted
at the discretion of the franchise administrator at any reasonable time, for example, in the
event of an accident or a complaint by a customer.
C. Condition of vehicles.
The operator is responsible for insuring that taxicabs are operated in compliance with
all applicable state and federal laws and maintained in a safe and sanitary condition.
(1) Interior. The interior of each taxicab shall be reasonably free of dirt and rubbish.
The floor covering and upholstery shall be maintained in a reasonably good condition
without rips, tears and places where wear through the covering material has occurred. Seats
shall be secure. Front and rear seats shall be equipped with safety belts, where safety belt
anchorages were part of the manufacturer's original equipment on the vehicle. Safety belts
shall be accessible to all passengers transported for hire. Each taxicab shall be equipped with
two-way radio communication equipment capable of transmitting and receiving voice
communication between the taxicab and the dispatching office of the operator. All required
equipment shall be maintained in good working order.
(2) Exterior. No functional part of the body of a vehicle shall be missing or have
major damage. The exterior paint of each taxicab shall be maintained in reasonably good
condition and shall be repainted once every three (3) years. Every taxicab shall have printed
on each side and the rear of the same the name of the owner or the assumed name under
which the owner operates, together with the owner's telephone number and the cab number.
Such letters and numbers shall be painted in a color sharply contrasting to the color of the
taxicab, in block print not less than 4 inches in height and 1 inch in stroke. Such paint shall
be either enamel or oil paint that will weather the elements and remain legible at all times the
taxicab is operated. No two taxicab operators shall be permitted to use the same or similar
color combinations.
D. Suspension or revocation of vehicle permit.
(1) Suspension. A vehicle permit may be either suspended or revoked by order of the
city manager, on recommendation of the franchise administrator, for violation of any federal,
state or local law or regulation. An order for immediate suspension of a vehicle permit for up
to thirty (30) days may be issued for safety violations. Taxicabs subject to a suspension order
shall be removed from service. A suspension may be terminated upon proof that the
violations causing suspension have been corrected.
(2) Revocation. Written notice of the proposed revocation of a vehicle permit shall be
mailed to the operator no later than ten (10) days prior to the proposed action. The notice
shall state the effective date of the proposed action, the grounds for the action, and the
procedure for contesting or appealing the action. The notice will be mailed to the address
shown in the franchise ordinance or the most recent change of address filed with the
franchise administrator.
(3) Appeal. An operator may contest the decision of the city manager by filing a
written appeal with the franchise administrator within ten (10) days from receipt of notice of
the decision. An appeal from a decision of the city manager shall be heard by the city council
at the second, regular meeting of the council following receipt of the appeal. The city
council's decision shall be final and may be contested only by filing suit in district court
within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision.
DIVISION 3. DRIVERS
A. Responsibility for hiring qualified drivers.
(1) Standards. The franchise operator is responsible for employing qualified drivers
who are physically, mentally and morally fit and able to operate a motor vehicle for hire. It
shall be the responsibility of the operator to employ drivers who can read and write the
English language, locate streets and addresses in the city, understand and obey traffic laws,
and furnish safe and courteous service to the public. Continued employment by an operator
of drivers who fail to meet the standards and qualifications required by this chapter will be
taken into consideration by the city council when requested to grant or renew any franchise
in the city.
(2) Qualifications. Every applicant for a taxicab driver's permit under this Chapter
must be a resident of Bell County, above the age of eighteen (18) years, and must have
resided within the county for at least six (6) months immediately preceding the date of the
application, provided that any period during which such person may have been outside the
country because of service in any branch of the armed services of the United States shall not
be taken into account in calculating the residence of such person. No person shall be eligible
for a taxicab driver's permit who, within five (5) years preceding the date of the application,
has been finally convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the following
offenses:
(a) Prostitution or related offenses,
(b) Driving while intoxicated,
(c) Driving while under the influence of drugs,
(d) Violation of state or federal laws governing controlled substances.
B. Taxicab driver's permit.
(1) Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a taxicab in
the city without first having obtained a taxicab driver's permit and a valid Texas Driver's
License for the class of vehicle operated by the driver.
(2) Permit to be displayed. The taxicab driver's permit shall be prominently displayed
at all times in full view of persons in the back seat of the taxicab being driven by the
permittee. Such permit shall have attached to it a picture of the permittee, his name, age and
such other information as may be deemed proper by the franchise administrator.
(3) Permit fee. The fee for a new or reinstated taxicab driver's permit shall be set by
resolution of the city council. The permit fee shall be submitted with the application form for
the new or reinstated permit and will not be refunded should the permit be denied. All taxicab
driver's permits shall expire on December 31 of each year. Applications for renewal must be
filed at least thirty (30) days before expiration to allow time for processing.
(4) Application. A written application for a taxicab driver's permit shall be filed on a
form obtained from the franchise administrator. The completed application form shall contain
or be accompanied by the following information:
(a) A showing of the experience of the applicant in driving motor vehicles,
including public vehicles.
(b) Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of
any federal, state or municipal law and if so, the particulars of each
violation of which applicant may have been convicted.
(c) Applicant's name, street address, age, sex, telephone number and place
of residence for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of
such application.
(d) The name of the taxicab operator for whom such driver proposes to
work.
(e) Two (2) photographs of the applicant taken within the preceding three
(3) months.
(f) Certification by at least three (3) reputable persons personally
acquainted with the applicant, showing the applicant to be a person of
good moral character.
(g) Such other additional information as the franchise administrator , in his
discretion, may prescribe on the application form.
(h) The permit fee.
(5) Investigations. The franchise administrator shall refer all applications for a new or
reinstated taxicab driver's permit to the chief of police for investigation of the applicant's
driving record and criminal history.
(6) Denial. Upon recommendation of the franchise administrator, the city manager
may deny a taxicab driver's permit to an applicant on the grounds that the applicant lacks any
of the qualifications for the permit. The procedures governing denial of a new or reinstated
permit shall be the same as provided in this Chapter for suspension or revocation of a taxicab
driver's permit.
(7) Appeal. An applicant may contest denial of a taxicab driver's permit by filing a
written appeal with the franchise administrator within ten (10) days from receipt of the notice
of denial. The appeal shall be heard by the city council at the second, regular meeting of the
council following receipt of the appeal. The city council's decision shall be final and may be
challenged only by filing suit in district court within sixty (60) days from receipt of the
council's decision.
C. Suspension or revocation of taxicab driver's permit.
(1) Grounds. A taxicab driver's permit may be either suspended or revoked by order of
the city manager, on recommendation of the franchise administrator, for one or more of the
following grounds:
(a) Suspension, revocation or lapse of the driver's Texas Driver's License;
(b) Final conviction of any offense that disqualifies an applicant from
obtaining a taxicab driver's permit under this Chapter;
(c) Using a taxicab in the perpetration of any criminal offense;
(d) Falsification of any information in the driver's application for a taxicab
driver's permit; or
(e) Negligent or reckless operation of a motor vehicle.
(2) Notice. Written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation of a taxicab
driver's permit shall be mailed to the driver and to the franchise holder that employs the
driver no later than ten (10) days prior to the proposed action. The notice shall state the
effective date of the proposed action, the grounds for the action, and the procedure for
contesting or appealing the action. The driver's notice will be mailed to the address shown on
the driver's most recent permit. The franchise holder's notice will be mailed to the address
shown in the franchise ordinance or the most recent change of address filed with the
franchise administrator.
(3) Appeal. An applicant may contest suspension or revocation of a taxicab driver's
permit by filing a written appeal with the franchise administrator within ten (10) days from
receipt of the notice of denial. The appeal shall be heard by the city council at the second,
regular meeting of the council following receipt of the appeal. The city council's decision
shall be final and may be challenged only by filing suit in district court within sixty (60) days
from receipt of the council's decision.
D. Uniforms.
It shall be the responsibility of every person operating a taxicab service under
franchise with the city to require the drivers to be neat and clean in appearance while on duty.
While on duty, drivers shall wear the uniform prescribed in the operator's franchise
agreement. The uniform shall be distinctive so that a driver may be easily identified as a
person properly authorized to operate a taxicab within the city. It shall be a violation of this
Code for an operator to permit the operation of any taxicab on the streets of the city by a
driver who is not wearing the prescribed uniform.
DIVISION 4. FARES
A. Rates.
(1) Rate review. The rate of fare to be charged by the operator of a taxicab franchise
may be prescribed by resolution of the city council. Notice of a proposed rate increase shall
be filed in writing with the franchise administrator at least ninety (90) days prior to the
effective date of the proposed increase. A proposed rate increase shall be deemed approved if
not acted upon by the city council within ninety (90) days from receipt of the notice.
(2) Rates to be posted. There shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the inside of
each taxicab and on the back of the front seat a card showing the zones and rates charged by
the taxicab.
(3) Receipt for payment. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab, upon
receiving full payment of a fare, to refuse to give a receipt upon the request of any passenger
making such payment.
(4) Refusal of service at specified rate. It shall be unlawful for the operator or driver
of any taxicab to refuse to convey a passenger at the rate specified on the rate card displayed
in such taxicab or to refuse to make a call or to refuse to pick up a passenger coming from
any distant section of the city because of excessive distance required to be traveled in relation
to the amount charged.
(5) Charging unauthorized fare. It shall be unlawful for the operator or driver of any
taxicab to demand or receive any fare in excess of or less than the rates prescribed by the city
council and displayed on the rate card posted in the taxicab.
B. Taximeters.
(1) Required. A taximeter of a size and design approved by the franchise administrator
shall be installed, maintained in working condition, and operated all times when the taxicab
is used to provide services under a franchise. No taxicab shall be operated at any time with a
passenger unless the taximeter on the taxicab is operating correctly. If at any time the
taximeter stops or malfunctions, the driver shall immediately remove the taxicab from service
and not operate the taxicab until the meter is operating correctly.
(2) Information registered. Each taximeter shall mechanically calculate the fare due
for travel time, waiting time or for hire of a taxicab, either for distance traveled or for
waiting, which charge shall be indicated by means of legible figures which are electrically
lighted each time the taximeter flag is thrown from nonearning to earning
position. Taximeters must register, upon visual counters, the following items:
(a) Total miles.
(b) Paid miles.
(c) Number of units.
(d) Number of trips.
(e) Number of extras.
(3) Tampering. Each taximeter must be furnished with a tamperproof switch and
system of electrical distribution so that, when the taximeter flag is in the vacant or
nonearning position, a light on the top of the taxicab will be lighted, and when the meter flag
is thrown to an earning position, the fare indicator on the taximeter will be lighted.
Each taximeter must be driven directly from the taxicab transmission (instead of
merely connecting with the speedometer driving shaft) to the taximeter head itself, using a
flexible shaft and a flexible housing so connected and sealed as to be nontamperable.
(4) Inspection. The franchise administrator shall inspect the taximeter in a taxicab at
the same time he inspects the vehicle, to see that the meter is in good working order and free
of electronic and mechanical defects. The city shall have the right to inspect said taximeter at
any other time it so desires.
(5) Certain changes prohibited. After a taximeter has been duly tested, inspected, and
approved by the franchise administrator, it shall be unlawful to change the size of the wheels
or tires of any taxicab, or the gears operating the taximeter, unless the taximeter is again
tested, inspected and approved before use.
(6) Inaccurate meters. No person shall use or permit to be used upon any taxicab a
taximeter which is in such a condition as to be over five (5) percent incorrect to the prejudice
of any passenger.
(7) Improper display of meter signal. No driver of a taxicab equipped with a
taximeter, while carrying passengers or under employment, shall display the signal affixed to
such taximeter in such a position as to denote such vehicle is not employed, or in such
position as to denote that he is employed at a rate of fare different from that to which he is
entitled under the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the driver to call the
attention of passengers to the amount registered, and the taxicab shall not be changed to the
"vacant" position until after the fare is paid.
DIVISION 5. OPERATIONS
A. Smoking prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, including a driver or a passenger, to smoke
tobacco products in a taxicab while transportation is being provided to a passenger for a fare.
B. Transportation of alcoholic beverages.
It shall be unlawful to transport alcoholic beverages in a taxicab or for any taxicab
driver to have on his person any alcoholic beverage while driving and operating a taxicab in
service. However, alcoholic beverages which are owned and in the exclusive possession and
control of a fare-paying passenger may be transported. It shall be unlawful for any driver or
passenger of any taxicab to have an open bottle of an alcoholic beverage of any kind while
inside the taxicab.
C. Unlawful use.
It shall be unlawful to knowingly permit any taxicab to be used in the perpetration of
a criminal offense.
D. Return of articles left in taxicabs.
It shall be the duty of every taxicab driver to return without delay to the owner,
whenever possible, any luggage, merchandise or other property left in the taxicab. If the
owner is unknown or cannot be located, the driver shall deliver to the operator, immediately
upon the driver's return to the terminal, any property whatsoever left in his taxicab. The
driver shall make a complete report of the circumstances pertaining to the property, including
information which would assist in locating the owner. Unclaimed property shall be
maintained by the operator for a six (6) month period prior to disposal.
E. Maximum time driver may operate.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab to operate the same continuously for
more than twelve (12) hours. No operator shall allow any driver of an taxicab operated under
a franchise with the city shall allow a driver of a taxicab to be on continuous duty, as a
driver, for a greater period than twelve (12) hours.
F. Cruising prohibited; exception.
Cruising, as defined in this chapter, is hereby prohibited; however, upon the
completion of a call or upon returning by the most direct route to the nearest stand of the
company employing a taxicab driver or the regular stand of such driver, such taxi may, if
hailed by a prospective passenger, stop and pick up such passenger.
G. Soliciting patronage unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver to solicit, by word, signal or sign,
passengers upon any public street in the city, or in or near any public place within the city.
H. Fixed place of business.
Each holder of a taxicab franchise granted by the city shall maintain at least one fixed
place of business or location within the city on private property. No taxi business shall be
located at any location if other provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city prohibit
the location of a taxi business at such location.
I. Taxi stands and call boxes.
In addition to its principal fixed place of business, the operator of a taxicab business
may have taxi stands or call boxes at other locations in the city; provided, that such other
locations are first approved by the traffic management administrator and that such use of the
proposed location is not in violation of this Code or other ordinance of the city. [Crossreference
'37-107.]
J. Daily manifest.
Every driver of a taxicab shall maintain a daily manifest upon which is recorded all
trips made each day, showing the time and place of origin and destination of each trip and the
amount of fare, and all such completed manifests shall be returned to the owner of the taxicab
by whom the driver is employed at the conclusion of the driver's tour of duty for the day. It
shall be the duty of the franchise holder to furnish the forms for such manifest record and to
see that such manifest is kept daily by each driver.
CHAPTER III. HORSE-DRAWN VEHICLES
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
A. Definitions.
(1) Horse-drawn vehicle means a vehicle that is pulled by carriage horses, dray horses
or other draft animals and is used for the purpose of conveying passengers for hire or for
advertising or promotion purposes.
(2) Driver or carriage driver means the person actually driving the horse-drawn
vehicle.
(3) Operator means the person to whom a franchise has been granted and under which
franchise the particular horse-drawn vehicle is being operated.
B. Franchise required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a horse-drawn vehicle or cause a horsedrawn
vehicle to be operated within the city without first having obtained, and having then in
force, a taxicab franchise as provided by this chapter.
DIVISION 2. VEHICLES
A. Vehicle permits.
(1) Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or cause to be
driven or operated, any horse-drawn carriage upon or over any public street in the city unless
the operator shall first have applied for and obtained a vehicle permit for such carriage.
(2) Application. Applications for vehicle permits shall be filed with the franchise
administrator on forms furnished by the administrator. Information required on application
forms shall include the name and address of the operator, carriage number, description of the
carriage, seating capacity of the carriage, signature of the operator or an authorized official of
the operator, and such other relevant information as may be deemed advisable and necessary
by the administrator.
(3) Fee. A vehicle permit shall be valid for the duration of the calendar year during
which the permit was issued. The fees for vehicle permits shall be established by resolution
of the city council. Vehicle permits are not transferable.
(4) Issuance. A vehicle permit shall be issued within ten (10) working days from the
administrator's receipt of the permit fee and a complete application showing that the vehicle,
franchise operation and proof of insurance meet all of the requirements of this chapter.
B. Carriages.
(1) Safety and sanitation. Any carriage used in the business of horse-drawn carriages
shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition at all times.
(2) Inspection. The franchise administrator shall have the right, but not the obligation,
to inspect carriages and other equipment prior to issuing a vehicle permit and as often as may
be necessary for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any unsafe or
unsanitary condition or any violations of law.
(3) Blinders. Every horse pulling a horse-drawn carriage must wear blinders during
the time the horse-drawn carriage is in operation.
(4) Harness attachment. The harness attachment shall be such so that the horse cannot
break away from its harness or carriage. The operator shall insure that all carriages shall have
the suspension, pivoting axle, shaves, and tongue and harness trees secured to the carriage
properly with safety measures taken to ensure that any key parts will not accidentally loosen.
(5) Brakes. Each horse-drawn carriage shall be equipped with suitable and efficient
manually operated brakes for such carriage.
(6) Lamps. Each horse-drawn carriage shall be equipped with lamps and illuminating
devices as required by state law. Required lights shall be displayed whenever the horsedrawn
carriage is operated upon a public street or highway at any time from a half hour after
sunset to a half hour before sunrise and at any other time when, due to insufficient light or
unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the highway are not clearly
discernible at a distance of one thousand feet (1,000') ahead.
(7) Slow-moving vehicle emblem. A horse-drawn carriage may not be operated or
drawn upon any public street or highway unless it is equipped with and unless there is
displayed at the rear thereof, a "slow-moving-vehicle emblem," in accordance with state law.
C. Suspension or revocation of vehicle permit.
(1) Suspension. A vehicle permit may be either suspended or revoked by order of the
city manager, on recommendation of the franchise administrator, for violation of any federal,
state or local law or regulation. An order for immediate suspension of a vehicle permit for up
to thirty (30) days may be issued for safety violations. Carriages subject to a suspension order
shall be removed from service. A suspension may be terminated upon proof that the
violations causing suspension have been corrected.
(2) Revocation. Written notice of the proposed revocation of a vehicle permit shall be
mailed to the operator no later than ten (10) days prior to the proposed action. The notice
shall state the effective date of the proposed action, the grounds for the action, and the
procedure for contesting or appealing the action. The notice will be mailed to the address
shown in the franchise ordinance or the most recent change of address filed with the
franchise administrator.
(3) Appeal. An operator may contest the decision of the city manager by filing a
written appeal with the franchise administrator within ten (10) days from receipt of notice of
the decision. An appeal from a decision of the city manager shall be heard by the city council
at the second, regular meeting of the council following receipt of the appeal. The city
council's decision shall be final and may be contested only by filing suit in district court
within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision.
DIVISION 3. DRIVERS
A. Drivers.
(1) Qualifications. All drivers of horse-drawn vehicles shall meet the following,
minimum qualifications:
(a) Be at least 18 years of age;
(b) Have a current Texas Driver's License; and
(c) Be able to operate a horse-drawn carriage in a safe and prudent manner.
(2) Duties. Each driver of a horse-drawn carriage shall, while on duty, do the
following:
(a) Conduct himself or herself in a reasonable and prudent manner;
(b) Obey applicable traffic laws.
(c) Not consume alcoholic beverages or use controlled substances, except
as prescribed by a physician, while operating a horse-drawn carriage;
(d) Not solicit passengers in a loud or annoying tone of voice and not
obstruct the movement of any person or follow any person for the
purpose of soliciting patrons;
(e) Not permit any unauthorized person to operate any horse-drawn
carriage under the driver's control;
(f) Not permit persons to ride on the back of any horse under his control;
(g) Empty diapers of all excrement when half full and at the beginning of
each trip;
(h) Keep all routes and carriage stands clean and free of animal excrement;
(i) Travel at a walk or at a pace not faster than a slow trot, except when
traveling through intersections;
(j) The driver shall not leave any horse-drawn vehicle unattended at any
time, and shall keep the interior of the vehicle clean at all times;
(k) Inspect the vehicle and its equipment at least once daily to determine
that it is mechanically fit and in good working order;
(l) Report all accidents to the operator and to the Police Department
immediately;
(m) Promptly provide a written receipt upon payment of fare at the request
of the passenger;
(n) Search the interior of the carriage at the end of each trip for articles left
or lost in the vehicle and deliver unclaimed articles to operator for
return to owners if possible. Unclaimed articles shall be maintained by
the operator for a six-month period prior to disposal.
(o) Be responsible for the proper and humane care and treatment of the
horses under his or her direct supervision and control;
(p) Have an identification badge or name plate in plain view at all times;
and
(q) Display operator's name, phone number, rates and passenger capacity in
plain view.
DIVISION 4. FARES
A. Rates.
(1) Rate review. The rate of fare to be charged by the operator of a franchise from the
city for the operation of a horse-drawn carriage may be prescribed by resolution of the city
council. Notice of a proposed rate increase shall be filed with the franchise administrator at
least ninety (90) days prior to the effective date of the proposed increase. A proposed rate
increase shall be deemed approved if not acted upon by the city council within ninety (90)
days from receipt of the notice.
(2) Rates to be posted. There shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the carriage a
card showing the zones and rates charged by the operator.
(3) Receipt for payment. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any horse-drawn
carriage, upon receiving full payment of a fare, to refuse to give a receipt upon the request of
any passenger making such payment.
(4) Refusal of service at specified rate. It shall be unlawful for the driver or operator
of any horse-drawn carriage to refuse to convey a passenger at the rate specified on the rate
card displayed on the carriage.
(5) Charging unauthorized fare. It shall be unlawful for the driver or operator of any
horse-drawn carriage to demand or receive any fare in excess of or less than the rates
prescribed by the city council and displayed on the rate card posted on the carriage.
DIVISION 5. OPERATIONS
A. Route limitations.
(1) Fixed routes. Before a horse-drawn carriage may be operated on a fixed route on
any public street within the city, the route must first be approved by the franchise
administrator.
(2) Special events. Horse-drawn carriages operated under a franchise may travel on
public streets without prior route approval when service is provided for a special events such
as a wedding or other private gathering.
B. Stopping, standing and parking.
(1) Stands. Horse-drawn vehicles may pick up and discharge passengers on public
streets and other public property only at specified locations approved by traffic management
administrator. No automobiles or other means of conveyance except horse-drawn vehicles
shall be permitted to use a stand designated for horse-drawn vehicles.
(2) Rules for motor vehicles apply. Horse-drawn carriages are subject to the same
restrictions on stopping, standing and parking that are provided in the Code of Ordinances for
motor vehicles. [Cross reference '37-87 - '37-106.]
(3) Sanitation. Operators of horse-drawn carriages shall keep the routes and carriage
stands clean and free of animal excrement and properly dispose of manure. Operators shall be
responsible for washing the street to remove urine and applying such chemicals as are
required to make the area around the carriage stand clean and free of urine.
C. Diapering apparatus required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize any horse-drawn vehicle service on the
public streets in the City of Temple, unless the horse is equipped with a diapering apparatus
that prevents the droppings of such horse from being deposited or otherwise left on public
streets. It shall be the responsibility of a person utilizing a horse for the purpose of pulling a
horse-drawn vehicle to ensure that the diapering apparatus is maintained in working order.
D. Treatment of animals.
(1) Humane treatment. No person shall treat a horse or other animal used in a horsedrawn
carriage business in an inhumane manner. No driver shall use more than a light touch
of the whip upon any animal, and no driver or other person may forcefully strike an animal,
or make movements or noise intended to frighten or harm an animal.
(2) Condition and age. No operator shall work an animal in poor health, lame, ill or
one that has sores, or work a horse under the age of three (3) years or over the age of twenty
(20) years.
(3) Water. Operators for horse-drawn carriages shall be responsible for watering
horses.
(4) Rest breaks. No horse shall be placed into service for more than twelve (12) hours
per day. A rest break of at least ten (10) minutes shall be given to each horse after one fifty
(50) minute work period. After two (2) consecutive fifty (50) minute work periods, a thirty
(30) minute rest period shall be given.
(5) Pasture time. Horses shall be given a minimum of four (4) days pasture time per
month.
(6) Weather. No horse-drawn vehicle shall be operated when the heat index exceeds
one hundred twenty-four (124) or the wind chill index is below zero degrees (0)
Fahrenheit, as reported by the National Weather Service. When the wind chill index is below
twenty degrees (20) degrees Fahrenheit, the horse must be blanketed during rest periods.
(7) Horse shoes. Any horse used on concrete, asphalt, or similar type street surfaces
shall be shod with metal shoes. A good quality, shock-absorbing material will be used
between the horse's hooves and the shoes at the discretion of a qualified farrier. Shoes are to
be refitted as needed. Any shoe lost during the work period by a horse then in service, must
be replaced before such horse resumes service. Horses' hooves shall be trimmed, as needed,
at the scheduled times for shoe refitting.
Page 1 of 32
CHAPTER 37
TRAFFIC
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 37-1. Definitions.
Wherever in this chapter the following terms are used, they will have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them in this section, unless clearly indicated to the contrary:
Authorized emergency vehicle. Vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles, and such ambulances
and emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or
authorized by the City.
Crosswalk. That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the connection of curb and property
lines at intersections, or any other portion of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines
or other markings on the surface.
Hand signals. All signals made by the operator by use of the hand and forearm for the purpose of
indicating his intention of turning, stopping, or changing the course of the vehicle.
Intersection. The area embraced within the connection of the lateral curb lines or, if none, then the
lateral boundary lines of two (2) or more streets or highways which join one another at an angle, whether
or not one such street or highway crosses the other.
Intersection visibility triangle. That area enclosed by drawing an imaginary line connecting two points
located within 15 feet of the curb line of any street intersection, street/driveway intersection or
street/alley intersection. It includes that portion of public street right-of-way and any corner lot in the
triangular area formed by extending the curb lines of the intersecting streets to their imaginary point of
intersection for the first point of the triangle, then proceeding back from this imaginary point of
intersection 15 feet along the curb lines of the intersecting streets to establish the two remaining points
of the triangle. These points must then be connected with imaginary lines, thereby forming a triangle. If
there are no curbs existing, the triangular area are formed by extending the pavement edges to the
imaginary point of intersection of the streets and then proceeding in the same manner described above.
Motor vehicle. A self-propelled vehicle.
Non-motor Vehicle. Any vehicle or device without motive power and which is not self-propelled and is
designed or used to carry property or passengers on its own structure and is drawn by a motor vehicle.
Non-motor vehicles include boat trailers, utility trailers, trailer-mounted equipment or wheel-mounted
Page 2 of 32
machinery.
Official traffic signs. All signals, not inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of directing, warning, or regulating traffic.
Operator. Any person who is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
Park or parking. To stand an occupied or unoccupied vehicle, other than temporarily while loading or
unloading merchandise or passengers.
Pedestrian. Any person afoot.
Police officer. Every officer of the city police department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
Private road or driveway. A privately owned way or place used for vehicular travel and used only by the
owner and persons who have the owner’s express or implied permission.
Recreational vehicle. A motor vehicle primarily designed or used as temporary living quarters for
recreational camping or travel use. Recreational vehicle includes a travel trailer, camping trailer, tent
trailers, motor homes, and converted buses, but does not include truck camper which do not exceed one
ton in capacity and are not longer than twenty-two (22) feet in length.
Right-of-way. The privilege of the immediate use of the street or highway.
Roadway. That portion of a street or highway between the regularly established curb lines or that part
devoted to vehicular travel.
Safety zone. That area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians
and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times
while set apart as a safety zone.
Sidewalk. The portion of a municipal street that is:
(a) Between a curb or lateral line of a roadway and the adjacent property lines; and
(b) Improved and designed for or is ordinarily used for pedestrian travel.
Street or highway. Every way set apart for public travel, except a sidewalk.
Traffic. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, and other conveyances, either singly or together,
while using any street for purposes of travel.
Page 3 of 32
Vehicle. A device that can be used to transport or draw persons or property on a roadway. The term does
not include:
(a) A device exclusively used on stationary rails or tracks; or
(b) Manufactured housing as that terms is defined by Chapter 1201, Occupations Code.
(Ordinance No. 2010-4361, 06-03-10)
Sec. 37-2. Duty of police to enforce chapter.
It is the duty of the police department of the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter, except as
otherwise indicated in this chapter.
Sec. 37-3. Authority of police and firemen to direct traffic.
Officers of the police department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic, either in person or by means
of visible or audible signal, in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. In the event of a fire or
other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police or fire department
may direct traffic, as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter.
Sec. 37-4. City transportation director; position established; duties.
(a) There is hereby established the position of transportation director. The holder of this position will
exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this chapter.
(b) It is the general duty of the transportation director, in conjunction with the police department, to
determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices, to conduct
engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering
investigations of traffic conditions, to plan the operation of traffic on the streets and highways of this city,
and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic
conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this city.
Sec. 37-5. Emergency and experimental regulations.
(a) The chief of police, by and with the approval of the transportation director, is hereby empowered to
make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of this city and to
make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No
such temporary or experimental regulation will remain in effect for more than ninety (90) days.
(b) The transportation director may test traffic-control devices under actual conditions of traffic.
(c) The chief of police may authorize the temporary placing of official traffic-control devices when
Page 4 of 32
required by an emergency. The chief of police will notify the transportation director of his or her action as
soon thereafter as is practicable.
Sec. 37-6. Obedience to traffic officers.
It is unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a
police officer or fire department official given, as authorized by this chapter, to direct, control, or regulate
traffic.
Sec. 37-7, 37-8. Reserved.
Sec. 37-9. Clinging to moving vehicles.
It is unlawful for the rider of a bicycle, motorcycle or other vehicle to catch on to or hold to the side or
rear of any other moving vehicle in the city.
Sec. 37-10. Riding on sidewalks.
(a) It is unlawful for any person to ride or propel a bicycle or skate upon a skateboard upon any
sidewalk in any area of the City zoned Central Area.
(b) Subsection (a) does not apply to a sidewalk that is 8 feet or larger in width.
(c) Any person riding or propelling a bicycle or skating upon a skateboard on any sidewalk in the
City, must yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian on the sidewalk.
Sec. 37-11. Reserved.
Sec. 37-12. Application of chapter to operators of government vehicles.
The provisions of this chapter apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of
the government of the United States or this state, county or city, and it is unlawful for any such operator to
violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter.
Sec. 37-13. Permissible conduct for authorized emergency vehicles.
(a) Authorized emergency vehicle in this section is defined by the Texas Transportation Code, Sec.
541.201.
(b) In operating an authorized emergency vehicle the operator may disregard any provision of this
chapter.
(c) An operator of an authorized emergency vehicle in disregarding a provision of this chapter has
Page 5 of 32
the same rights and restrictions as operators of authorized emergency vehicles under Texas Transportation
Code, Chapter 546, Operation of Authorized Emergency Vehicles and Certain Other Vehicles.
Sec. 37-14. Authority to regulate classes and kinds of traffic on certain highways.
(a) Gross weight limits. The transportation director is hereby authorized, on the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation, to erect and maintain official traffic-control devices on any streets or
parts of streets to impose gross weight limits.
(b) Trucks exceeding ten thousand pounds. The transportation director is hereby authorized, on the
basis of engineering and traffic investigation, to erect and maintain official traffic-control devices on the
streets or parts of streets to prohibit the operation of trucks exceeding ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross
weight; provided that such devices do not prohibit necessary local operation on such streets for the purpose
of making a pickup or delivery.
(c) Vehicle size restrictions. The transportation director is hereby authorized, on the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation, to erect and maintain official traffic-control devices on any streets or
parts of streets to impose vehicle size restrictions.
(d) Incompatible traffic. The transportation director is hereby authorized, upon the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation, to determine and designate those heavily traveled streets upon which
it is prohibited any class or kind of traffic which is found to be incompatible with the normal and safe
movement of traffic and the transportation director will erect appropriate official traffic-control devices
giving notice thereof.
Secs. 37-15--37-22. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY
Secs. 37-23--37-27. Reserved.
Sec. 37-28. Speed limits.
(a) Except as otherwise posted, it is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motor vehicle
within a City urban district on a street other than an alley at a rate of speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per
hour.
(b) “Urban district” in this section means the territory adjacent to and including a street or highway,
if the territory is improved with structures that are used for business, industry, or dwelling houses and are
located at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of at least one-quarter mile on either side of the street
or highway.
Sec. 37-29. Reserved.
Page 6 of 32
Sec. 37-30. Authority to place devices altering normal course for turns.
The transportation director is authorized to place official traffic-control devices within or adjacent to
intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course
to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.
Sec. 37-31. Authority to place restricted turn signs.
The transportation director is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of
vehicles may not make a right, left, or "U" turn and will place proper signs at such intersections. The
making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in
which event the same will be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are
permitted.
Sec. 37-32. Turning around in middle of block prohibited.
No vehicle may be turned around in the middle of the block, nor between the corners thereof, but must
go on to the intersection of a street or avenue before turning or attempting to turn.
Sec. 37-33, 37-34. Reserved.
Sec. 37-35. Authority to sign one-way streets and alleys.
The transportation director is hereby authorized to determine and designate one-way streets or alleys
and will place and maintain official traffic-control devices giving notice thereof. No such designation will
be effective unless such devices are in place.
Sec. 37-36. Authority for stop signs and yield signs.
The transportation director is hereby authorized to erect and maintain stop signs, yield signs, or other
official traffic-control devices to designate through streets or to designate intersections or other roadway
junctions at which vehicular traffic on one or more of the roadways should yield or stop and yield before
entering the intersection or junction.
Secs. 37-38--37-42. Reserved.
Sec. 37-43. Driving between vehicles of authorized procession.
It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other
authorized procession while they are in motion. This provision will not apply at intersections where traffic
is controlled by traffic-control signals or by police officers.
Page 7 of 32
Sec. 37-44. Operation in parks.
It is unlawful for any person to drive, park, or place any vehicle through, in, along, upon, or across any
public park belonging to the city except upon designated streets, alleys, driveways, or parking areas located
in such park.
Sec. 37-45. Motor vehicles prohibited on school grounds; exceptions.
It is unlawful for any person to drive, park or place any motor vehicle through, in, along, upon, or
across any public school grounds within the City of Temple except:
(1) Upon designated streets, alleys, driveways, or parking areas located on said school grounds;
(2) At the direction of a police officer of the City of Temple or a duly designated official of the
school district;
(3) When the vehicle is owned and operated by an employee or agent of the City of Temple or the
school district.
Secs. 37-46--37-49. Reserved.
Sec. 37-50. Restrictions on towing.
No vehicle may tow more than one other vehicle at a time, and no tow connection thereon may be more
than fifteen (15) feet in length.
Sec. 37-51. Reserved.
Sec. 37-52. Reserved.
Sec. 37-53. Truck routes established.
(a) Definitions.Whenever used in this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
(1) Truck means any motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation
of property, with a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity exceeding two thousand (2,000)
pounds and is not intended to include those trucks commonly known as pickup trucks, panel
delivery trucks, and carryall trucks.
(2) Semitrailer means vehicles of the trailer type so designed or used in conjunction with a motor
vehicle that some part of its own weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another
vehicle.
Page 8 of 32
(3) Road tractor means any motor vehicle designed or used for drawing other vehicles or loads and
not so constructed as to carry a load independently or any part of the weight of the drawn load
or vehicle.
(4) Truck tractor means every motor vehicle designed or used for drawing other vehicles and not so
constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load as drawn.
(b) Established. There are hereby established and created certain truck routes in, through, and
around the City of Temple for all trucks, semitrailers, road tractors, and truck tractors entering or exiting
the City as follows:
(1) Interstate Highway No. 35.
(2) State Highway No. 53.
(3) State Highway No. 36.
(4) Loop 363--State Highway No. 190.
(5) F.M. Road No. 2305.
(6) South First Street from where it intersects with Loop 363 and Highway 36 north to the point
where South First becomes South Third Street and from that point north to where North
Third Street intersects with Interstate Highway No. 35.
(7) F.M. Road No. 438.
(c) Through traffic prohibited. Through traffic of any truck, semitrailer, road tractor, or truck tractor
on any street within the City of Temple other than those streets or highways specifically designated in
subsection (b) hereof is expressly prohibited and declared to be unlawful.
(d) Exceptions. The terms, provisions and regulations set forth in this section do not and are not
intended to apply to trucks, semitrailers, road tractors, and truck tractors entering the City of Temple and
traveling on streets other than those designated herein for the purposes of pickup and delivery to a
specific location, or to obtain service, repairs, commercial lodging, fuel, or other legitimate purposes
requiring a stop within the city. For purposes of this section, a person commuting to and from a
residence for purposes other than making a delivery or pickup within the City is not a “legitimate
purpose.”
(e) Signs. The transportation director is hereby directed to place appropriate signs upon the streets
indicated herein and may, at his or her discretion, place signs upon other local streets notifying the public
that no truck traffic is allowed thereon.
Page 9 of 32
Sec. 37-54. Alleys -- Speed limit established.
(a) The reasonable and prudent prima facie maximum speed limit for any vehicular traffic upon
alleys within the City of Temple is hereby established as 15 miles per hour.
(b) It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motor vehicle, bicycle, or other vehicle of any
kind, whether or not motor-powered, at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the
circumstances then existing along, or upon, or over any alley within said city, but any speed in excess of the
reasonable and prudent prima facie maximum speed limit as set forth in paragraph (a) hereof is prima facie
evidence that such speed is not reasonable and prudent and that it is unlawful.
Sec. 37-55. Use of engine break or retarder prohibited.
(a) This section applies to a roadway or street within the corporate limits of the City, including a
state maintained roadway.
(b) A person may not use an engine brake or engine retarder to assist in slowing or braking a
motor vehicle, except for a fire truck engaged in emergency duties.
Secs. 37-56--37-64. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES GENERALLY
Sec. 37-65. Authority to install traffic-control devices.
The transportation director will place and maintain official traffic-control devices when and as required
under the traffic ordinances of this city to make effective the provisions of said ordinances, and may place
and maintain such additional official traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate, warn, or
guide traffic under the traffic ordinances of this city or the Texas Transportation Code.
Sec. 37-66. Manual and specifications for traffic-control devices.
All traffic-control signs, signals, and devices will conform to the manual and specifications approved
by the Texas Department of Transportation. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular
purpose will so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic-control
devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter will be official
traffic-control devices.
Secs. 37-67--37-70. Reserved.
Sec. 37-71. Marking of traffic lanes.
The transportation director is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or
Page 10 of 32
highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary.
Sec. 37-72. Designation and marking of crosswalks.
The transportation director is hereby authorized to designate and maintain, by appropriate devices,
marks, or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in the transportation
director’s opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places
as the transportation director may deem necessary.
Sec. 37-73. Establishment and marking of safety zones.
The transportation director is hereby authorized to establish safety zones of such kind and character and
at such places as he or she may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
Secs. 37-74--37-76. Reserved.
Secs. 37-77--37-85. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Sec. 37-86. Parking of vehicles with capacity of more than one and one-half tons in certain
districts.
(a) A person commits an offense if he stops, parks, or stands a truck-tractor, road tractor,
semitrailer, bus, trailer, or a truck with more than two axles, rated capacity in excess of one and one-half
tons, or with a height of more than nine feet, according to the manufacturer’s classification, in front of,
or forward of the building setback line (as shown by the property’s plat or the zoning ordinance,
whichever is a greater distance from the property line adjacent to the street) upon property within a
residential area. This subsection will not apply to the parking or standing of a vehicle for the purpose of
expeditiously loading or unloading passengers, freight, or merchandise or to recreational vehicles, as
defined by Section 37-1 of the Code of Ordinances.
(b) In this section, Residential Area means any block zoned SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SFA, SFA-2,
SFA-3, MH, MF, 2F, TH or UE.
Sec. 37-87. Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places.
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions
of a police officer or official traffic-control device, no person may:
(a) Stop, stand, or park a vehicle:
(1) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
Page 11 of 32
(2) On a sidewalk;
(3) In an intersection;
(4) On a crosswalk;
(5) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of a place on the
curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is
indicated by signs or markings;
(6) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or
parking would obstruct traffic;
(7) On a bridge or other elevated structure on a highway or in a highway tunnel;
(8) On a railroad track;
(9) On any controlled-access highway;
(10) In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including crossovers; or
(11) At any place where official traffic-control devices prohibit stopping.
(b) Stand or park an occupied or unoccupied vehicle except momentarily to pick up or discharge a
passenger:
(1) In front of a public or private driveway;
(2) Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant;
(3) Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
(4) Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign, or
traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
(5) Within twenty (20) feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a
street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of the
entrance when the entrance is properly marked with a sign; or
(6) At any place where an official traffic-control device prohibits standing.
(c) Park an occupied or unoccupied vehicle except temporarily to load or unload merchandise or
passengers:
(1) Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; or
(2) At any place where an official traffic-control device prohibits parking.
(d) A person may not move a vehicle that is not lawfully under the person's control into an area
where a vehicle is prohibited under Section 37-87.
Sec. 37-88. Parking prohibited in alleys located in the central business district.
(a) Definition. As used in this section, "central business district" means all parts of the city which
are within the area bounded on the south by Avenue B, on the east by Eighth Street, on the north by French
Avenue, and on the west by Ninth Street.
(b) Parking in alleys within the central business district is prohibited. It is unlawful to park,
Page 12 of 32
abandon, or leave a motor vehicle in an alley within the central business district, except as hereinafter
provided.
(c) Exception and duty.
(1) Vans and trucks used for delivery of merchandise, and actually loading or unloading
merchandise, and vans and trucks of utility companies, plumbers, electricians, air conditioning
and heating firms, etc., utilized at the time in providing services to buildings abutting the alley
are excepted from the provision of subsection (b); provided, however, that this exception
applies only to vans and trucks during the time actually being loaded or unloaded, or being
utilized in providing service, and parked in such a manner to leave a ten-foot clearance for other
vehicles traveling the alley.
(2) The operator of any vehicle, described in subsection (c)(1) above, must remain in such close
proximity to said vehicle that if another vehicle does not have sufficient clearance to pass said
vehicle in the alley, the operator may be promptly summoned to move said vehicle at any time
such movement is necessary to allow passage of another vehicle in the alley.
Sec. 37-89. Prohibited for certain purposes.
It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park any vehicle upon any public street, alley, city-owned
parking lot, park, playground, golf course, or athletic field of the City of Temple for any of the following
purposes:
(1) For the primary purpose of offering such vehicle for sale or selling the same;
(2) For the purpose of repairing such vehicle or accessories thereon or attached thereto; provided
that part (2) of this section will not apply to emergency tire repair nor to any other emergency
repairs for the purpose of removing the vehicle from the streets, avenues, and alleys; or
(3) For the primary purpose of washing a vehicle.
Sec. 37-90. Leaving less than ten feet of roadway open for traffic.
(a) It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand, or park such vehicle upon a street,
except as otherwise authorized in this chapter, in such manner or under such conditions as to leave
available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway free for movement of vehicular traffic, except
during actual unloading or loading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations, an
official traffic control device, or a police officer.
(b) It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle within an alley in such manner
or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the alley for the free
movement of vehicular traffic.
Page 13 of 32
Sec. 37-91. Intersection visibility triangle.
(a) A vehicle, fence, wall, screen, view obstruction, or foliage is not allowed within the
intersection visibility triangle at elevations between three feet and eight feet above the average street
grade. Obstructions of this nature are declared to be a public traffic nuisance. A person may not park or
allow parking of a vehicle or boat in the intersection visibility triangle at elevations between three feet
and eight feet above the average street grade.
(b) Obstruction of an intersection visibility triangle must be abated within 10 days after written
notice.
(Ordinance No. 2010-4361, 06-03-10)
Sec. 37-92. Designation and marking of parking spaces and areas where parking is
prohibited or limited.
(a) The transportation director is hereby authorized, on the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation, to prohibit, regulate, or limit stopping, standing, or parking vehicles at all times or during
specified hours.
(b) No prohibition, regulation, or limitation relating to stopping, standing, or parking imposed under
this chapter or any other ordinance of this city will be effective unless official traffic-control devices are
erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. It is the duty of the transportation director to erect
and maintain such devices.
Sec. 37-93. Two-hour parking zone.
(a) The city manager or his/her designee is hereby authorized to determine and designate in and on such
streets and portions thereof spaces in which parking is limited to two-hour periods of time. In area designated as
a two-hour parking zone, signs or other clearly distinguished markings will be posted or made at both ends of the
two-hour parking zone and at reasonable intervals between the beginning and ending of the zone. If the signs or
other markings for the two-hour parking zone indicate the days or times allowed for parking therein, such
prohibition will only apply on such days and between such hours as prescribed by the signs or markings
(b) It is unlawful for any person to leave standing or parked any vehicle for a period of more than two
hours in a two-hour parking zone, and each successive two hours that a vehicle should be left continuously
parked in such zone will constitute a separate offense.
(c) The city manager is authorized to suspend this section by decree during public events or when the
municipal parking lot adjacent to City Hall is closed.
(d) The city manager is authorized to grant permits to persons involved in construction in or near twohour
parking zones to park construction related vehicles in these zones longer than designated by signage. It is
Page 14 of 32
unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit.
Sec. 37-94. Parking areas designated for persons with disabilities.
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), a person may not stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a parking
space or area on public or private property that is designated for use by a person with a disability in
accordance with applicable law. Parking spaces or areas designated for persons with disabilities on private
property do not have to be in compliance with the identification requirements referred to in Chapter 681
(Privileged Parking) of the Texas Transportation Code.
(b) This prohibition does not apply if the vehicle is operated by or for a person with a temporary or
permanent disability, and the vehicle displays:
(1) License plates for the vehicle issued in accordance with the Texas Transportation Code
for use by persons with disabilities; or
(2) A disabled parking placard issued in accordance with Chapter 681 of the Texas
Transportation Code.
(c) A person may not stop, stand, or park a vehicle on public or private property in a manner that
blocks an access or curb ramp, accessible pedestrian space between or adjacent to a parking space, or other
architectural feature designed to aid a person with a disability.
(d) A peace officer or a person designated by the city under Sec. 681.0101 of the Texas
Transportation Code may enforce this section.
Sec. 37-95. Direction of parked or stopped vehicles.
(a) Every vehicle parked or stopped on any street in the city must be parked or stopped parallel with
the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of traffic, and with curb-side wheels of the vehicle within
eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except where streets are appropriately marked for
perpendicular or for angle parking.
(b) Every vehicle parked or stopped on any street in the city in a parking space appropriately
marked for perpendicular or angle parking must be parked with the front of such vehicle adjacent to the
curb or sidewalk.
Sec. 37-96. Compliance with parking space markings.
(a) If a parking space limit line is delineated on a street or parking lot owned or maintained by
the city, a person:
(1) May not park a vehicle on or across the line; and
Page 15 of 32
(2) Must park a vehicle entirely within the delineated area.
(b) A person may not park a vehicle in a driveway of a parking lot owned or maintained by the
city.
Sec. 37-97. Loading or unloading at an angle to the curb.
Backing of a vehicle to the curb is permitted for the limited purpose of loading or unloading
merchandise or other property. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading merchandise or other
property exceed 30 minutes.
Sec. 37-98. Parking of trucks with more than two axles.
The parking of trucks with more than two (2) axles on any street or alley within the corporate limits of
the City of Temple, Texas, is hereby prohibited; provided, however, that the prohibition set out in this
section will not apply to such trucks parked for the purpose of loading or unloading or for the purpose of
making emergency repairs.
Sec. 37-99. Parking of Boats, Non-Motor Vehicles and Recreational Vehicles.
(a) Definitions. Whenever used in this section, the following terms are defined as follows:
(1) Boat means any watercraft, vessel, or outboard motor.
(2) Public roadway means any public street, alley, road, right-of-way, or other public way,
including paved and unpaved portions of the right-of-way.
(b) It is unlawful for any person to park or place any boat, non-motor vehicle or recreational
vehicle on any public roadway within the city limits of Temple, Texas, unless the boat, non-motor
vehicle or recreational vehicle is connected or otherwise secured to a motor vehicle.
(c) It is unlawful for any person to park or place any boat, non-motor vehicle or recreational
vehicle which is connected or secured to a motor vehicle on any public roadway within the city limits of
Temple, Texas for a period of more than forty-eight (48) hours at any one place.
(d) For prosecution under subsection (b) or (c) of this section, it is presumed that the registered
owner or the owner or occupant of the property adjacent to the location of the offense is the person who
parked or placed the boat, non-motor vehicle, or recreational vehicle in violation of subsection (b) or (c)
of this section, at the time and place of the offense charged.
Page 16 of 32
Sec. 37-100. Parking for more than two days prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to park or permit to remain parked or standing any vehicle upon any street,
alley, or city-owned parking lot within the city for longer than two (2) days at any one place.
Sec. 37-101. Parking of vehicles used for transporting liquefied petroleum gases.
(a) Except in an emergency, no tank vehicle containing liquefied petroleum gas (“LPG”) may be
left unattended on any street, highway, avenue or alley, provided that this does not prevent a driver from
the necessary absence from the truck in connection with the delivery of his or her load, except that
during actual discharge of the liquid some responsible person must be present at the vehicle, nor does it
prevent stops for meals during the day or night if the street is lighted at point of parking.
(b) Tank vehicles used to transport or deliver LPG may not be parked out of doors at any one
point longer than 1 hour, except on a premises of a facility approved for storing or servicing LPG tank
vehicles. The location must be off any street, at least 50 feet from any building, and 25 feet from any
property line.
(c) LPG tank vehicles used to transport may not be parked or garaged in any building or near any
building other than those specifically approved for such use by the fire official.
Sec. 37-102. Parking near scene of fire.
It is unlawful for any operator to park any vehicle within three hundred (300) feet of any burning
building or other thing where fire-fighting apparatus is being used for the purpose of extinguishing the
same, except under the direction of the chief, other officer of the fire department, or a police officer of the
city.
Sec. 37-103. Parking in fire lanes.
(a) The marking of fire lanes on private property, devoted to public use, will be approved by the fire
chief of the City or his or her designee(s).
(b) The fire chief has the authority, by and with the consent of the city council expressed by
resolution, to determine where such fire lanes will be required and has the authority to require that such fire
lanes be marked and maintained. Such fire lanes will be marked by painting the curb red with the words
"Fire Lane" stenciled thereon at appropriate intervals together with signs, placed at appropriate distances,
which indicate the existence of the fire lane and that parking in or blocking the fire lane is prohibited.
(c) It is unlawful for any person to park or to allow to be parked any vehicle in a properly marked
fire lane or to otherwise obstruct such fire lane.
Page 17 of 32
Sec. 37-104. Parking of vehicles at Draughon-Miller Airport.
(a) It is unlawful for any person to park any motor or non-motor vehicle at Draughon-Miller Airport
outside the limits of the designated parking area for the particular kind or type of vehicle.
(b) No aircraft or vehicle may be parked within twenty-five (25) feet of a fire hydrant at Draughon-
Miller Airport.
Sec. 37-105. Parking of non-motor vehicles and recreational vehicles prohibited.
(a) Definitions. Whenever used in this section, the following terms are defined as follows:
(1) Corner lot means any triangular portion of a plot of ground defined by measuring thirty
(30) feet along the curb line or adjacent streets and whose hypotenuse is the connection of
the two (2) points as measured along the curb line.
(2) Private property means any privately owned real property, lot, tract or parcel of land, or
portion thereof, including a private driveway, roadway or alley, within the city limits of
Temple, Texas.
(b) It is unlawful for any person to park, place or locate on any private property any non-motor
vehicle or recreational vehicle that:
(1) Is within six (6) feet from the back of any curb or edge of the pavement if no curb
exists;
(2) Is in, blocks, or otherwise obstructs any paved sidewalk;
(3) Is within a corner lot; or
(4) Is not secured with wheel stops on the wheels on each side or otherwise secured to
adequately hold the vehicle on any grade on which the vehicle is parked.
(c) It is unlawful for any person to use a non-motor vehicle or recreational vehicle for
housekeeping, dwelling, or sleeping quarters for any period exceeding two (2) weeks during any six (6)
month period.
(d) For prosecution under subsection (b) or (c) of this section, it is presumed that the registered
owner or the owner or occupant of the property which is the location of the offense is the person who
parked, placed, or used the non-motor vehicle or recreational vehicle in violation of this section.
Page 18 of 32
Sec. 37-106. Passenger and loading zones generally.
(a) The transportation director is hereby authorized to determine the location of loading zones and
passenger loading zones and will place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the
hours during which the provisions of this Code are applicable. In lieu of such signs, such zones may be laid
out and designated by yellow-colored lines or marks on the surface of the street or curb.
(b) No person may stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the
expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of property in any place marked as a loading
zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case may the stop for
the expeditious loading and unloading of property exceed thirty (30) minutes.
(c) The driver of a vehicle may stop temporarily at a loading zone for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any vehicle
which is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone to load or unload property. In no case may such a stop
exceed thirty (30) minutes.
(d) The city manager is authorized to grant permits to persons involved in construction in or near
passenger and loading zones to park construction related vehicles in these zones longer than designated by
signage or colored markings or lines. Persons who fail to abide by the terms and conditions of the permit may
receive a citation for each successive thirty (30) minutes that a vehicle is left continuously parked in these zones
in violation of the permit.
Sec. 37-107. Bus stop and taxicab stands.
(a) The transportation director is hereby authorized and required to establish bus stops, bus stands,
taxicab stands, and stands for other passenger common-carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such
places and in such number as he or she determines to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the
public, and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand, or other stand will be designated by appropriate
signs.
(b) The operator of a bus may not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than
a bus stand, bus stop, or passenger loading zone so designated as provided herein, except in case of an
emergency.
(c) The operator of a bus may not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of
loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading
zone so designated as provided herein, except in case of an emergency.
(d) The operator of a bus must enter a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading zone on a public
street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage, will be in a
position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not farther than eighteen (18) inches from the curb and
the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular
Page 19 of 32
traffic.
(e) The operator of a taxicab may not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other
than in a taxicab stand so designated as provided herein. This provision does not prevent the operator of a
taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
(f) No person may stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, bus stand, or
passenger loading zone or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been
officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily
stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone.
Sec. 37-108. Reserved
Sec. 37-109. Vehicle parked in violation of city ordinance.
No person may allow, suffer, or permit any vehicle registered in his name to stand or be parked in, on
or upon any street in the City of Temple in violation of any of the ordinances of this city regulating the
stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles.
Sec. 37-110. Parking violations made civil offenses.
A violation of a provision of this article governing the stopping, standing, and parking of a vehicle is a
civil offense.
Sec. 37-111. Hearing officer powers, duties, and functions.
(a) The city manager, or the city manager’s designee, will appoint one or more hearing officers to
administratively adjudicate stopping, standing, and parking violations under the Code of Ordinances.
(b) A hearing officer has the authority to:
(1) Administer oaths;
(2) Issue orders compelling the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents,
which may be enforced by the municipal court;
(3) Accept admissions and hear and determine contests of parking violations under this article;
(4) Assess civil fines, penalties, and costs for a parking violation in accordance with this
article;
Page 20 of 32
(5) Issue orders of immobilization or impoundment of vehicles;
(6) Set conditions for the release of vehicles immobilized or impounded under this article;
(7) Administratively terminate citations or dismiss cases arising from possible violations of
this article that the hearing officer determines to be uncollectable, unenforceable, or
erroneously issued; and
(8) Preside over, hear evidence, and make findings at immobilization and impoundment
hearings under this article.
Sec. 37-112. Citations.
(a) The administrative adjudication process for violations under this article will be initiated by the
issuance of a citation which may be issued by a peace officer or by a parking enforcement official
designated to perform this duty by the Temple Police Department.
(b) A citation serves as the summons and provides the time and place of an administrative
adjudication hearing.
(c) A citation will contain the following information:
(1) The nature, date, time, and location of the alleged violation;
(2) The state license plate number of the vehicle, or if the license plate number is not visible
or legible, other observable identification information, including but not limited to
vehicle identification number or the state inspection tag number;
(3) The make of the vehicle, if known, or a vehicle description;
(4) The appearance date for the citation, including information as to the time and place of the
administrative adjudication hearing for the alleged offense committed under this article
scheduled on the appearance date;
(5) A notification that the person charged with the violation has the right to an instanter
hearing on or before the appearance date on a day of the week established by the
municipal court for the routine operation of the court;
(6) A notification that failure to answer the citation or to appear for a hearing on or before the
appearance date is considered an admission of liability for the violation and will result in
the assessment of civil fines, costs, and fees; and
Page 21 of 32
(7) The identification number and/or the initials of the individual issuing the citation.
(d) The original or a copy of the citation is a governmental record kept in the ordinary course of
city business and is rebuttable proof of the facts it contains.
Sec. 37-113. Service of a citation; presumption of service.
(a) A citation must be served on the operator of the vehicle or the registered owner of the vehicle
by either personal service of the citation or by affixing the citation to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
(b) The operator of a vehicle who is not the registered owner but has the express or implied
permission to operate the vehicle is considered the registered owner's agent and is authorized to receive a
citation.
(c) The original and all copies, including electronic copies, of a citation are prima facie evidence
that the citation was issued and that an attempt at service was made in accordance with this section.
Sec. 37-114. Answering a citation.
(a) A person issued a citation must answer the citation not later than the appearance date provided
on the citation.
(b) An answer may be made in any of the following ways:
(1) A person may admit liability and pay the applicable civil fines, costs, and fees. A person
may pay in person, by mail, by electronic means, or by other method of payment as
determined by the municipal court clerk; or
(2) A person may appear before a hearing officer on the appearance date for his or her
scheduled administrative hearing or at an instanter hearing before the appearance date.
(c) Payment of civil fines, costs, and fees assessed under this article operates as an admission of
liability for the parking violation and is the final disposition of the parking violation charge.
Sec. 37-115. Presumptions.
In an administrative adjudication hearing for a citation:
(a) It is presumed that the registered owner of the motor vehicle is the person who parked or
stopped the vehicle at the time and place of the offense charged; and
(b) The Texas Department of Motor Vehicles’ computer-generated record of the registered
vehicle owner is prima facie evidence of the contents of the record.
Page 22 of 32
Sec. 37-116. Hearings for disposition of a citation.
(a) A hearing to adjudicate a parking violation charge under this article will be conducted by a
hearing officer.
(b) The Texas Rules of Evidence do not apply to a hearing under this article.
(c) No formal or sworn complaint or any other charging instrument is required.
(d) The hearing officer will hear and consider:
(1) Evidence presented by the person charged;
(2) Presumptions and prima facie evidence established by this article or other applicable law;
and
(3) Evidence presented by the issuing officer, if he or she attends the hearing.
(e) The hearing officer will make a decision based on a preponderance of the evidence after
considering the presumptions.
(f) All hearings will be recorded by an electronic recording device.
(g) The acceptance of documents or real evidence shall be noted on the record. The recorded
testimony, documents, and other evidence shall constitute the record for appeal. The Municipal Court will
maintain all exhibits admitted during the proceeding and the official record of the proceeding.
(h) The person who issued the citation is not required to attend an instanter hearing, unless ordered
to do so by the hearing officer.
(i) It is not required that the prosecuting attorney attend the hearing. If the person is represented by
legal counsel at the hearing, the hearing officer must notify the prosecuting attorney who will have the right
to appear on behalf of the city at the hearing.
(j) At the conclusion of the hearing, a hearing officer will issue an order either:
(1) Finding the person is liable for the parking violation and assessing the applicable civil
fines, costs, and fees; or
(2) Finding the person is not liable for the parking violation.
(k) A person charged with a civil offense who fails to answer a citation on or before the appearance
Page 23 of 32
date is considered to admit liability for the offense charged, and an order will be issued on that basis.
(l) Any orders issued under this article will be filed with the municipal court clerk. Orders will
be kept in a separate index and file. The order may be recorded using microfilm, microfiche, or data
processing techniques.
Sec. 37-117. Appeals.
(a) A person found liable by the hearing officer for a parking or stopping ordinance may appeal the
determination to municipal court.
(b) The appeal must be instituted by filing, not later than the 30th day after the date on which the
hearing officer’s order is filed, a petition with the clerk of the municipal court and paying a non-refundable
filing fee.
(c) A person who accepts liability or fails to contest liability by the appearance date is not entitled to
an appeal hearing.
(d) Service of notice of appeal under this section does not stay the enforcement and collection of
any order of a hearing officer, unless the person found liable, before appealing, posts a cash appeal bond
with the municipal court clerk in an amount equal to all civil fines, costs, and fees assessed by hearing
officer.
(e) When an appeal petition is filed, the municipal court clerk will schedule an appeal hearing and
notify each party of the date, time, and location of the appeal hearing.
(f) An appeal hearing is conducted by the municipal court judge.
(g) The judge will review the record and hear oral arguments of the parties at the appeal hearing.
(h) The judge may receive evidence of procedural irregularities alleged to have occurred at the
hearing that are not reflected in the record.
(i) The judge may not reverse the hearing officer's decision unless it is determined to be:
(1) In violation of law;
(2) Not reasonably supported by substantial evidence, based upon a review of the reliable and
probative evidence in the record as a whole; or
(3) Arbitrary and capricious or characterized by an abuse of discretion.
(j) If the findings of the hearing officer are affirmed, the municipal court judge may reduce fine
Page 24 of 32
amounts and fees based on an inability to pay or allow liable persons to make payment plans based on
ability to pay. In addition, the municipal judge may impose additional penalties and other costs or fees
according to this article.
(k) The municipal court judge’s ruling is final and may not be appealed.
Sec. 37-118. Fine Amounts.
(a) Fine amounts may range from one dollar ($1.00) to five hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to
applicable costs and fees. City Council will set fine amounts or ranges for offenses under this article by
resolution.
(b) Upon a finding of liability, a hearing officer may assess the person a fine ranging from one
dollar ($1.00) to five hundred dollars ($500.00) as set by City Council in addition to applicable costs and
fees.
(c) A late fee will be assessed if:
(1) The person does not answer the citation on or before the appearance date; or
(2) The person fails to pay in full within a specified time period.
(d) A ten dollar ($10.00) late fee may be assessed every thirty days up to a maximum of sixty
dollars ($60.00) until all applicable fines, costs, and fees are paid in full.
(e) A hearing officer may reduce fine amounts and fees based on an inability to pay or allow liable
persons to make payment plans based on ability to pay.
Sec. 37-119. Enforcement of order.
When a person is found liable for violations under this article and has not paid the fines, costs, and fees
assessed when due, the fines, costs, and fees assessed for the violations may be enforced by:
(a) Impounding the vehicle if the owner or operator of the vehicle has committed three or more
such violations in a calendar year;
(b) Placing a device on the vehicle that prohibits movement of the motor vehicle if the owner or
operator of the vehicle has committed three or more such violations in a calendar year or has three or more
outstanding or unresolved citations issued under this article;
(c) Imposing an additional fine if the original fine is not paid within a specified time;
(d) Denying issuance of or revoking a parking or operating permit, as applicable; or
Page 25 of 32
(e) Filing an action to collect the fines, costs, or fees in a court of competent jurisdiction.
Sec. 37-120. Impoundment or immobilization of motor vehicles.
(a) A hearing officer will determine if a vehicle is subject to impoundment or immobilization under
this article.
(b) If a hearing officer determines that a vehicle is subject to impoundment or immobilization, the
hearing officer will send a written notice of the opportunity for a hearing before a written order to impound
or immobilize the vehicle is issued. The written notice will be mailed to the last address of the registered
owner on record with the Texas Department of Motor Vehicles or to the address of the registered owner or
operator last known to the hearing officer.
(c) The written notice will contain the following information:
(1) The vehicle license plate number;
(2) The name of the last registered owner of the vehicle;
(3) The date issued, fine amounts, costs, and fees for all outstanding or unresolved
citations issued under this article;
(4) A statement that a request for a hearing to determine whether or not the motor vehicle
will be immobilized or impounded must be made to the municipal court clerk in
writing, without requirement of bond, within twenty (20) days after the date the notice
was mailed;
(5) A statement that failure to request a hearing before the expiration of the twenty-day
period, or failure to appear at a requested hearing will constitute a waiver of the
opportunity to oppose the proposed impoundment or immobilization; and
(6) A statement indicating that the registered owner of the vehicle, in addition to being
responsible for all outstanding citations issued under this article, will be responsible
for all fees and costs incurred in immobilizing and impounding the vehicle, including
storage fees.
Sec. 37-121. Hearing before hearing officer regarding impoundment or immobilization of vehicle;
issuance of order.
(a) A person may request a hearing before a hearing officer to contest impoundment or
immobilization of a vehicle.
Page 26 of 32
(b) A request for a hearing under this section must be submitted in writing to the municipal
court clerk not later than the twentieth (20th) business day after the date the notice of impoundment or
immobilization was mailed.
(c) A failure to timely request or appear at a hearing under this section waives any objection to
the proposed impoundment or immobilization of the vehicle.
(d) The only issue at a hearing under this section is whether the vehicle may be impounded or
immobilized under Sec. 37-119.
(e) The hearing officer will issue an order of impoundment or immobilization if:
(1) A person does not timely request a hearing under this section;
(2) A person does not appear at a scheduled impoundment or immobilization hearing; or
(3) A hearing officer determines at the hearing that the vehicle is subject to impoundment
or immobilization.
(f) An impoundment order and an immobilization order must include the information described in
Sec. 37-120 regarding notice requirements.
(g) If a hearing is requested and held, the hearing officer will provide the signed order of
immobilization or impoundment at the hearing.
(h) If a hearing is not requested, a signed order of immobilization or impoundment will be
provided upon request and at no cost to a party to the case.
Sec. 37-122. Interference with impoundment or immobilization prohibited.
(a) A person may not knowingly, intentionally, or recklessly obstruct, prevent, hinder, or
interfere with a person executing an order of impoundment or immobilization.
(b) A person may not tamper with, deface, damage, or attempt to remove an immobilization
device when it has been installed.
(c) An offense under this Section is a Class C misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine up to
five hundred dollars ($500.00).
Page 27 of 32
Sec. 37-123. Execution of impoundment order.
(a) An impoundment order is executed when the vehicle identified in the order is seized,
removed to, and stored at an authorized vehicle depository.
(b) An impoundment order may be executed by:
(1) A certified peace officer;
(2) A city parking enforcement officer;
(3) An authorized city employee; or
(4) An authorized city agent.
(c) If it is necessary for a person executing an order of impoundment to enter a motor
vehicle to effectuate its impoundment, entry into the vehicle will be made by or in the presence of a
certified peace officer. An inventory of the vehicle will be conducted by or in the presence of
certified peace officer who will sign the inventory.
(d) The person executing an order of impoundment will promptly notify the municipal court
clerk or designee of the date and time of the impoundment.
(e) Nothing under this article will be construed to restrict or limit the authority of police
officers to tow and impound vehicles under other applicable law.
Sec. 37-124. Execution of immobilization order.
(a) An immobilization order is executed when a device designed to restrict the normal
movement of the vehicle has been installed or attached.
(b) An immobilization order may be executed by:
(1) A certified peace officer;
(2) A city parking enforcement officer;
(3) An authorized city employee; or
(4) An authorized city agent.
Page 28 of 32
(c) At the time of immobilization, the person executing the order of immobilization must
attach to the vehicle a conspicuous written notice, on a form provided by the city, that includes the
following information:
(1) Notice that the vehicle has been immobilized under a court order and that attempted
movement may cause damage to the vehicle;
(2) Notice that it is unlawful for any person to tamper with, deface, damage, or attempt
to remove an immobilization device when it has been installed;
(3) Instructions to obtain a release of the vehicle;
(4) Notice that the vehicle may be towed and impounded if the owner or a person
authorized to act on behalf of the owner does not obtain a release of the vehicle from
the municipal court, or the Temple Police Department when the municipal court is
closed, by 4:00 p.m. on the day the vehicle has been immobilized; and
(5) Notice that if the vehicle is towed and impounded, the owner shall be responsible for
payment of applicable fees for towing, impoundment, and storage in addition to the
civil fines, costs, and fees under this article.
Sec. 37-125. Reclamation of an impounded or immobilized vehicle.
(a) The owner or other person with legal right of possession of a vehicle that has been
impounded or immobilized under an order may reclaim the vehicle by:
(1) Presenting evidence satisfactory to the municipal court clerk during its hours of
operation, or the Temple Police Department when the municipal court is closed, that
establishes ownership or right of possession; and
(2) Paying in full all accumulated civil fines, costs, and fees, including costs and fees of
immobilization or impoundment and storage.
(b) If the owner or other person with legal right of possession cannot provide payment in full,
the person may appear before a hearing officer during the municipal court’s hours of operation to
arrange to pay:
(1) All accumulated civil fines, costs, and fees at a later specified date; or
Page 29 of 32
(2) A specified portion of all accumulated civil fines, costs, and fees at designated
intervals.
(c) If the owner or other person with legal right of possession has paid, or arranged to pay, the
accumulated civil fines, costs and fees, the owner or other person may reclaim the impounded vehicle
or have the immobilization device removed. Upon making such payment or payment arrangements,
the owner or other person with legal right of possession of the vehicle will receive a signed release
order for the vehicle.
(d) A hearing officer may reissue an impoundment or immobilization order under Sec. 37-121
without additional notice if the owner or other person with legal right of possession of the vehicle
fails to comply with a condition imposed under this section.
Sec. 37-126. Release of impounded vehicle.
(a) A person in actual possession of the impounded vehicle will release the vehicle to a
person named in the release order if the person named in the order presents the signed release order
and proof of identity.
(b) A person releasing the vehicle will indicate the date and time that a vehicle was released
on the release order, or on a paper attached to it.
(c) A release order must be signed by the person reclaiming the vehicle and the person
releasing the vehicle.
(d) After the release order is signed, the person releasing the vehicle must return the order to
the municipal court.
(e) A person in possession of an impounded vehicle may not request or require the person
reclaiming the vehicle to sign a release from liability for damages or loss until the person
authorized to reclaim the vehicle has been provided a meaningful opportunity to inspect the vehicle
and its contents.
(f) A release from liability must:
(1) Indicate whether the person reclaiming the vehicle has made an inspection of the
vehicle;
(2) Include an enumeration of the damages, if any, allegedly the result of impounding the
vehicle; and
Page 30 of 32
(3) Include a list of the items, if any, allegedly missing from vehicle.
(g) A copy or duplicate of the original release must be provided to the person that reclaims
an impounded vehicle.
Secs. 37-127--37-149. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. RESERVED.
ARTICLE V. HAZARDOUS CARGO ROUTES
Section 37-150. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms have the meanings ascribed to them:
(a) Hazardous Materials means any quantity, group, form or class of material designated as
hazardous material in any official publication of the Secretary of Transportation of the
United States under the authority of 49 C.F.R. 171, et seq., as amended, including any
such publication issued after the effective date of this ordinance.
(b) Requiring Placards means that the material to be transported is hazardous and is in
sufficient quantity to require placarding in accordance with the Department of
Transportation Hazardous Materials Regulations (49 C.F.R. 171, et seq., as amended), or
in accordance with state law.
(c) Transport shall mean to move any vehicle requiring placards upon any public
thoroughfare or highway.
Section 37-151. Hazardous cargo route.
No person may knowingly transport materials or knowingly cause hazardous materials to be
transported upon any public street and highway within the corporate limits of the City of Temple, Texas,
except upon those portions of Interstate Highway 35 and H.K. Dodgen Loop, as more fully shown on a
map, attached hereto and made a part hereof for all purposes as Exhibit "A," and on file in the Office of
the Director of Public Works of the City of Temple. Provided, however, this section does not apply to
those persons who leave the hazardous cargo route by the most direct route to make a delivery or pickup
of hazardous cargo within the corporate limits of the City of Temple.
Section 37-152. Vehicle operation.
The operator of a vehicle used to transport hazardous materials requiring placards must:
Page 31 of 32
(a) Apply and display appropriate placards meeting U.S. Department of Transportation
specifications; and
(b) Keep immediately accessible, complete, and adequate shipping papers for the hazardous
materials being shipped, which papers must specify:
(1) Origin of the shipment;
(2) Destination or delivery point of the shipment;
(3) Proper shipping name;
(4) Hazard class;
(5) Proper identification number;
(6) Total quantity of material being shipped; and
(c) Before operation, inspect the vehicle and determine that:
(1) The brakes are in good working condition;
(2) The steering mechanism is in good working condition;
(3) The electrical wiring is well insulated and firmly secured;
(4) The required lights are operative;
(5) The vehicle is in a safe condition to transport hazardous materials;
(6) The fire extinguisher is fully charged and operational; and
(7) All emergency features on bulk transport carriers are installed and operative as
outlined in U.S. Department of Transportation specifications and requirements.
Section 37-153. Presumptions; defenses.
It is presumed for purposes of prosecution under this ordinance that a transporting vehicle
contains hazardous materials if it bears a placard. It is a defense to prosecution under this ordinance that
the transporting vehicle was empty.
Page 32 of 32
Section 37-154. Enforcement.
The Police Department of the City of Temple is expressly authorized to enforce the provisions of
this ordinance.
Revised by Ordinance No. 2015-4738 (12/3/15)
Chapter 38
WATER, SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 38-1. Water wells--Drilling Permit.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drill or commence to drill a water well in the city
limits without first obtaining a water well drilling permit from the water superintendent.
Sec. 38-2. Same--Covering.
Each person owning a water well or hereafter owning or drilling a water well in the city
shall enclose such well with a cement covering or other covering equally as good and of
sufficient quality and construction to keep mosquitoes, flies, rats and all other animals,
insects and foreign matter from entering such well, and sufficient to prevent the well from
becoming unsanitary for any reason whatsoever.
Sec. 38-3. Same--Not to be connected with public water system.
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any private water well with any pipe,
water main or any other portion of the public water system of the city. The city shall have
the right to disconnect any connection in violation of this section.
Sec. 38-4. When sewer connections required.
Each property owner owning a lot or plot of ground in the city on which there is located
a house or dwelling occupied or capable of being occupied by human beings, which lot or
plot of ground is located within two hundred (200) feet of a city sewer line, is hereby
required to connect such house or dwelling with the sewer line at his expense, if the sewer
line is lower than such residence or dwelling connection, and toilet facilities and keep the
same connected at all times with the city sewer line so that the occupants of the house, or
dwelling shall at all times use the sewer facilities of the city.
Sec. 38-5. Construction and use of septic tanks and cesspools.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, use, keep, maintain, or allow to be
constructed, used, kept or maintained, a septic tank or cesspool used for toilet purposes by
human beings on any lot or plot of ground where a sewer connection is required by section
38-4. If such lot or plot of ground is so located that such sewer connection is not required,
the owner or occupant thereof may construct and use, for toilet purposes, a septic tank or
cesspool of a type and design approved by the state health department, but the construction
or use of any other type of septic tank or cesspool on such lot or plot of ground is hereby
declared to be unlawful.
Sec. 38-6. Pit toilets prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, use, keep, maintain, or to allow to be
constructed, used, kept or maintained, a pit toilet for toilet purposes of human beings on any
lot or plot of ground located within the city limits.
Sec. 38-7. Unlawful deposit of sewage.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or place any human excreta upon the
ground or in any other way so as to expose it to the air or to flies on any lot or plot of
ground within the city. It shall likewise be unlawful for the owner or controller of any
premises, or for any other person to permit or allow any foul or unwholesome fluid, fecal or
urinal matter, fluid or substance, or washings or slops from any kitchen, laundry, or private
or public house or place, to run into or be deposited in any excavation, pit, sink or well.
Sec. 38-8. Connections to city systems to be made by water and sewer departments.
All connections with water and sewer mains and laterals in the city shall be done by
employees of the water and sewer department of the city, and under the supervision of the
water and sewer superintendent, and it shall be unlawful for any other person to make any
connection with any water or sewer main or lateral in the city.
Sec. 38-9. Applicants and work order for connections with city systems.
Any person who desires a connection with the water and sewer mains and laterals of the
city shall make application therefore to the water and sewer department, on forms
prescribed by it, at least two (2) days in advance of the time such connection is desired to be
in effect; whereupon the work order shall be issued and all laying of pipes from such main
or lateral to the property line shall be done by the city.
Sec. 38-10. Same--New construction.
(a) Terms defined. The term "new user" when used in this section shall mean any
landowner, developer or other person who connects to a newly constructed sewer trunk
main, water distribution main or similar facility which is a part of the city's water and
sanitary sewer system or part of a system which is managed or operated by the city when
that landowner, developer or other person is either not presently served in that particular
area by the city water and sanitary sewer system or who receives upgraded service. The
term "upgraded service" shall mean service in the form of increased capacity due to an
increase in the size of the line or other improvement which is a part of the new construction.
(b) Authorization for one-time charge for new users. The following charge shall be
made and collected by the water and sewer department for each water and sewer tap
connection demanded by a "new user" resulting from newly constructed sewer trunk mains,
water distribution mains, lift stations and similar facilities:
(1) A one-time connection fee of thirty-one cents ($0.31) per gallon of daily flow for
connections by a new user into or onto the Fryers Creek Trunk Sewer Project.
(2) A one-time connection fee per gallon of daily flow determined by dividing the cost
of the improvements by the total daily capacity of the line to be charged to all
new users of newly constructed or improved sewer trunk mains, water
distribution mains, lift stations and other similar facilities. Provided, however, the
exact connection fee to be charged for each project shall be determined by the
superintendent of water utilities and approved by the city council taking into
consideration the above mentioned formula and any factors which may be
reasonably considered in determining the exact connection fee.
(3) Nothing herein shall prevent the city through its superintendent of water utilities
from utilizing the water and sewer extension and rebate procedures set forth in
Article III of this chapter as an alternative to the connection fee set forth herein.
Sec. 38-11. Interfering with or injuring water equipment or apparatus.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or injure in any manner any
reservoir, tank, fountain, pipe, stop cock, valve or other apparatus pertaining to any water
system in the city, or to turn on or off, without authority, the water in any street hydrant or
other water fixture.
Sec. 38-12. Pollution of water sources generally.
It shall be unlawful for any person in this city to bathe his hands, face, feet or any other
portion of his body in, or pollute or make foul the water of any public or private cistern,
tank, spring or well, or to water any animal in any spring. Likewise, any person who shall
place, throw or deposit in any well, cistern, tank, fountain, spring or other place containing
water in this city, any substance or liquid whatever, calculated to pollute, poison or render
unwholesome the water therein, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Sec. 38-13. Pollution of Knob Creek.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to throw, place,
put, conduct or deposit into Knob Creek, or any tributary, ditch, drain, gutter, gulley, pipe
receptacle or conduit leading into Knob Creek or any tributary thereof, any filth, foul
matter, offal, refuse, slops, vegetable matter, human or animal excrement, alvine or fecal
matter or any carcass or any part of any dead animal, fish or fowl, or soapy water, suds,
dishwater, soapsuds or any water impregnated with soap, pearline, washing powder or any
substance or preparation of any nature whatever used in water to aid in its cleansing effect,
or any liquid or substance of any nature, kind, class or character whatever that may pollute
the waters of Knob Creek or that may be calculated to rot or decay or cause to become
putrid or foul or make the water of Knob Creek putrid or foul. It shall be unlawful for any
person within the corporate limits of the city to cause, suffer or permit any violation of this
section upon any premises owned or occupied by him or controlled by him as agent, lessee,
manager or otherwise.
Sec. 38-14. Leon River Reservoir--Swimming and fishing prohibited at certain
location.
It shall be unlawful for any person to swim or fish in or on the waters of the Leon River
Reservoir, located on the Leon River between the cities of Temple and Belton, at any place
between the banks of the reservoir and between the dam located just south of the highway
bridge across the reservoir on U.S. Highway No. 81, and a point two thousand eight
hundred (2,800) feet up the river from the location of the water intake pipe of the city,
located on the East bank of the reservoir.
Sec. 38-15. Same--Boating prohibited at certain location.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride in a boat, on a raft or any other conveyance
placed in or on the waters of the Leon River Reservoir between the dam and a point two
thousand eight hundred (2,800) feet up the river from the water intake pipe of the city.
Sec. 38-16. Same--Deposit of foreign substances.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any boat, log, stick, can, bucket, trash, debris
or foreign substance of any kind in the water of the Leon River Reservoir between the dam
and a point two thousand eight hundred (2,800) feet up the river from the location of the
water intake pipe of the city.
Sec. 38-17. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe; minimum specifications.
(a) Four (4) inch through twelve (12) inch polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe which meets
the minimum specifications set out in paragraph (b) hereof may be used for the Temple
municipal water main distribution system under the guidelines set out herein.
(b) Material specifications for four (4) inch through twelve (12) inch polyvinyl chloride
(PVC) pipe for use in the Temple municipal water main distribution system shall be as
follows:
(1) Scope and product:
a. Requirements for unplasticized polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe for municipal
distribution systems. There shall be a minimum pressure classification of one
hundred fifty (150) pounds per square inch (psi) and dimension ration (DR) of
eighteen (18). The pipe class and DR will be indicated on plans.
b. The pipe shall meet or exceed requirements of AWWA C-900, PVC pipe with
cast iron outside dimensions and with rubber ring gaskets. PVC water pipe shall
be listed by Underwriters' Laboratories and approved for use in cities and towns
of Texas by the state board of insurance. The rigid PVC pipe shall bear the seal
of approval (or "NSF" mark) of the National Sanitation Foundation Testing
Laboratory for potable water pipe. Provisions must be made for the contraction
and expansion at each joint with a rubber ring, and an integral thickened bell,
twin-gasketed coupling, or integral sleeve as part of each joint. Pipe and fittings
must be assembled with a nontoxic lubricant. Laying lengths shall nominally be
twenty (20) feet plus or minus (±) one inch (Laying lengths of ten (10) feet or
thirteen (13) feet may be utilized for pipe lines laid on a curve when deemed
appropriate by the city engineer.)
c. Pipe shall be made in nominal size of four (4) to twelve (12) inches, and shall
meet the dimension ratios (DR's) and physical dimensions as shown in Table 2,
save and except that the minimum pressure class shall be one hundred fifty (150)
pounds per square inch (psi) and minimum DR shall be eighteen (18).
TABLE 2
Dimensions and Pressure Classes for Dimension Ratio (DR) for PVC 1120 Pipe
With Cast-Iron Pipe-Equivalent OD's
Pressure Class*
Nominal at 73.4F(23C) OD--in. Wall Thickness--in.
Size--in. --psi DRAverage Tolerance Min. Tolerance
4 150 18 4,800 ±0.0090.267 +0.032
4 200 14 4,800 ±0.0090.343 +0.041
6 150 18 6,900 ±0.0110.383 +0.046
6 200 14 6,900 ±0.0110.493 +0.059
8 150 18 9.050 ±0.0150.503 +0.060
8 200 14 9.050 ±0.0150.646 +0.078
10 150 18 11.100 ±0.0150.617 +0.074
10 200 14 11.100 ±0.0150.793 +0.095
12 150 18 13.200 ±0.0150.733 +0.088
12 200 14 13.200 ±0.0150.943 +0.113
(2) Materials. Pipe shall be made from NSF-approved Class 1245-4A or B PVC
compound, conforming to ASTM resin specification D1784.
(3) Hydrostatic routine test. Each length of pipe shall be tested to four (4) times the
class pressure of the pipe for a minimum dwell of five (5) seconds. Field testing
shall be done under a separate specification.
(4) Service taps:
a. All corporation cocks shall be installed using the proper service clamp or
saddle for PVC pipe that:
1. Provides full support around the circumference of the pipe;
2. Provides a bearing area of sufficient width (two (2) inches minimum)
along the axis of the pipe;
3. Is constructed of bronze, stainless steel or epoxy coated cast iron.
b. All taps will be made with an approved bit/cutter for PVC pipe designed to
remove/retain the shavings and plug. Any tap larger than two (2) inches will
require use of a tapping sleeve and valve.
(5) Certification. When requested, the manufacturer will furnish certification that pipe
meets all requirements of this specification.
Secs. 38-18--38-29. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. CUSTOMER SERVICE
Sec. 38-30. Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable to this article:
Business days. All days, other than Saturday, Sunday and holidays on which the
Utility Business Office is closed under authority of the City Council, are declared to be
"business days."
Class A service means water, sewer service, or both provided for a dwelling designed
and constructed for occupancy by one family, including mobile and HUD-code
manufactured homes which are used as dwellings and which are not located in a mobile
home or recreational vehicle park.
Class B service means water, sewer service, or both provided for any location except a
dwelling designed and constructed for occupancy by one (1) family. Class B sewer
service includes but is not limited to service for office, church, retail, business,
commercial, industrial, governmental and manufacturing users; mobile and HUD-code
manufactured homes not used as dwellings, or located in mobile home parks and
recreational vehicle parks; and dwellings designed and constructed for occupancy by
more than one family, such as apartments, duplexes and four-plexes.
Good payment history means that for the previous twelve (12) consecutive months,
service has been maintained in the customers' name (including transfers, new meters and
address changes) without having service disconnected for non-payment and without
having more than two penalties assessed for late payment.
Office hours. The Utility Business Office shall be open for all purposes on all business
days from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
Sec. 38-31. Rates, deposits, penalties and service charges.
The Utility Business Office is hereby authorized to charge and collect monthly service
charges for water and sewer service, security deposits, penalties and other charges
established by ordinance or resolution. The amounts to be charged shall be established by
Resolution of the City Council and adjusted from time to time as necessary to sustain
efficient utility services and comply with laws and regulations.
Sec. 38-32. City divided into zones for billing purposes.
The Utility Business Office may divide utility service areas into geographical zones
for billing purposes. A current map of billing zones shall be maintained and made
available for public inspection in the Utility Business Office.
Sec. 38-33. When bills due.
The minimum monthly billing cycle for utility services shall be as follows:
(a) The invoice date is the date that payment becomes due.
(b) The penalty date, which shall never be less than 16 days from date invoice issued,
is the date that penalty for late payment becomes due.
(c) The disconnect date, which shall never be less than 10 days after the penalty date,
is the date that utility service may be disconnected for non-payment.
For purposes of scheduling services of the Utility Business Office, billing cycles may be
staggered by billing zones.
Sec. 38-34. Contents of invoice.
Utility invoices are due on the date the invoice for service is issued. Invoices shall
provide the following information:
(a) Customer information
(1) Account number
(2) Customer number
(3) Date invoice issued
(4)Water meter reading in 100 gallons
(5)Winter water average, if applicable
(b) Consumption information
(1) Meter read date
(2) Billing period
(3) Present reading
(4) Previous reading
(c) Customer charges
(1) Previous balance
(2) Water
(3) Sewer
(4) Sanitation
(5) Drainage
(6) Cost sharing fees
(7) Sales tax
(8) New connect fee
(9) Re-read charge
(10) Transfer fee
(11) Miscellaneous charges
(12) Disconnect charge
(13) Amount due on date invoice issued
(14) Amount due late charge
(15) Date on which service may be disconnected for non-payment
Sec. 38-35. Failure to receive bill does not excuse nonpayment.
A customer's failure to receive a utility bill shall not excuse failure to pay the same
before it becomes delinquent.
Sec. 38-36. When deposit required-Class A service.
(a) Deposits required. Customers requesting new Class A service or requesting
reconnection following disconnection for non-payment shall be required to post a deposit
if the customer's utility service at any address has been disconnected for nonpayment or
the customer has not established good payment history.
(b) Deposits not required. Customers requesting new Class A service or an additional
meter at the same service address shall be exempt from posting a deposit when the
following conditions are met:
(1) The customer has established good payment history; or
(2) A letter of reference citing good payment history from another utility is submitted
to the Business Office; or
(3) For persons employed in the U. S. armed forces, a Base Authorization Quarters
(BAQ) certificate is submitted; or
(4) Any owner or manager of rental property who has a utility account that is not
overdue requests 10-day cleanup service for the rental property. A flat fee covers water
and sewer service for a maximum of ten (10) days and two thousand (2,000) gallons of
water. Consumption exceeding 2,000 gallons of water is billed at the regular rate.
(5) The City Manager is authorized to waive utility deposits for service in the event of
a state or federal emergency declaration, when he determines it is in the best interest of
the City to do so.
(c) Deposits refunded. Deposits posted to secure Class A service accounts shall be
refunded whenever the customer establishes good payment history. Months for which
service was temporarily disconnected at the customer's request are counted. Refunds of
deposits shall be paid by check. Checks shall be mailed monthly to eligible customers.
Sec. 38-37. When deposit required-Class B service.
(a) Deposits required for certain categories of businesses. Customers requesting new
Class B service for property used as a restaurant, tavern, private club, apartment, hotel, or
motel shall post a deposit in an amount established by resolution of the City Council.
(b) Deposits required-generally. Customers requesting new Class B service or
requesting reconnection following disconnection for non-payment shall be required to
post a deposit if the customer's utility service at any address has been disconnected for
nonpayment or the customer has not established good payment history.
(c) Deposits not required. Customers-other than the categories excluded in part (a) of
this section-requesting new Class B service or an additional meter at the same service
address shall be exempt from posting a deposit when the following conditions are met:
(1) The customer has established good payment history; or
(2) A letter of reference citing good credit history from another utility is submitted to
the Business Office; or
(3) Any owner or manager of rental property who has a utility account that is current
requests 10-day cleanup service for the rental property. A flat fee covers water and sewer
service for a maximum of ten (10) days and two thousand (2,000) gallons of water.
Consumption exceeding 2,000 gallons of water is billed at the regular rate.
(4) Deposits shall not be required for service provided to federal, state or local
government entities; or
(5) The Temple Economic Development Corporation requests waiver of the deposit as
an economic development incentive.
(6) The City Manager is authorized to waive utility deposits for service in the event of
a state or federal emergency declaration, when he determines it is in the best interest of
the City to do so.
(d) Deposits refunded. Deposits for service to categories listed in part (a) of this
section are not refundable until the account is closed. Deposits posted to secure Class B
service accounts shall be refunded whenever the customer has established good payment
history. Months for which service was temporarily disconnected at the customer's request
are counted. Refunds of deposits shall be paid by check. Checks shall be mailed monthly
to eligible customers.
Sec. 38-38. Delinquencies-penalties.
A utility service accounts becomes delinquent if payment is not received by the Utility
Business Office before 5:00 p.m. on the penalty date shown on the customer's invoice. A
check or bank draft that is dishonored by the customer’s bank does not constitute payment
of a utility service account.
A late charge or penalty shall be applied only to current monthly charges of fifteen
dollars ($15.00) or more. Late charges shall not be assessed against federal, state or local
governmental entities.
Sec. 38-39. Delinquencies-reminder notices.
Prior to disconnection of service for non-payment of any customer charges shown on
the invoice, the Utility Business Office will send a reminder notice to customers whose
accounts have become delinquent. Utility service shall be disconnected when delinquent
charges equaling or exceeding the minimum utility services billing rate are not paid
before the Disconnect Date shown on the customer's invoice. Failure to receive a
reminder notice shall not excuse non-payment or prevent disconnection.
Service will not be disconnected for failure to pay the current penalty. Failure to pay
penalties assessed in prior months will result in disconnection.
Sec. 38-40. Delinquencies-Application of Deposit to Unpaid Charges.
Deposits shall be applied to unpaid charges when an account is closed for any reason.
When the deposit is insufficient to satisfy the unpaid charges, the Utility Business Office
will bill the customer for any deficiency greater than two dollars ($2.00).
Sec. 38-41. Returned check policy.
A fee shall be charged for processing each check or bank draft given in payment for
utility services which is dishonored by the customer's bank for any reason. On or after the
disconnect date shown on the customer’s invoice, utility service is subject to immediate
disconnection when the City’s bank notifies the City that the customer’s check or bank
draft has been dishonored.
The Utility Business Office will not accept payments made by check or bank draft for
charges owed on any utility accounts of a customer who has had three (3) or more checks
dishonored within a period of one (1) year. Payments must be made by cash, cashier's
check or money order until the customer has maintained service in the name (including
transfers, new meters and address changes) for at least twelve (12) consecutive months,
without having service disconnected for non-payment or two or more penalties assessed
for late payment.
Sec. 38-42. Reconnection after disconnection for non-payment.
Utility customers whose service has been disconnected for non-payment are entitled to
have service reconnected upon payment of the following charges:
(a) utility charges which are due or delinquent;
(b) reconnect-disconnect fee;
(c) service charges incurred for tampering with or damaging meters, padlocks and
locking devices; and
(d) deposit in the amount which would be required to institute new service.
A Base Authorization Quarters (BAQ) certificate shall not be accepted in lieu of a
deposit following disconnection for non-payment.
Persons requesting new service at an address where service has been disconnected for
non-payment must present evidence of a lease, rental agreement or other real property
transaction, for purposes of verifying that service is not being restored to the customer
whose non-payment precipitated disconnection. Persons who reside with a customer
whose service has been disconnected for non-payment are not eligible for new service at
that residence until all conditions for reconnection are met.
Sec. 38-43. Liens for delinquent utility bills.
The Utility Business Office may impose a lien against property that is not protected by
the Texas Constitution as a homestead, for delinquent bills for municipal utility service to
the property. Liens for delinquent utility bills shall be perfected by recording in the real
property records of the county where the property is located a notice of lien containing a
legal description of the property and the account number for the delinquent charges. Liens
may include penalties, interest and collection costs. A lien for utility service is inferior to
a bona fide mortgage lien that is recorded before the recording of the City's lien in the real
property records of the county where the property is located. The City's lien is superior to
all other liens, including previously recorded judgment liens and any liens recorded after
the City's lien.
A lien shall not apply to bills for service connected to a tenant's name after notice by
the property owner to the municipality that the property is rental property. A lien shall not
apply to bills for service connected in a tenant's name prior to March 4, 1993.
Sec. 38-44. Voluntary disconnection.
A disconnect fee is charged for temporary disconnection. The Utility Business Office
shall disconnect water utility service on request of a customer, by telephone, for Class A
or Class B service, when the customer can provide proper account information for
purposes of identification. The requirement for identification is intended to protect
customers from disconnection initiated by unauthorized persons.
Sec. 38-45. Separate water meter for each residence or apartment.
The City shall install a separate water meter for each separate residence which is not
divided into apartments. The City shall also install a separate water meter for each
apartment of each residence and apartment building, except when the owner of such
residence or apartment building assumes all liability for water and sewer services
furnished such residence or apartment building.
Sec. 38-46. Water charge when meter fails or becomes defective.
A service charge will be charged for meter testing requested by a customer if testing
shows that meter was not out of tolerance in either direction. Whenever a water meter
installed by the city fails or becomes defective, the meter shall be replaced and such
customer shall be charged a monthly fee equal to the average of the last three (3) normal
months' consumption. This average fee shall be assessed for each month the meter was
defective.
Sec. 38-47. Re-reading of water meters.
A fee shall be charged for rereading a water meter at the customer's request, unless it
is found that the prior reading was in error.
Sec. 38-48. Fire hydrant meters.
After March 4, 1993, a fire hydrant meter will be installed and relocated only by
service personnel of the Water Department. Fire hydrant meters rented by customers prior
to March 4, 1993, must be returned to the Water Department by June 1, 1993, for
processing in accordance with this section.
Requests for installation of a fire hydrant meters shall be made by written application
in the Utility Business Office. Payment of the required security deposit for installation of
a fire hydrant meter must be made in advance of installation. The service charge for
relocation of a fire hydrant meter assigned to a customer will be billed to the customer's
account. Customers requesting use of a fire hydrant meter agree to be financially
responsible for any damage to the locking device or gate valve on the meter which occurs
while the meter is assigned to them.
The Water Department shall be responsible for reading fire hydrant meters, billing for
consumption obtained through fire hydrant meters, recalibrating meters prior to reassignment,
and notifying the Temple Fire Department of all installations and relocations
of fire hydrant meters. Meters which have not been used for a period of one (1) month
may be removed by service personnel, to lessen risks of damage or misappropriation and
to make the meter available to other customers.
Sec. 38-49. Temple Shares program.
The Temple Shares program is hereby established for the purpose of aiding customers
who need assistance to pay utility bills owed to the City of Temple. Customers may
contribute to Temple Shares by submitting an application to the Utility Business Office.
The minimum contribution which can be billed is one dollar ($1.00) per month. The
Utility Business Office will maintain records of all contributions. Letters acknowledging
customers' contributions will be sent annually during January. The Director of Utilities
shall have authority to suspend collection of contributions whenever adequate funding is
established.
A board consisting of the Utility Business Manager, a member of a benevolent
organization appointed by the Mayor, and a city employee appointed by the City
Manager, will meet as needed to review requests for assistance. Appointed members of
the board serve terms of two years and rotate off board in alternate years.
Funds may be expended only with approval of the board. When disconnection of
service for non-payment is imminent, an extension of time for payment may be granted by
the Utility Business Manager or deputy of the Manager.
Criteria for assistance will be based on individual need as determined by the board,
giving consideration to emergencies presented by events such as unemployment, illness
and death. Assistance will be granted one time per year except in cases of extreme
circumstances.
Sec. 38-50. Director of utilities-rule-making authority.
(a) The director of utilities shall promulgate such rules and regulations as are
necessary to administer this article and shall make such interpretations of the various
provisions of this chapter as are necessary to ensure proper administration and
enforcement. All rules and regulations promulgated by the director of utilities shall be in
writing and shall be adopted by the city council.
(b) The director of utilities shall from time to time make interpretations of the various
provisions of this article and in doing so shall seek the advice of the city manager and the
city attorney. Any such interpretations shall be in writing, shall be distributed to the
affected departments and a copy of such interpretation shall be provided to any citizen
who may request a copy thereof.
(c) Any utility customer of the City of Temple who is adversely affected by an
interpretation of the provisions of this article made by the director of the public utilities
shall have the right to appeal such interpretation or ruling to the city council of the City of
Temple. Provided, that such appeal is made within ten (10) days of the time when the
appellant received notice of said rule or regulation or should have known of said rule or
regulation. Any such appeal shall be in writing and the city council shall set a date for a
hearing of said appeal within thirty (30) days of the appellant's filing of a written request
for such hearing with the city manager.
(d) All hearings of the city council shall be public, and the appellant, his
representative, the director of utilities and any other person whose interest may be
affected by the matter on appeal shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The mayor, or
in his absence, the mayor pro-tem, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. Upon hearing, the board may reverse, or modify, the interpretation of the
director of utilities, but may not actually change or alter the provisions of this article
without passing a duly adopted ordinance. Any decision of the city council shall be
recorded in the minutes and shall be in writing. Such record, immediately following the
board's decision, shall be filed in the office of the director of utilities, who, upon request,
shall promptly furnish a copy to the appellant, his representative, and any person who has
filed a written entry of appearance.
(e) Every decision of the board shall be final, except when such decision shall affect
vested rights of the appellant to the extent that appellant may have a legal right to pursue
a remedy in a court of competent jurisdiction. In such a case, the decision of the city
council shall only become final if no appeal of that decision is made by filing a suit in a
court of competent jurisdiction within thirty (30) days of the date of their ruling.
Secs. 38-51--38-70. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. WATER SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY
Sec. 38-71. City authorized to sell water, outside city limits.
The City of Temple, Texas, may sell water, may participate in the construction and
maintenance of water mains, and may permit connections to be made to such water mains
outside the city limits; provided that the terms and conditions hereinafter set out are met.
Sec. 38-72. Application for authority to sell water; contents; hearing; final action by
city council.
Authority to sell water and permission to construct water mains and/or make
connections to such mains outside the city limits may be granted by resolution of the city
council upon application and hearing. The application may be made by any interested party
or parties and shall be made in writing addressed to and filed with the secretary of the city
council.
The application shall consist of an original and two (2) copies and shall set out the
names of the parties requesting permission to purchase water, install water mains, or make a
tap; the use to which the water is to be put; the size and type of pipe proposed to be used;
the estimated cost of construction; the estimated daily average amount of water which such
use would consume; a plat, map or sketch showing the location of the proposed use, the
location of adjoining properties and names of owners, adjacent streets, the location of the
line or main proposed to be tapped, the proposed location of the line to be installed, any
other information that would be helpful or of assistance; and a short statement of the
reasons why the city council should grant such application, whichever is applicable.
Upon receipt thereof, the secretary shall transmit the copies to the secretary of the
planning commission agenda, provided that the application shall have been received at least
ten (10) days prior to such next regular meeting in the name of such applicants. At the
planning commission meeting the applicants and all interested parties may appear and be
heard. The planning commission shall vote either to accept, conditionally accept, or deny
such application.
For final action, the applicant shall appeal the decision of the planning commission to
the city council. It shall require a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the city council to overrule or
modify the decision of the planning commission.
Sec. 38-73. Prerequisites for securing permission to sell water.
Before permission to sell water, install a main or make a tap is granted, the following
terms and conditions shall be met:
(1) The pipe and installation thereof shall meet city specifications.
(2) The superintendent of the water department shall calculate the average daily
amount of water that the use proposed by the applicants would consume and
certify that the City of Temple has the capability of supplying such an amount in
addition to that used by the residents and businesses of the city.
(3) The city engineer shall calculate the main size which is necessary to furnish the
amount of water to be used by such applicants, the water main deemed desirable
to meet the future needs of the area surrounding the location of the proposed use,
and the acreage that should be served in the future by a main located in the
proposed location. If a main size larger than that needed to serve the applicants is
deemed necessary to meet the future needs of the area, the additional expense of
materials and installation caused thereby shall be borne by the city as follows: By
an agreement refunding thirty (30) percent of the revenue derived from such
main for a period of twelve (12) years from the date of completion of the line, the
total initial cost to be borne by the applicant.
(4) Should others thereafter desire to tap the main, the owner, other than the City of
Temple, may charge for the tap a pro rata amount of the cost of the main based
on the following formula:
proposed acreage to be served = original cost of main-(depreciation and amount rebated)
acreage to be served by tap charge for tap
(5) The owner will not allow taps onto such a main without prior approval from the
City of Temple. the city shall make such taps at the expense set out in the
appropriate ordinance, and the person desiring the tap shall pay to the City of
Temple the charge, if any, for the tap in addition to the payment set out in (4). If
a tap is allowed or permitted on the main without prior approval of the city, the
city may cease selling water to applicant.
(6) The City of Temple reserves the right to make periodic inspections of the main or
mains and, if such mains do not meet city specifications in any particular, the
City of Temple may cease transporting and/or selling water through such line.
(7) A meter shall be placed at the point where such main branches off from the city
water system, or at the intersection of such main and the then existing city limits,
or as near thereto as may be practicable, whichever location is, in the judgment of
the city, best suited. Such meter will be read periodically and the owner will be
billed for the amount of water which has passed through the meter at a rate not
more than or in excess of double the amount paid by users within the city.
(8) If the city limits are extended to take in a part or all of such mains, the City of
Temple may by resolution assume the title and maintenance of that part of the
line taken over. The price to be paid shall be the original pro rata cost of that
portion of the main to which title is assumed less the pro rata amount of
depreciation, rebate under subsection (3) above, and charge to subsequent users.
In such event the meter, if located at the city limits line shall be moved at the
expense of the city and the pro rata portion of the rebate, if any, as to the acquired
mains would cease to be paid. As to properties which are subsequently brought
into the city limits, the rate charged shall become that charged to users within the
city. Nothing herein shall obligate the city to assume or pay any debts outstanding
and owing from the applicant to any person because of such main; but such
obligation shall be and remain that of the applicant or owner.
(9) If applicants cannot or will not install the main size determined to be desirable,
then such applicants must request that they be brought into the city limits. In such
cases, the installation of mains shall be controlled by the applicable state statutes
and city ordinances.
Sec. 38-74. Contract; required; contents.
A contract setting out the agreement of the parties shall be executed and shall contain
the agreement of the parties concerning the following items:
(1) Purpose of contract.
(2) Quantity of water to be supplied. In no case shall the obligation of the City of
Temple to supply water be absolute, but the obligation shall be conditioned on
the availability of water.
(3) Term of agreement.
(4) The rates to be charged shall be not more than twice the rate charged users within
the city limits. The rate will increase or decrease in proportion to the increase or
decrease of the charge to users within the city.
(5) Point of delivery of water.
(6) Quality of water.
(7) Air-gap reservoirs.
(8) Inspections.
(9) Title to the water and to the mains and appurtenances.
(10) Indemnity. The purchaser shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the city
from any liability whatsoever.
(11) Resale of water is to be prohibited.
(12) Forfeiture.
(13) Provisions relating to emergencies.
(14) Any other matter which the parties deem desirable or necessary to include in the
contract.
Sec. 38-75. Discontinuance of water service--In cases of emergency.
In cases of emergency only, the city shall have the right to discontinue water service to
users outside of the limits of the city without notice.
Sec. 38-76. Same--When city water supply becomes inadequate.
Upon thirty (30) days notice, the city shall have the right to discontinue service to users
outside of the limits of the city in the event the water supply of the city becomes inadequate.
In such events, service to users outside of the limits of the city shall be resumed when the
supply becomes adequate for the needs of the residents of the city and users outside of the
limits of the city.
Sec. 38-77. State department of health approval of plans and specifications required.
The plans and specifications of the line proposed to be installed must be approved by the
department of health of the State of Texas prior to their becoming binding.
Secs. 38-78--38-89. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. INDUSTRIAL WASTES STANDARDS
Sec. 38-90. General provisions, purpose and policy.
This ordinance sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned
treatment works for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable State and
Federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and
the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 403).
The objectives of this ordinance are:
(a) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment
works that will interfere with its operation;
(b) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment
works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated,
into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment
works;
(c) To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be
affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general
public;
(d) To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the
publicly owned treatment works;
(e) To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation,
maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works; and
(f) To enable the city to comply with its Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (TPDES) permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other
Federal or State laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject.
This ordinance shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. The
ordinance authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for
monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review
procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.
Sec. 38-91. Administration.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the director of public works shall administer,
implement, and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. Any powers granted to or duties
imposed upon the director of public works may be delegated by the director to a duly
authorized representative.
Sec. 38-92. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations and or definitions, when used in this ordinance, shall have
the designated meanings:
• BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand
• BMP - Best Management Practice
• BMR - Baseline Monitoring Report
• CFR - Code of Federal Regulations
• CIU - Categorical Industrial User
• COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand
• EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
• gpd - gallons per day
• IU - Industrial User
• mg/l - milligrams per liter
• POTW - publicly owned treatment works
• RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
• SIC - Standard Industrial Classification
• SIU - Significant Industrial User
• SNC - Significant Noncompliance
• TCEQ - Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
• TPDES -Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
• TSS - Total Suspended Solids
• TTO - Total Toxic Organics
• U.S.C.- United States Code
Sec. 38-93. Definitions.
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in
this ordinance, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated.
“Act or The Act” shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known
as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251.
Administrative fine shall mean a punitive monetary charge unrelated to actual
treatment costs which are assessed by the control authority rather than a court.
Approval authority shall mean the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
(TCEQ).
Authorized or duly authorized representative of the industrial user shall mean the
person authorized to represent, sign, and submit documents in accordance with the
following criteria:
(a) If the user is a corporation:
1. The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in
charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs
similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
2. The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating
facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including
having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to
assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and
regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions
taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual
wastewater discharge permit requirements; and where authority to sign
documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance
with corporate procedures.
(b) If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or
proprietor, respectively.
(c) If the user is a Federal, State, or local governmental facility, a director or
highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the
activities of the government facility, or their designee.
(d) The individuals described in paragraphs (a) through (c), above, may designate
another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization
specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility
from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the City of Temple.
Best management practices or BMPs shall mean the schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to
implement the prohibitions listed in section 38-95 (a)[40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)].
BMPs include treatment procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or
leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five
(5) days at 20° centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/I).requirements,
operating
Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning three (3) feet outside
the inner face of the building wall.
Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
Bypass shall mean the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an
industrial user’s treatment facility.
Categorical industrial user shall mean an industrial user subject to categorical
standards as established by the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Categorical standard or pretreatment standard. Any regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c)
of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which
appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
Cease and desist order shall mean an administrative order directing an industrial
user to immediately halt illegal or unauthorized discharges.
Chemical oxygen demand or COD shall mean a measure of the oxygen required to
oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.
City shall mean the city of Temple, the city council of Temple or the duly
authorized representatives of the city.
Compliance order shall mean an administrative order directing a noncompliant
industry to achieve or restore compliance by a date specified in the order.
Composite sample shall mean a sampling method consisting of either discrete or
continuous samples collected in equal amounts and over equal time intervals. For
discrete sampling, at least 12 aliquots shall be composited. Where a 24 hour composite
sample is not feasible, four (4) grab samples may be collected in equal amounts and equal
time intervals. All samples must be representatives of normal daily operations.
Consent order shall mean an administrative order embodying a legally enforceable
agreement between the control authority and the noncompliant industrial user designed to
restore the user to compliance status.
Control authority shall mean the city or duly authorized representatives of the city.
Daily limit or daily maximum limit shall mean the maximum allowable discharge
of a pollutant over a calendar day or equivalent representative 24-hour period. Where
daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass and the daily discharge is calculated
by multiplying the daily average concentration and total flow volumes in the same 24-
hour period by a conversion factor to get the desired units. Where daily limits are
expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the composite sample value,
or flow weighted average if more than one discrete sample was collected. Where flow
weighting is infeasible, the daily average is the arithmetic average of all samples if
analyzed separately, or the same value if samples are composited prior to analysis.
Direct discharge shall mean the discharge of untreated wastewater directly to the
waters of the State of Texas.
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA shall mean the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division
director, or other duly authorized official of said agency.
Existing source shall mean any source of discharge, the construction or operation
of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical
pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is
thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act.
Garbage shall mean solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing
food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
Grab sample shall mean a sample which is taken from a wastestream without
regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15)
minutes.
Indirect discharge or discharge shall mean the introduction of pollutants into the
POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (4) of the
Act, as amended.
Industrial user shall mean a source of indirect discharge which does not constitute
a “discharge of pollutants” under regulations issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act,
(33 USC 1317) into the wastewater system (including holding tank waste discharged into
the system).
Industrial wastes shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct
from sanitary sewer.
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit shall mean the maximum
concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the
analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial
flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
Interference shall mean a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause
of a violation of the TPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal
in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued
there under, or any more stringent State or local regulations:
Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act,
including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any State
regulations contained in any State sludge management plan
prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal
Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act;
and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
Local limit shall mean a specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the
city upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific
discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b).
Medical waste shall mean isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical
wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
Monthly average shall mean the arithmetic mean of the effluent samples collected
during a calendar month or specified 30-day period. Where the control authority has
taken a sample during the period, it must be included in the monthly average if provided
in time. However, where composite samples are required, grab samples taken for process
control or by the control authority are not to be included in a monthly average.
National pollution discharge elimination system or NPDES Permit shall mean a
permit pursuant to section 402 of the Act.
National pretreatment standards, pretreatment standard, or standard (i.e.
prohibitive discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits) shall
mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, which applies to Industrial users. This
term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 403.5.
New source
(a) Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be)
a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of
proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable
to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that
section, provided that:
1. The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at
which no other source is located; or
2. The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process
or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an
existing source; or
3. The production or wastewater generating processes of the building,
structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing
source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially
independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is
engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
(b) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a
modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building,
structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of section (a) (2) or (3) above but
otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.
(c) Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced
if the owner or operator has:
1. Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on site construction
program:
i. any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
ii. significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or
removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
2. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or
equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable
time. Options to purchase or contacts which can be terminated or modified
without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and
design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
paragraph.
Noncontact cooling water shall mean water used for cooling which does not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished
Pass through shall mean a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of
the city’s TPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation.
Person shall mean any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any
other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition
includes all Federal, State, and local governmental entities.
pH shall mean a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.
Pollutant shall mean dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock,
sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics
of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
Pretreatment or treatment shall mean the reduction of the amount of pollutants,
the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This
reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by
process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants
unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
Pretreatment requirements shall mean any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard.
Pretreatment standard or standard shall mean prohibited discharge standards,
categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.
Process wastewater shall mean any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any
raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by product, or waste product.
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharge shall mean absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in
section 38-95(a) of this ordinance.
Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be
carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no
particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension.
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW shall mean “treatment works,” as
defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. *1292). This definition includes any devices
or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage
or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a
treatment plant.
Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
Septic tank waste shall mean any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
Sewage shall mean human excrement and gray water (household showers, dish
washing operations, etc.).
Sewage treatment plant shall mean an arrangement of devices and structures used
for treating sewage.
Sewage works shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
Shall is mandatory; may is permissive or discretionary.
Significant industrial user shall mean:
(a) An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
(b) An industrial user that:
1. Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of
process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling,
and boiler blow down wastewater);
2. Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5) percent or more
of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW
treatment plant; or
3. Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable
potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement.
(c) Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (b), has no
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in
response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR
403((f) (6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
Slug load or slug shall mean any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which
could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 38-95(a) of this
ordinance. A slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including
but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a
reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the
POTW’s regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
Standard industrial classification code or SIC code shall mean a classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States
Office of Management and Budget.
Storm water shall mean any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
Suspended solids shall mean the total suspended matter that floats on the surface
of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by
laboratory filtering.
System shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of
sewage.
TBRSS pretreatment program shall mean the approved Temple-Belton Regional
Sewerage System pretreatment program as amended.
Temple pretreatment program shall mean the approved city of Temple
pretreatment program as amended.
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) shall mean the State agency
of that title, or where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the
director or other duly authorized official of said agency.
Upset shall mean an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with pretreatment regulations because of factors beyond the
reasonable control of the industrial user. This does not include noncompliance caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities,
lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
User shall mean any person who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution of
wastewater into city’s wastewater system.
User permit shall mean permits issued to significant industrial users and
categorical industrial users by the city as set forth in section 38-99 of this ordinance.
Wastewater shall mean liquid and any water-carried industrial wastes and sewage
from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities,
and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant shall mean the portion of the
POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste.
Sec. 38-94. Duties of the director of public works.
It shall be the duty of the director to see that certain provisions of this article as
pertaining to the use of public sewers are carried out, to determine if the sewage collected
by the sewer collection system is treatable, and to supervise the treatment of the sewage.
Sec. 38-95. General sewer use requirements for the Temple-Belton Regional
Sewerage System.
(a) Prohibited Discharge Standards.
1. General prohibitions.
i. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any
pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference.
These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether
or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any
other National, State, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements.
ii. If in the opinion of the director, the character of the sewage from any
manufacturer or industrial plant, building or other premises is such
that it will (1) injure or interfere with wastewater treatment
processes or facilities, (2) constitute a hazard to humans or animals,
(3) create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment
plant effluent, or (4) violate appropriate Federal, State or local
regulations, the city manager shall have the right to require such user
to dispose of such waste otherwise, and prevent it from entering
the system.
iii. The city shall require industrial users to control production of
all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with
categorical pretreatment standards and local limits upon reduction,
loss, or failure of its treatment facility. In the event of a
plant/system upset, provisions outlined in 40 CFR 403.16 shall prevail.
2. Specific Prohibitions. Except as hereinafter provided, no user shall
introduce or cause to be introduced into the sewerage system of the city,
directly or indirectly, any of the following pollutants, substances, or
wastewater:
i. Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified
in 40 CFR 261.21;
ii. Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 10.5 or otherwise
causing corrosive material damage to the POTW or equipment;
iii. Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
resulting in interference to the flow in the POTW or interference
with the proper operation of the sewage works,
iv. Wastewater with twenty-four (24) hour composite samples
containing biochemical oxygen demand and/or total suspended solids
in excess of eight (800) milligram per liter (mg/l).
v. Wastewater having a temperature greater than 40ºC (104ºF), or
which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting
in interference,
vi. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
vii. Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems;
viii. Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated
by the director in accordance with section 38-97 (c) of this
ordinance;
ix. Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient
to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into
the sewer for maintenance;
x. Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, inks, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the
treatment plant’s effluent, thereby violating the city’s TPDES permit;
xi. Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations;
xii. Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, contact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater,
unless specifically authorized by the city;
xiii. Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
xiv. Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the city in a
wastewater discharge permit;
xv. Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the
treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test;
xvi. Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
xvii. Any water or waste which may contain more than ninety-six (96.0)
milligrams per liter of fat, oil or grease or other substances which
may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees
Fahrenheit and 150 degrees Fahrenheit.
xviii. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;
xix. Any feathers, entrails, feet, bones, paunch manure, hair, fleshings or
eggshells, whole blood or other liquids in quantities which exert an
unusual oxygen or chlorine requirement or which result in a
discoloration of the treatment plant influent.
xx. Wastewater taken as a grab sample which contains total phenols
and/or formaldehyde in concentrations greater than 15.7 parts per
million.
xxi. Wastewater which contains hydrogen sulfide measured as H2S or
Fluoride that is discharged in an amount that would cause the levels
of H2S or Fluoride to increase in the treated effluent from the
sewage treatment plant.
Hazardous wastes that are prohibited by Regulatory Agencies shall not be
discharged to the sewer system.
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this Section shall not be
processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW.
(b) National Categorical pretreatment standards.
Users must comply with the categorical Pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR
Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
1. When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in
terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the director may convert
the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant
discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating
effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users.
2. When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed
with wastewater not regulated by the same Standard, the director shall
impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e).
3. A CIU may obtain a net/gross adjustment to a categorical Pretreatment
standard in accordance with the following paragraphs of this Section.40
CFR 403.15:
i. Categorical Pretreatment standards may be adjusted to reflect the
presence of pollutants in the Industrial user’s intake water in
accordance with this section. Any Industrial user wishing to obtain
credit for intake pollutants must make application to the city. Upon
request of the Industrial user, the applicable standard will be
calculated on a “net” basis (i.e., adjusted to reflect credit for
pollutants in the intake water) if the requirements of paragraph (ii) of
this section are met.
ii. Criteria.
a. Either (i) the applicable categorical Pretreatment standards
contained in 40 CFR subchapter N specifically provide that they
shall be applied on a net basis; or (ii) The Industrial user
demonstrates that the control system it proposes or uses to meet
applicable categorical Pretreatment standards would, if properly
installed and operated, meet the Standards in the absence of
pollutants in the intake waters.
b. Credit for generic pollutants such as biochemical oxygen
demand, total suspended solids and oil and grease should not be
granted unless the Industrial user demonstrates that the
constituents of the generic measure in the user’s effluent are
substantially similar to the constituents of the generic measure
in the intake water or unless appropriate additional limits are
placed on process water pollutants either at the outfall or
elsewhere.
c. Credit shall be granted only to the extent necessary to meet the
applicable categorical Pretreatment standard(s), up to a maximum
value equal to the influent value. Additional monitoring may be
necessary to determine eligibility for credits and compliance with
standard(s) adjusted under this section.
d. Credit shall be granted only if the user demonstrates that the
intake water is drawn from the same body of water as that into
which the POTW discharges. The city may waive this
requirement if it finds that no environmental degradation will
result.
(c) State pretreatment standards.
Users must comply with TCEQ pretreatment standards codified at 30 TAC 315.
(d) Local limits.
1. The director is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 40 CFR
403.5(c).
2. The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass
through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing
in excess of the following daily maximum limit.
10.688 mg/l Aluminum
0.121 mg/l Arsenic
0.145 mg/l Cadmium
1.478 mg/l Chromium (T)
0.282 mg/l Copper
0.524 mg/l Cyanide
0.836 mg/l Lead
0.001 mg/l Mercury
0.207 mg/l Molybdenum
0.662 mg/l Nickel
96.00 mg/l Oil and grease (T)
15.7 mg/l Phenols/Formaldehyde combined
0.017 mg/l Selenium
1.820 mg/l Silver (T)
0.849 mg/L TTO
0.661 mg/L Zinc
The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All
concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise.
3. The city may develop best management practices by ordinance or in
individual wastewater discharge permits to implement categorical standards
only.
(e) Right of revision.
The city and/or TBRSS reserve the right to establish, by ordinance, or in wastewater
discharge permits, more stringent Standards or Requirements on discharges to the POTW
consistent with the purpose of this ordinance.
(f) Dilution.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute
discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve
compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable
pretreatment standard or requirement.
Sec. 38-96. General sewer use requirements for the Temple Sewerage System.
(a) Prohibited discharge standards.
1. General prohibitions.
i. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any
pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference.
These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether
or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any
other National, State, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements.
ii. If in the opinion of the director, the character of the sewage from any
manufacturer or industrial plant, building or other premises is such
that it will (1) injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes
or facilities, (2) constitute a hazard to humans or animals, (3) create a
hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent,
or (4) violate appropriate Federal, State or local regulations, the city
manager shall have the right to require such user to dispose of such
waste otherwise, and prevent it from entering the system.
iii. The city shall require industrial users to control production of all
discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with
categorical pretreatment standards and local limits upon reduction,
loss, or failure of its treatment facility. In the event of a plant/system
upset, provisions outlined in 40 CFR 403.16 shall prevail.
2. Specific Prohibitions. Except as hereinafter provided, no user shall
introduce or cause to be introduced into the sewerage system of the city,
directly or indirectly, any of the following pollutants, substances, or
wastewater:
i. Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified
in 40 CFR 261.21;
ii. Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 10.5 or otherwise
causing corrosive material damage to the POTW or equipment;
iii. Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
resulting in interference to the flow in the POTW or interference
with the proper operation of the sewage works;
iv. Wastewater with twenty-four (24) hour composite samples
containing biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and/or total
suspended solids (TSS) in excess of eight (800) milligram per liter
(mg/l);
v. Wastewater having a temperature greater than 40ºC (104ºF), or
which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting
in interference;
vi. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
vii. Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems;
viii. Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated
by the director in accordance with section 38-97(c) of this ordinance;
ix. Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient
to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into
the sewer for maintenance;
x. Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the
treatment plant’s effluent, thereby violating the city’s TPDES permit;
xi. Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations;
xii. Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, contact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater,
unless specifically authorized by the city;
xiii. Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes;
xiv. Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the city in a
wastewater discharge permit;
xv. Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the
treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test;
xvi. Concentrations exceeding one hundred seventy-five (175) milligrams
per liter of oil and grease, wax, fats and plastic or other substances
which will solidify or become discernibly viscous at any temperature
between thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit and one hundred fifty
(150) degrees Fahrenheit.
xvii. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;
xviii. Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substance which that
might cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
xix. Wastewater containing chemical oxygen demand in excess of fiftythree
hundred (5300) milligrams per liter; or
xx. Any feathers, entrails, feet, bones, paunch manure, hair, fleshings or
eggshells, whole blood or other liquids in quantities which exert an
unusual oxygen or chlorine requirement or which result in a
discoloration of the treatment plant influent;
xxi. Wastewater taken as a grab sample which contains total phenols
and/or formaldehyde in concentrations greater than 7 parts per
million;
xxii. Wastewater which contains Hydrogen Sulfide measured as H2S,
Chlorides, or Fluoride that is discharged in an amount that would
cause the levels of H2S or Fluoride to increase in the treated effluent
from the sewage treatment plant.
Hazardous wastes are prohibited by regulatory agencies shall not be discharged
to the sewer system;
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be
processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the
POTW.
(b) National categorical pretreatment standards.
The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Part
405-471 are hereby incorporated.
1. When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed
with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the director shall
impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e).
2. A CIU may obtain a net/gross adjustment to a categorical pretreatment
standard in accordance with the following paragraphs of this section.40
CFR 403.15.
i. Categorical pretreatment standards may be adjusted to reflect the
presence of pollutants in the Industrial user’s intake water in
accordance with this section. Any industrial user wishing to obtain
credit for intake pollutants must make application to the city. Upon
request of the industrial user, the applicable standard will be
calculated on a “net” basis (i.e., adjusted to reflect credit for
pollutants in the intake water) if the criteria found in paragraph (ii)
of this section are met:
ii. Criteria:
a. Either (i) the applicable categorical pretreatment standards contained
in 40 CFR subchapter N specifically provide that they shall be
applied on a net basis; or (ii) The industrial user demonstrates that
the control system it proposes or uses to meet applicable categorical
pretreatment standards would, if properly installed and operated,
meet the standards in the absence of pollutants in the intake waters.
b. Credit for generic pollutants such as biochemical oxygen demand,
total suspended solids, and oil and grease should not be granted
unless the Industrial user demonstrates that the constituents of the
generic measure in the user’s effluent are substantially similar to the
constituents of the generic measure in the intake water or unless
appropriate additional limits are placed on process water pollutants
either at the outfall or elsewhere.
c. Credit shall be granted only to the extent necessary to meet the
applicable categorical pretreatment standard(s), up to a maximum
value equal to the influent value. Additional monitoring may be
necessary to determine eligibility for credits and compliance with
standard(s) adjusted under this section.
d. Credit shall be granted only if the user demonstrates that the intake
water is drawn from the same body of water as that into which the
POTW discharges. The city may waive this requirement if it finds
that no environmental degradation will result.
(c) State pretreatment standards.
Users must comply with TCEQ codified at 30 TAC 315.
(d) Local Limits.
1. The director is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 40 CFR
403.5(c).
2. The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass
through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing
in excess of the following daily maximum limit.
0.03 mg/l Arsenic
0.36 mg/l Cadmium
9.14 mg/l Chromium (T)
1.05 mg/l Chromium (Hex)
0.50 mg/l Copper
0.60 mg/l Cyanide (Grab)
7.30 mg/l Lead
0.08 mg/l Mercury
1 75 mg/l N-Ammonia
1.00 mg/l Nickel
0.12 mg/l Silver
7.03 mg/l Zinc
The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All
concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise.
3. The city may develop best management practices by ordinance or in
individual wastewater discharge permits to implement categorical standards
only.
(e) Right of Revision.
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance, or in wastewater discharge permits,
more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW consistent with the
purpose of this ordinance.
(f) Dilution.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute
discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve
compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable
pretreatment standard or requirement.
Sec. 38-97. Pretreatment of wastewater.
(a) Pretreatment facilities.
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this
ordinance and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local
limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 38-95 for industries discharging to the
TBRSS system and section 38-96 for industries discharging to the Temple sewerage
system, of this ordinance within the time limitations specified by EPA, the State, or the
city, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be
provided, operated, and maintained at the user’s expense. When required by the director
of public works, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial
wastes, shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the industrial wastes. Such manhole, when
required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance
with plans approved by the city. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his
expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to
the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the director before such facilities are
constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve
the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a
discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this ordinance.
(b) Accidental discharge/slug control plans.
The city shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an accidental discharge/slug
discharge control plan or other action to control slug discharges. The city may require
any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan or take such other
action that may be necessary to control slug discharges. An accidental discharge/slug
discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
1. Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges;
2. Description of stored chemicals;
3. Procedures for immediately notifying the director of any accidental or slug
discharge, as required by section 38-100 (f) of this ordinance; and
4. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge.
Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance
of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading
operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of
containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for
emergency response.
The results of such activities shall be available to the approval authority upon request. All
documentation associated with BMP’s shall be included.
The city will evaluate each SIU within one year of being designated an SIU to determine
whether each such SIU needs a plan or other action to control slug discharges.
(c) Hauled wastewater.
1. Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations
designated by the city, and at such times as are established by the city. Such
waste shall not violate section 38-95 for the TBRSS system or 38-96 for the
Temple system of this ordinance or any other requirements established by
the city. The city may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain
individual wastewater discharge permits.
2. Septic tank waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated
by the director. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the
chief operator at the POTW. The director may collect samples of each
hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The director
may require the septic tank waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any
load prior to discharge.
3. No industrial, hazardous waste is allowed to be discharged to the POTW.
4. Septic tank haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This
form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the hauler,
permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of
waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the
type of business the waste originated from, known or suspected waste
constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.
Sec. 38-98. Wastewater discharge permits.
(a) Wastewater analysis.
When requested by the city, a user must submit information on the nature and
characteristics of its wastewater within (60) days of the request. The director is authorized
to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this
information.
(b) Wastewater discharge permit requirement.
1. No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW
without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the city, except
that significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to
section 38-98 (c) of this ordinance may continue to discharge for the time
period specified therein.
2. The city may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as
necessary to carry out the purposes of this ordinance.
3. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit
shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and subjects the wastewater
discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 38-104 and 38-105
of this ordinance. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve
a permittee of its obligation to comply with all Federal and State
pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of
Federal, State, and local law.
(c) Wastewater discharge permitting: Existing connections.
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging
wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this ordinance and who wishes to
continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 60 days after said date, apply to the
director for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with section 38-98 (e) of this
ordinance, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 90 days
of the effective date of this ordinance except in accordance with a wastewater discharge
permit issued by the city. For existing permitted user reapplication, see requirements in
Section 38-99 (f).
(d) Wastewater discharge permitting: New connections.
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or
recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning
or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit,
in accordance with section 38-98 (e) of this ordinance, must be filed at least 90 days prior
to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.
(e) Wastewater discharge permit application contents.
All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit
application. The city may require all users to submit all or some of the following
information as part of a permit application:
1. Identifying Information.
i. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator, owner, and facility contact person; and
ii. Contact information, description of activities, facilities, and plant
production processes on the premises;
2. Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by
or for the facility.
3. Description of Operations.
i. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production
(including each product produced by type, amount, processes, and
rate of production), and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should
include a schematic process diagram, which indicates points of
discharge to the POTW from the regulated process(es);
ii. Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or
actual hours of operation;
iii. Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and
rate of production;
iv. Type and amount of raw materials processed and chemicals used
(average and maximum per type);
v. Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to
show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location,
and elevation, and all points of discharge;
4. Time and duration of discharges;
5. The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit;
6. Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and
maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated
process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the
combined wastestream formula set out in section 38-95 (b)(1) [40 CFR
403.6(e)];
7. Measurement of pollutants.
i. The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated
process and any new categorically regulated process for existing
sources.
ii. The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the
city, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated
process.
iii. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported.
iv. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be
analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 38-100 (i)
of this ordinance. Where the standard requires compliance with a
BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit
documentation as required by the city or the applicable standards to
determine compliance with the standard.
v. Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in section 38-100 (j) of this ordinance.
8. Any requests for a monitoring waiver, or a renewal of an approved
monitoring waiver, for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present
in the discharge based on section 38-100 (d) (3) [40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)];
9. Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the director to
evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.
10. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the user for revision.
(f) Application signatories and certification.
1. All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be
signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following
certification statement:
“I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to
assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted.
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons
directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the
best of my knowledge and belief, to be, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.”
2. If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate
because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall
operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental matters
for the company, a new written authorization satisfying the requirements of
this section must be submitted to the director prior to or together with any
reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
(g) Wastewater discharge permit decision.
After receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the director will
determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The director may deny
any application for a wastewater discharge permit or require additional safeguards,
reports or information. For users not meeting the criteria of significant industrial users,
the director may also waive or defer a permit, or allow discharges in the interim while a
permit is being prepared.
(h) Extraterritorial users.
No discharge originating in areas outside the territorial limits of the city shall be made
into any sanitary sewer of the city without first obtaining a special permit, which shall be
subject to and incorporate by reference the terms of this ordinance.
Sec. 38-99. Wastewater discharge permit issuance.
(a) Permit Duration.
A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed
five (5) years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may
be issued for a period less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the director. Each
wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
(b) Permit Contents.
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably
necessary by the city to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the
water body receiving the treatment plant’s effluent, protect worker health and safety,
facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.
1. Permits must contain:
i. A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit issuance
date, expiration date and effective date;
ii. A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable
without prior notification to the city in accordance with Section 38-
99(d) of this ordinance, and provisions for furnishing the new owner
or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
iii. Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards;
iv. Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping
requirements. These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants or best management practice to be
monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type
based on Federal, State, and local law;
v. A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of
pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for
compliance beyond that required by applicable Federal, State, or
local law;
vi. Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the city to
be necessary; and
2. Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the
following conditions:
i. Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
ii. Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of
pollutants into the treatment works;
iii. Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions including management
practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated,
or non-routine discharges;
iv. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment;
v. A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with
all applicable Federal and State pretreatment standards, including
those which become effective during the term of the wastewater
discharge permit; and
vi. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure
compliance with this ordinance, and State and Federal laws, rules,
and regulations.
(c) Permit modification.
1. The city may modify an individual wastewater discharge permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
i. To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, and local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
ii. To address significant alterations or additions to the user’s operation,
processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of the
individual wastewater discharge permit issuance;
iii. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
iv. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to
the POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters;
v. Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual wastewater
discharge permit;
vi. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the
wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
vii. Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical Pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
viii. To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge
permit; or
ix. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator where requested in accordance with section 38-99
(d).
(d) Permit Transfer.
Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the
permittee gives at least 30 days advance notice to the city and the director approves the
wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the city must include a written
certification by the new owner or operator which:
1. States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to
change the facility’s operations and processes;
2. Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
3. Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit.
Upon approval by the city of the permit transfer, a copy of the new permit will be
provided to the new owner(s).
(e) Permit Revocation.
The city may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not
limited to, the following reasons:
1. Failure to notify the director of significant changes to the wastewater prior
to the changed discharge;
2. Failure to provide prior notification to the director of changed conditions
pursuant to Section 38-100 (e) of this ordinance;
3. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the
wastewater discharge permit application;
4. Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
5. Tampering with monitoring equipment;
6. Refusing to allow the director timely access to the facility premises and
records;
7. Failure to meet effluent limitations;
8. Failure to pay fines;
9. Failure to pay sewer charges;
10.Failure to meet compliance schedules;
11.Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit
application;
12.Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a
permitted facility; or
13. Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the
wastewater discharge permit or this ordinance.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer
of business ownership with the exception for transfer provisions outlined in Section 38-99
(d). All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the
issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user.
(f) Permit reissuance.
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge
permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with
Section 38-98 (e) of this ordinance, a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the
user’s existing wastewater discharge permit.
Sec. 38-100. Reporting requirements.
(a) Baseline Monitoring Reports.
1. Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a) (4), whichever is later,
existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge
to the POTW shall submit to the director a report which contains the
information listed in paragraph 2., below. At least ninety (90) days prior to
commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become
categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
categorical standard, shall submit to the city a report which contains the
information listed in paragraph (2), below. A new source shall report the
method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical
standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
2. Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
i. All information required in section 38-98 (e) (1)(i), section 38-98 (e)
(2), section 38-98 (e) (3) (i), and section 38-98 (e) (6).
ii. Measurement of pollutants.
a. The user shall provide the information required in section 38-98
(e) (7) (i) through (iv).
b. The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample of
daily operations to compile that data necessary to comply with
the requirements of this paragraph.
c. Samples should be taken immediately downstream from the
pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream
from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other
wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to
pretreatment the user should measure the flows and
concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance
with the pretreatment standards.
d. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
section 38-100 (i) and 40 CFR Part 136.
e. The director may allow the submission of a baseline report which
utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides
information sufficient to determine the need for industrial
pretreatment measures.
f. The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of
sampling and methods of analysis and shall certify that such
sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles
and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW.
iii. Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by the user’s
authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional,
indicating whether Pretreatment standards are being met on a
consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements.
iv. Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or operation
and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards,
the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or operations and maintenance must be provided.
The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance due established for the applicable pretreatment standard.
A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the
requirement set out in section 38-100(b) of this ordinance.
v. All baseline monitoring reports must be certified in accordance with
section 38-100(m) (1) of this ordinance and signed by an authorized
representative.
(b) Compliance schedule progress reports.
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by section 38-
100 (a) (2) (iv) of this ordinance:
1. The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited
to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing
contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction,
and beginning and conducting routine operation);
2. The user shall submit a progress report to the city no later than fourteen (14)
days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance
including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of
progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken
by the user to return to the established schedule; and
3. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between increments or
progress reports to the director.
(c) Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source, 90 days following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to
such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city a report containing
the information described in section 38-98 (e) (6) and (7) and section 38-100 (a) (2) (ii) of
this ordinance. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with
section 38-98 (f) of this ordinance.
(d) Periodic Compliance Reports.
1. All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the city
but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December or dates
specified by the control authority), submit a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by
pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and
maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the
pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice
or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation
required by the city or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the
compliance status of the user.
2. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with section 38-98 (f) of this ordinance.
3. All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times.
The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order
shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.
4. If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any
regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more frequently
than required by the director, using the procedures prescribed in section 38-
100 (j) of this ordinance, the results of this monitoring shall be included in
the report.
5. User shall report the average and maximum daily flows for the reporting
period and identify where flow estimates are used.
6. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with section 38-100 (m) (1) of this ordinance.
(e) Reports of changed conditions.
Each user must notify the director of any significant changes to the user’s operations or
system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days
before the change.
1. The director may require the user to submit such information as may be
deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the
submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 38-
98 (e) of this ordinance.
2. The director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 38-99
(f) of this ordinance or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit
under section 38-99 (c) of this ordinance in response to changed conditions
or anticipated changed conditions.
(f) Reports of Potential Problems.
1. In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary
batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the
POTW, the user shall immediately notify the director of the incident. This
notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste,
concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the
user.
2. Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived
by the director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of
the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar
future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result
of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person
or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines,
penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this
ordinance.
3. A notice shall be permanently posted in a prominent place advising
employees who to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph (1)
above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a
discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
4. Significant Industrial users are required to notify the city immediately of
any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge.
(g) Reports from unpermitted users.
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate
reports to the director as the city may required.
(h) Notice of Violation/Repeat Sampling and Reporting.
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the director
within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also
repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the
director within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. Resampling by the
industrial user is not required if the city performs sampling at the user’s facility at least
once a month, or if the city performs sampling at the user’s facility between the time
when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user or the city receives
the results of this sampling. If the city has performed sampling, the user will repeat the
sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the director within
thirty (30) days upon being notified by the city of any violations.
(i) Analytical Requirements.
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a
wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with
the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise
specified in an applicable categorical Pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not
contain sampling or analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any
other applicable sampling and analytical procedures. The tests shall be performed on the
samples taken at the location designated in each industry’s Permit.
(j) Sample Collection.
1. Except as indicated in Section 2 and 3 below, the user must collect
wastewater samples using 24-hour flow proportional composite sampling
techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling
is authorized by the city. Where time-proportional composite sampling or
grab sampling is authorized by the city, the samples must be representative
of the discharge. Using protocols specified in 40 CFR part 136 and
appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-
hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for
cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the
laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the
samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other
parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in
approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the city, as appropriate.
In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with
instantaneous limits. Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements
must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis
performed during the period covered by the report, based on data that is
representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period.
2. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.
3. For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day
compliance reports required in section 38-100 (a) and (c) [40 CFR 403.12
(b) and (d)], a minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH,
cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic
compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for
facilities for which historical sampling data is available, the city may
authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by paragraphs section
38-100 (d) [40 CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)] the IU is required to collect
the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by
with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
(k) Date of receipt of reports.
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For
reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United
States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern.
(l) Record keeping.
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this ordinance shall retain, and make
available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any
monitoring activities required by this ordinance and any additional records of information
obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements, and documentation associated with best management practices established
under sections 38-95 (d) (3) and 38-96 (d) (3). Records shall include the date, exact place,
method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates
analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or
methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a
period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the
duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been
specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director.
(m)Certification Statements.
1. Certification of permit applications, user reports and initial monitoring
waiver. The following certification statement is required to be signed and
submitted by users submitting permit applications in accordance with
section 38-98 (f); users submitting baseline monitoring reports under
section 38-100 (a) (2) (v); users submitting reports on compliance with the
categorical pretreatment standard deadlines under section 38-100 (c);and
users submitting periodic compliance reports required by section 38-100 (d)
(1) through (6). The following certification statement must be signed by an
Authorized Representative as defined in Section 38-93:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, the best of my knowledge and belief,
true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment
for knowing violations.
Sec. 38-101. Compliance monitoring.
(a) Right of entry: inspection and sampling.
The city, or its representative(s), TBRSS representative(s), TCEQ representative(s), and
EPA’s representative(s) shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine
whether the user is complying with all requirements of this ordinance and any wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the representatives from the
city, TBRSS, TCEQ and/or EPA, ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance
of any additional duties.
1. Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon
presentation of suitable identification, the director will be permitted to enter
without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
2. The city, T-BRSS, TCEQ, and/or EPA shall have the right to set up on the
user’s property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling and/or metering of the user’s operations.
3. The director may require the user to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user
at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and
quality shall be calibrated, annually to ensure their accuracy.
4. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
user at the written or verbal request of the director and shall not be replaced.
The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user.
5. Unreasonable delays in allowing the director access to the user’s premises
shall be a violation of this ordinance.
6. When monitoring facility is constructed in the public right-of-way or
easement, in an unobstructed location, the IU shall provide ample room in
or near the monitoring facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation
of samples and analysis and whether constructed on public or private
property, the monitoring facilities should be provided in accordance with
the city’s requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications, and such facilities shall be constructed and maintained in
such manner so as to enable the director to perform independent monitoring
activities.
7. Search Warrant: If the city has been refused access to a building, structure,
or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this ordinance, or that there is a
need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program of the city, designed to verify compliance with this ordinance or
any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety and welfare of the community, the director may seek issuance of a
search warrant from the appropriate County or District Court.
Sec. 38-102. Confidential information.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs,
and from the city’s inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public
without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the city, that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under
applicable State law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the
information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user by furnishing a report
that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might
disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the
public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies
for uses related to the TPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics and other “effluent data” as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be
recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without
restriction.
Sec. 38-103. Publication of user in significant noncompliance.
(a) The city shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that
provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the
municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, at any time
during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance
with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
(b) The term significant noncompliance shall be applicable to all significant
industrial users (or any other industrial user that violates paragraphs (3), (4),
or (8) of this section) and shall mean:
1. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those
in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of all the measurements taken
for the sampled pollutant parameter taken during a six (6 )month period
exceed by any magnitude, a numeric pretreatment standard or
requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined in section 38-93;
2. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements
taken for each pollutant parameter during a six (6)month period equals or
exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement
including instantaneous limit, as defined by section 98-93 multiplied by
the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease; and 1.2
for all other pollutants except pH);
3. Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined
in section 38-93 (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit,
or narrative standard) that the city determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through,
including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general
public;
4. Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city’s exercise of
its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
5. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge
permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance;
6. Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical Pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic selfmonitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
7. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
8. Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the director determines will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
Sec. 38-104. Administrative enforcement remedies and administrative orders.
All enforcement actions shall follow the TCEQ approved enforcement response plan
(ERP) and the enforcement response guide (ERG). This plan contains detailed procedures
indicating how the control authority will investigate and respond to instances of industrial
user noncompliance.
(a) Notification of Violation.
When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may serve upon that user a written
notice of violation. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of this notice, an explanation of the
violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include
specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the director. Submission of this
plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after
receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the
director to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action,
without first issuing a notice of violation.
(b) Consent Orders.
The city may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for
noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the user to
correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such
documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued
pursuant to sections 38-104 (d) and (e) of this ordinance and shall be judicially
enforceable.
(c) Show Cause Hearing.
The city may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the director and show cause why
the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user
specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the
reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least fifteen (15)
business days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized
representative of the user as defined in section 38-93 and required by section 38-98 (f)
(1). A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.
(d) Compliance Orders.
When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may issue an order to the user
responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a
specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer
service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related
appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain
other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring
and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to
the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established
for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user
of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance
order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
user.
(e) Cease and Desist Orders.
When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user’s past violations are likely to recur,
the director may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such
violations and directing the user to:
1. Immediately comply with all requirements; and
2. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist
order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the user.
(f) Emergency Suspensions.
The director may immediately suspend a user’s discharge, after informal notice to the
user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to
the health or welfare of persons. The director may also immediately suspend a user’s
discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the
operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the
environment.
1. Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or
eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s failure to immediately
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director may take such
steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving
stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The director may allow the user
to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the director that the period of endangerment has passed,
unless the termination proceedings in section 38-104 (g) of this ordinance
are initiated against the user.
2. A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting
imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, to the director prior to the date of any show
cause or termination hearing under sections 38-104 (c) or 38-104 (g) of this
ordinance.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency
suspension under this section.
(g) Termination of Discharge.
In addition to the provisions in section 38-99 (e) of this ordinance, any user who violates
the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
1. Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
2. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics
of its discharge;
3. Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume,
constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
4. Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose of
inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
5. Violation of the pretreatment standards in section 38-95 for TBRSS or 38-
96 for the Temple Sewerage System, of this ordinance.
6. Problems existing at the headworks.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an
opportunity to show cause under section 38-104 (c) of this ordinance why the proposed
action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the director shall not be a bar to, or
a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
Sec. 38-105. Judicial enforcement remedies.
(a) Injunctive Relief.
When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
Pretreatment standard or Requirement, the director may petition the district court through
the city’s attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate,
which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit,
order, or other requirement imposed by this ordinance on activities of the user. The
director may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and or equitable relief,
including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for
injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against a user.
(b) Civil Penalties.
1. A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a
maximum civil penalty of $2000 but not less than $1000 per violation, per
day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit,
penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
2. The director may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs, and other
expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the
city.
3. In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account
all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm
caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any
economic benefit gained through the user’s violation, corrective actions by
the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice
requires.
4. Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite
for, taking any other action against a user.
(c) Criminal Prosecution.
1. A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this ordinance,
a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $2000 per violation,
per day, or not more than one year imprisonment, or both.
2. A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the
POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty up to
$2000, or be subject to not more than one year imprisonment, or both. This
penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury
or property damage available under state law.
3. A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other
documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this
ordinance, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who
falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring
device or method required under this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be
punished by a fine of not more than $2000 per violation, per day, or not
more than one year imprisonment or both.
4. In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $2000 per violation, per day, or not more than one year
imprisonment, or both.
(d) Remedies Nonexclusive.
The remedies provided for in this ordinance are not exclusive. The city may take any, all,
or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of
pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city’s enforcement
response plan. However, the city may take other action against any user when the
circumstances warrant. Further, the city is empowered to take more than one enforcement
action against any noncompliant user.
Sec. 38-106. Affirmative defenses to discharge violations.
(a) Upset.
1. In an action brought in federal court and for the purposes of this section,
“upset” means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because
of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not
include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
2. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements
of paragraph (3), below, are met.
3. A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed contemporaneous operating logs or
other relevant evidence that:
i. An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
ii. The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures; and
iii. The user has submitted the following information to the director
within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset. If
this information is provided orally, a written submission must be
provided within five (5) days:
a. A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
b. The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue; and
c. Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
4. In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence
of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
5. Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of
upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
6. Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to
maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored
or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies
in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of
the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
(b) Act of God.
1. The Act of God defense constitutes a statutory affirmative defense [Texas
Water Code Section 7.25] in an action brought in municipal or state court.
If a person can establish that an event that would otherwise be a violation of
a pretreatment ordinance, or a permit issued under the ordinance, was
caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe, the
event is not a violation of the ordinance or permit.
2. An industrial user who wishes to establish the Act of God affirmative
defense shall demonstrate, through relevant evidence that:
i. An event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment
ordinance or a permit issued under the ordinance occurred, and the
sole cause of the event was an act of God, war, strike, riot or other
catastrophe; and
ii. The industrial user has submitted the following information to the
POTW and the city within 24 hours of becoming aware of the event
that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance or a
permit issued under the ordinance (if this information is provided
orally, a written submission must be provided within five days):
a. A description of the event, and the nature and cause of the event;
b. The time period of the event, including exact dates and times or,
if still continuing, the anticipated time the event is expected to
continue; and
c. Steps being taken or planned to reduce eliminate and prevent
recurrence of the event.
iii. Burden of proof. In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user
seeking to establish the act of God affirmative defense shall have the
burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that an event
that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance, or a
permit issued under the ordinance, was caused solely by an act of
God, war, strike, riot or other catastrophe.
(c) Prohibited Discharge Standards.
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for
noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section 38-95 (a) (1) (i) through (iii) for
industries discharging to the TBRSS system or section 38-96 (a) (1) (i) through (iii) for
industries discharging to the Temple sewerage system of this ordinance or the specific
prohibitions in sections 38-95 (a) (2) (i) through (xxi). for TBRSS industries or sections
38-96 (a) (2) (i) through (xxii) for Temple industries of this ordinance if it can prove that
it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either:
1. A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or
interference;
2. No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in
nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge when the city was
regularly in compliance with its TPDES permit, and in the case of
interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.
(d) Bypass.
1. For the purposes of this section:
i. Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any
portion of a user’s treatment facility; and
ii. Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural
resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence
of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss
caused by delays in production.
2. A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment
standards or requirements to be violated but only if it also is for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to
the provision of paragraphs (3) and (4) of this section.
3. Any other bypass must meet the following requirements:
i. If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit
prior notice to the director, at least ten (10) days before the date of
the bypass, if possible.
ii. A user shall submit oral notice to the director of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twentyfour
(24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A
written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the
time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission
shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of
the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has
not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue;
and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The director may waive the written
report on a case-by-case basis if the report has been received within
twenty-four (24) hours.
4. Bypass is prohibited, and the director may take an enforcement action
against a user for a bypass, unless:
i. Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or
severe property damage;
ii. There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of
auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This
condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have
been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to
prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment
downtime or preventive maintenance; and
iii. The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (3) of this
section.
5. The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its
adverse effects, if the director determines that it will meet the three
conditions listed in paragraph (4) of this section.
Sec. 38-107. Miscellaneous provisions.
(a) Review and approval; preliminary treatment; required facilities.
1. The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having (1) a
five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than three hundred (300) parts
per million (ppm) by weight, or (2) containing more than four hundred
(400) parts per million by weight of total suspended solids, or (3)containing
any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in section
38-95 for the TBRSS or section 38-96 for the city of Temple, or (4) having
an average daily flow greater than five per cent (5%) of the average daily
sewage flow of the city, shall be subject to the review and approval of the
director. Where the director has approved the admission of (1) or (2) above
into the public sewer, that discharge may be subject to a surcharge as
determined by the director.
2. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval
of the director and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced
until said approvals are obtained in writing.
(b) Pretreatment Charges and Fees.
The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating
the city’s pretreatment program which may include:
1. Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of
processing such applications;
2. Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the
cost of collection and analyzing a user’s discharge, and reviewing
monitoring reports submitted by users;
3. Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and
construction;
4. Fees for filing appeals; and
5. Fees to recover administrative and legal costs [not included in section 38-
107 (a) (2) associated with the enforcement activity taken by the director to
address IU noncompliance; and
6. Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements
contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this
ordinance and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable
by the city.
7. Surcharges. After a review by the director, if a determination is made that
the discharge is of such unusual strength and/or character that increased
treatment within the sewer treatment plant would be required accompanied by
increased treatment costs to the POTW, the discharge shall be subject to a
surcharge. In no case will a discharge be accepted that will prevent the POTW
from meeting its permit limits. The surcharge will be automatic beginning the
third month for a user who has had two previous consecutive months with
discharges of BOD or TSS which exceed the limits provided in 38-107 (a) (1)
above. A surcharge is an additional charge by the POTW for the increased cost
of handling discharge of unusual strength and character, and shall not serve as
a variance to the requirements of this ordinance, nor shall it serve to bar the
POTW from bringing a criminal action or civil action under section 38-105 for
violations of the provisions of this ordinance.
Surcharges for the treatment of discharges shall be determined as follows:
i. A basic sewer charge of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per
million gallons times the monthly volume discharged in millions of
gallons.
ii. A BOD surcharge of one dollar ($1.00) per million gallons times the
difference between the BOD expressed in milligrams per liter, and
three hundred (300) milligrams per liter; all multiplied times the
monthly volume discharged expressed in millions of gallons.
iii. A TSS surcharge of one dollar ($1.00) per million gallons times the
difference between the TSS expressed in milligrams per liter, and
four hundred (400) milligrams per liter; all multiplied times the
monthly volume discharged in millions of gallons.
iv. The basic sewer charge, BOD, and TSS surcharges will be reviewed
at periodic intervals as determined by the director. Changes in the
aforementioned surcharges shall be authorized by resolution of the
city council and shall be binding on all city agreements for the
treatment of industrial wastes.
(c) Gender.
As used in this Chapter, whenever the context so indicates, the masculine, feminine, or
neuter gender and the singular or plural number, shall be deemed to include the others.
(d) Headings.
The headings above the various provisions of this Chapter have been included only in
order to make it easier to locate the subject covered by each provision and are not to be
used in construing the said provisions.
(e) Amendments of Statutes.
Reference made to any State or Federal statutes or to any local ordinances includes and is
intended to refer to those statuettes and/or ordinances as they presently exist or as they
may hereafter be amended to read.
Sec. 38-108. Effective date.
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect immediately following its passage,
approval, and publication, as provided by law.
Sec. 38-109 - 38-125. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
Sec. 38-130. General Provisions.
(a) Title. These regulations shall hereinafter be known, cited, and referred to as
the Cross Connection Control Ordinance of the City of Temple, Texas, and shall be
included as part of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Temple, Texas.
(b) Definition of Terms. For the purposes of this ordinance, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
If a word or term used in this ordinance is not contained in the following list, its
definition or other technical term used, shall have the meaning or definitions listed in the
most recent edition of the Manual of Cross Connection Control published by the
Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of
Southern California.
1. Approved Backflow Prevention Assembly or Backflow Assembly or
Assembly shall mean an assembly to counteract backpressure or
prevent backsiphonage. This assembly must appear on the list of
approved assemblies issued by the City of Temple Utilities
Department.
a. Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention
Assembly or Reduced Pressure Principle Assembly or
RP Assembly or RP shall mean an assembly containing
two independently acting approved check valves
together with a hydraulically operated, mechanically
independent pressure differential relief valve located
between the valves and at the same time below the first
check valve. The assembly shall include properly
located resiliently seated test cocks and tightly closing
resiliently seated shut-off valves at the end of the
assembly.
b. Reduced Pressure Principle Detector Backflow
Prevention Assembly or Reduced Pressure Detector or
RPDA shall mean an assembly composed of line-size
approved reduced pressure principle assembly with a
bypass containing a specific water meter and an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention assembly. The meter shall register accurately
for very low rates of flow.
c. Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Assembly or
Double Check Assembly or Double Check or DC shall
mean an assembly which consists of two independently
operating check valves which are spring loaded or
weighted. The assembly comes complete with a gate
valve on each side of the checks, as well as test cocks to
test the checks for tightness.
d. Double Check Detector Backflow Prevention Assembly
or Double Check Detector or DCDA shall mean an
assembly composed of line-size approved double check
assembly with bypass containing a specific water meter
and an approved double check valve assembly. The
meter shall register accurately for very low rates of flow.
e. Pressure Vacuum Breaker Backflow Prevention
Assembly or Pressure Vacuum Breaker or PVB shall
mean an assembly which protects against
backsiphonage, but does not provide adequate
protection against backpressure backflow. The assembly
is a combination of a single check valve with an AVB
and can be used with downstream shutoff valves. In
addition, the assembly has suction and discharge gate
valves and test cocks which allows the full testing of the
assembly.
f. Spill-Resistant Pressure Vacuum Breaker or SVB shall
mean an assembly containing an independently
operating, internally loaded check valve and
independently operating, loaded air inlet valve located
on the discharge side of the check valve. This assembly
is to be equipped with a properly located test cock and
shutoff valves on the suction and discharge ports of the
assembly.
g. Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker Backflow Prevention
Device or Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker or AVB shall
mean that this device cannot be tested and cannot
prevent back pressure backflow, but is used to prevent
backsiphonage in nonhealth hazard conditions.
h. Air Gap shall mean a physical separation between the
free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply
piping and/or appurtenance and an open or nonpressure
receiving vessel, plumbing fixture or other device. An
"approved air gap separation" shall be at least double the
diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above
the overflow rim of the vessel, plumbing fixture or other
device, in no case less than one inch. Air gaps can be
used to protect against backpressure or backsiphonage
of a high health or nonhealth hazard.
2. Auxiliary Supply shall mean any water source or system other than the
public water system, that may be available in the building or on the
property, including ground water or surface water used for industrial,
irrigation or any other purpose.
3. AWWA shall mean American Water Works Association.
4. Backflow shall mean the undesirable reversal of flow of water or
mixtures of water and other liquid, gaseous, or other substances into
the distribution pipes of the potable supply of water from any source
or sources.
5. Backpressure shall mean any elevation of pressure in the downstream
piping system (by any means) above the supply pressure at the point of
consideration which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the
normal direction of flow and the introduction of fluids, mixtures or
substances from any source other than the intended source.
6. Backsiphonage shall mean a form of backflow due to a reduction in
system pressure which causes a subatmospheric pressure to exist at a
site in the water system.
7. Boresight or Boresight to Daylight shall mean providing adequate
drainage for backflow prevention assemblies installed vaults through
the use of an unobstructed drain pipe.
8. City shall mean the City of Temple, Texas.
9. Commercial Establishment shall mean any property or location which
is primarily used for the manufacture, production, storage, wholesaling
or rebuilding of any goods or wares which is or may be placed in the
flow of commerce or any property or location which is used primarily
for the provision of any service.
10. Commission shall mean the Texas Natural Resource Conservation
Commission (TNRCC).
11. Containment shall mean the installation of appropriate type or method
of backflow protection at the service connection.
12. Contaminants shall mean any foreign material, solid or liquid, not
common to the potable water supply which makes or may make the
water unfit or undesirable for human consumption.
13. Contamination shall mean the entry into or presence in a public water
supply system of any substance which may be deleterious to health
and/or the quality of the water.
14. Cross Connection means any physical arrangement where a potable
water supply is connected, directly or indirectly (actual or potential),
with any other non-drinkable water system, used water system, or
auxiliary water supply, sewer, drain conduit, swimming pool, storage
reservoir, plumbing fixture, swamp coolers, air condition units, fire
protection system, or any other assembly which contains, or may
contain, contaminated water, sewage, or other liquid of unknown or
unsafe quality which may be capable of importing contamination into
the public water system as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements,
jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover
assemblies, or other temporary or permanent assemblies through
which, or because of which, backflow may occur are considered to be
cross connections.
15. Customer shall mean the person, company or entity contracting with
the City of Temple through the Utility Department to receive potable
water service.
16. Customer Potable Water System shall mean that portion of the
privately owned potable water system lying between the point of
delivery and the point of use. This system will include all pipe,
conduits, tanks, receptacles, fixtures, equipment, and appurtenances
used to produce, convey, store or utilize the potable water.
17. Customer Service Inspection shall mean a detailed inspection of a
location and disposition of the water lines, including without
limitation, establishing water lines on the premises, the existence of
cross connections, the availability of auxiliary or used water supplies,
the use or availability of pollutants, contaminants and other liquid,
solid or gaseous substances which may be used for stabilization of
water supplies and such other processes necessary to determine degree
of hazard. Inspection may include review of records required by this
ordinance. The inspection may only be conducted by: (i) plumbing
inspectors and water supply protection specialist licensed by the State
Board of Plumbing Examiners; (ii) Certified waterworks operators and
members of other water related professional groups holding an
endorsement by the commission or its designated agent; (iii) licensed
plumbers (for single-family residential services only).
18. Degree of Hazard shall mean the low or high hazard classification that
shall be attached to all actual or potential cross connections.
a. High Hazard shall mean the classification assigned to an
actual or potential cross connection that potentially can
allow a substance to backflow into the potable water supply
that may cause illness or death.
b. Low Hazard shall mean the classification assigned to an
actual or potential cross connection that potentially could
allow a substance that may be objectionable but not
hazardous to a human's health to backflow into the potable
water supply.
c. Health Hazard shall mean an actual or potential threat of
contamination of a physical or toxic nature to the public
potable water system or the consumer's potable water
system that would be a danger to health.
d. Plumbing Hazard shall mean an internal or plumbing-type
cross connection in a consumers potable water system that
may be either a pollution or a contamination hazard.
e. Pollution Hazard shall mean an actual or potential threat to
the physical properties of the water system or the potability
of the public or consumer's potable water system but which
would not constitute a health or system hazard, as defined.
The maximum degree of intensity of the pollution to which
the potable water system could be degraded under this
definition would cause a nuisance or be aesthetically
objectionable or could cause minor damage to the system or
its appurtenances.
f. System Hazard shall mean an actual or potential threat of
severe danger to the physical properties of the public or
consumer's potable water supply or of a pollution or
contamination that would have a detrimental effect on the
quality of the potable water in the system.
19. Director shall mean the City's Director of Utilities Department who is
vested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of
an effective cross connection control program for the City and for the
enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance.
20. Non-Potable Water shall mean water that does not comply with the
commission's rules and regulations governing drinking water.
21. Non-Residential Uses shall include all users not specifically included
in residential uses defined under Residential Use.
22. Point-of-Use Isolation shall mean the appropriate backflow
prevention within the consumer's water system at the point at which
the actual or potential cross connection exists.
23. Pollution shall mean an impairment of the quality of the public water
supply to a degree which does not create a hazard to the public health
but does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of
such potable water for domestic use.
24. Potable Water Supply shall mean any water supply intended or used
for human consumption or other domestic use.
25. Premises shall mean any piece of property to which water is provided,
including all improvements, mobile structures, and structures located
on it.
26. Premises Isolation shall mean the appropriate backflow prevention at
the service connection between the public water system and the water
user.
27. Public Water System or System shall mean any public or privately
owned water system, which supplies water for public domestic use.
The system must meet all the health requirements set forth by the
TNRCC. The system will include all services, reservoirs, facilities, and
any equipment used in the process of producing, treating, storing or
conveying water for public consumption.
28. Recognized Tester shall mean a person that is a State certified
backflow prevention assembly tester.
a. General Tester shall mean qualified to test backflow
prevention assemblies on any domestic, commercial,
industrial or irrigation service except firelines.
b. Fireline Tester shall mean qualified to test backflow
prevention assemblies on firelines only. The State Fire
Marshall's office requires that a person performing
maintenance on firelines must be employed by an
Approved Fireline Contractor.
29. Representative of the Water System shall mean a person designated
by the City of Temple to perform cross connection control duties that
shall include, but are not limited to, cross connection inspections and
water use surveys.
30. Residential Use shall include single family dwellings, duplexes,
multiplex, housing and apartments where the individual units are
each on a separate meter or the units are full-time dwellings in cases
where two or more units are served by one meter.
31. Service Connection shall mean the terminal end of a service line from
the public potable water system, i.e., where the water purveyor loses
jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery
to the consumer's potable water system. If a meter is installed at the
end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean
the downstream end of the meter.
32. Thermal Expansion shall mean heated water that does not have the
space to expand.
33. TNRCC shall mean the Texas Natural Resource Conservation
Commission.
34. Used Water shall mean water supplied by a public water system to a
water user's system after it has passed through the service connection.
35. Utility shall mean the City of Temple Utilities Department.
36. Water Supply Protection Specialist shall mean any person who holds
a license endorsement issued by the Texas State Board of Plumbing
Examiners to engage in the inspection, in connection with health and
safety laws and ordinances, of the plumbing work or installation of a
public water system distribution facility or of customer owned
plumbing connected to that system's water distribution lines.
(c) Authority of Requirements.
This ordinance is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and
laws of the State of Texas, as promulgated by Chapter 212 of the Texas Local
Government Code, as heretofore, or hereinafter amended. This ordinance is
adopted pursuant to the provisions of the Charter for the City of Temple,
Texas.
(d) Purpose of Ordinance.
The regulations contained herein are adopted to achieve the following
purposes and shall be administered to achieve the following objectives:
1. Promote the health, safety and general welfare of the city;
2. Promote and encourage the proper use and control of the City's
water distribution system;
3. To protect the City's potable water supply from the possibility
of contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's
internal distribution system(s) or the customer's private water
system(s) such contaminates or pollutants that could backflow
into the public water system;
4. Promote the elimination or control of existing cross
connections, actual or potential, between the customer's potable
water system(s), and nonpotable water systems, plumbing
fixtures, and process piping systems in conjunction with the
currently adopted plumbing code;
5. To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of
cross connection control that will systematically and effectively
prevent this contamination or pollution of the City's potable
water by requiring the certification and operational testing of
all testable backflow prevention assemblies located on a
premises, and requiring the installation of approved backflow
prevention assemblies as required by the currently adopted
plumbing code; and
6. To comply with the TNRCC rules and regulations for Public
Water Systems.
(e) Policy.
It is hereby declared the policy of the City to promote the public health
safety and welfare by;
1. Implementing the rules for drinking water standards governing
drinking water quality and reporting requirements for public
water supply systems promulgated by the Texas Natural
Resource Conservation Commission, 31 Texas Administrative
Code 290.44 and 290.46, Texas Health and Safety Code,
Chapter 341, Subchapter C and the Federal Safe Drinking
Water Act, 42 US.CA §§300 f et seq;
2. Establish a cross connection control program of uniform
regulations governing the installation, testing and certification
of backflow prevention assemblies and technicians;
3. Establishing requirements to permit and control the installation,
routine maintenance and inspection of backflow prevention
assemblies.
(f) Jurisdiction and Applicability.
These rules and regulation contained herein shall apply to the utility
water service area and all cross connections and installations of backflow
prevention assemblies within:
1. Any service area of the City of Temple Utility;
2. Areas where water is purchased from the City of Temple Utility
for the purpose of resale; and
3. Any plumbing outside the City requiring plumbing inspection
pursuant to a interlocal agreement between the City and a
political subdivision, a water sales contract or applicable
ordinance.
(g) Rulemaking.
The Director of Utilities is hereby authorized to promulgate reasonable
regulations to achieve the purposes of the ordinance that are not in conflict
with this chapter, the currently adopted plumbing code, the City charter, the
TNRCC, the laws of the State of Texas, Texas Health and Safety Code,
§§341.031 et seq., as amended, and the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act, 42.
USCA § 300 f et. seq., as amended.
(h) Conflicts with Public and Private Provisions.
Except where indicated, these regulations are not intended to:
1. Interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other public ordinance,
rule or regulation statute, or other provision of law.
2. Abrogate any easement, deed restriction, covenant or any other
private agreement or deed restriction.
(i) Conformance with Rules and Regulations.
These regulations herein shall be held to be the minimum requirements
concerning cross connections and backflow prevention. In addition to the
requirements, each water customer of the City shall be in conformance with
all applicable County, State and Federal laws.
Sec. 38-131. Backflow and Siphonage Prevention Program.
(a) Cross Connection Prohibited.
1. No installation of potable water supply piping or part thereof
shall be made in such a manner that allows used, polluted or
contaminated water, mixtures, gases, or other substances to
enter any portion of such piping by reason of backsiphonage,
backpressure or any other cause.
2. No person shall install any water operated equipment or
mechanism or use any water treating chemical or substance. If
it is found that such equipment, mechanism, chemical or
substance may cause pollution or contamination of the public
potable water supply system, such equipment or mechanism
may be permitted only when equipped with an approved
backflow prevention assembly.
3. No person shall connect to the public potable water
supply/system any mechanism(s) or system(s) designed to
return used water to the public potable water supply/system
through any measures.
4. No person shall connect any auxiliary water system to the
public potable water supply/system except as allowed by the
ordinance and by the currently adopted plumbing code, as
amended.
(b) Installation Provisions.
1. No water connection from a public drinking water supply
system shall be made to any establishment where an actual or
potential contamination or system hazard exists without an air
gap separation between the drinking water supply and the
source of potential contamination. The containment air gap is
sometimes impractical and instead reliance must be placed on
individual air gaps or mechanical backflow prevention devices.
Under these conditions, additional protection shall be required
at the meter in the form of a backflow prevention device (in
accordance with AWWA Standard C510 and C511, and
AWWA Manual M14) on those establishments handling
substances deleterious or hazardous to the public health. The
City need not require backflow protection at the water service
entrance (meter) if an adequate cross connection control
program is in effect that includes annual inspection and testing
by a certified backflow prevention device tester. It will be the
responsibility of the City to ensure that the requirements are
met. It is the water customer's responsibility to coordinate and
pay for any required annual test(s) and inspection(s).
2. No water connection from any public drinking water supply
system shall be made to any condensing, cooling or industrial
process or any other system of nonpotable usage over which the
public water supply system official does not have sanitary
control, unless the said connection is made in accordance with
the requirements of paragraph one (1) of this section. Water
from such systems cannot be returned to the potable water
supply.
3. Overhead bulk water dispensing stations must be provided with
an air gap between the filling outlet hose and the receiving tank
to protect against backsiphonage and cross contamination.
4. The use of a backflow prevention device at the service
connection shall be considered as additional backflow
protection and shall not negate the use of backflow protection
or internal hazards as outlined and enforced by the current
adopted plumbing code.
5. New Installation.
a. New, replacement, or reconditioned backflow
prevention assemblies shall be installed in
accordance with the currently adopted plumbing
code, as amended.
b. Prior to installation, the person must obtain a
plumbing permit.
c. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, a
completed test and maintenance report must be
submitted to the Utility Department for any
connection requiring a testable backflow
prevention assembly. Documentation of an
approved air gap can be substituted where
applicable and is subject to annual inspection.
6. High Health Hazard Installation.
a. Only approved backflow prevention assemblies
installed at the meter can be used at high health
hazard applications unless a variance is obtained
from Director of Utilities. Variances will be
based on conditions such as type of hazards(s),
complexity of facility plumbing, potential for
future plumbing connections and others as
deemed appropriate.
b. The Director of Utilities may require a secondary
assembly if deemed necessary to protect the
public water supply from the failure of the
primary backflow prevention assembly or to
allow maintenance of the primary backflow
prevention assembly.
7. Other Installations.
a. An approved backflow prevention assembly shall
be installed to protect the potable water system
from contamination or pollution when such
system is connected to any automatic fire
protection system, standpipe systems or privately
owned fire hydrants.
b. Installation of a reduced pressure backflow
prevention assembly shall be required on any
meter connected to the potable water system for
water appropriation from fire hydrants unless an
approved air gap is authorized. Only meters and
backflow prevention assemblies approved by the
Director of Utilities can be used to obtain water
from a fire hydrant.
8. Wholesale Customers. Any Customer purchasing water for
the purpose of resale or distribution shall:
a. Install an air gap separation or a reduced pressure
backflow prevention assembly at the service
connection; or
b. Implement a plumbing inspection and cross
connection control program that is approved by
the Director of Utilities which is not less
restrictive than that of the City and provide
annual program records to the Director for
review and audit.
9. Government Customers. Any premises owned, operated, or
occupied by a state, federal, county, city or foreign government
or agency refusing to comply with the provisions of this chapter
shall install a reduced pressure backflow prevention assembly
at each service connection.
10. Water Hauling Vehicles. Water hauling vehicles obtaining
water from a connection to the City's potable water supply
system shall have an approved air gap separation or a reduced
pressure backflow prevention assembly installed permanently
on the vehicle, or if connected by a fire hydrant meter, installed
on the fire hydrant meter. The assembly shall be registered with
the City and certified for operation annually.
11. Compliance for Existing Customers.
a. The premise owner, customer or the designated
representative of any facility which is determined
to have an unprotected or improperly installed
high health hazard connection (s) must comply
with this section within 60 days upon written
notification by the Director unless the Director
determines that circumstances exist which
require installation within a shorter time frame.
Documentation of the installation and testing
shall be submitted as outlined in Section 220.
b. The premise owner, customer, or designated
representative of any facility which is determined
to have an unprotected nonhealth hazard
connections must install an approved assembly
immediately downstream of the City's meter on a
schedule determined by the Director.
Documentation of the installation and testing
shall be submitted as outlined in Section 220.
c. The premise owner, customer or designated
representative shall have all testable backflow
prevention assemblies which are currently
installed certified for operation by a certified
backflow prevention assembly tester on an
annual basis. If the assembly has not been
certified for operation within the last year, the
assembly must be tested and, if required, repaired
and the documentation submitted to the director
within 60 days upon written notification by the
Director or on a schedule approved by the
Director.
(c) Inspection and Testing Requirements.
1. All backflow prevention assemblies shall be inspected and
tested in each of the following circumstances:
a. Immediately after installations;
b. Whenever the assembly is moved;
c. A minimum of once a year;
d. Premises that have been vacated and unoccupied
for one year, prior to re-occupancy; and
e. Immediately after repairs.
2. All assembly testing shall be performed by a state certified
backflow prevention assembly tester, approved by the regulatory authority and registered
with the City of Temple.
3. Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper
credentials and identification are entitled to enter any public or
private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of
enforcing this ordinance. Persons and occupants of premises
which are provided water service by the city, either directly or
indirectly, shall allow the city or its representatives ready
access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of inspection, testing, records examination or in the
performance of any of their duties. Where persons or occupants
of premises have security measures in force which would
require proper identification and clearance before entry into
their premises, the persons and occupants of the premises shall
make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that
upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the
city will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes
of performing their specific responsibilities.
4. The City is not liable for damage to a backflow prevention
assembly, which may occur during testing, fluctuation in the
distribution system pressure or interruption to the water supply.
5. A water use survey may be conducted at any establishment
located in the city which is served by a public water supply or
which provides water to the public. Upon determination that
the establishment falls under the provisions of this ordinance
and requires a backflow prevention assembly, a notice to abate
the condition or to install the proper backflow prevention
assembly shall be issued.
6. Gauges used in the testing of backflow prevention assemblies
shall be tested for accuracy annually and calibrated in
accordance with the Manual of Cross Connection Control
published by the Foundation of Cross Connection Center,
Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California and/or
the AWWA Manual of Cross Connection Control (Manual M-
14).Testers shall include test gauge serial numbers on "Test and
Maintenance" report forms.
7. Test and Maintenance Report.
A Backflow Prevention Assembly Test and Maintenance
Report must be completed by the recognized backflow
prevention assembly test for each assembly tested. The signed
and dated original must be submitted to the City Utility
Department within 10 working days for record keeping
purposes. Should the tester choose to use a report format which
differs from that found in this Section, it must minimally
contain all information required by the report form.
Test and maintenance reports shall be retained for a minimum
of three years. The public water supplier must provide these
records to commission staff for inspection upon request.
(d) Customer Responsibility.
1. It is the responsibility of the person who owns or controls
property to have all assemblies tested in accordance with this
ordinance. Assemblies may be required to be tested more
frequently if the regulatory authority deems necessary.
2. The customer shall be responsible for all costs associated with
the installation, general maintenance, testing, upkeep, record
keeping, and replacement of the approved backflow prevention
assembly.
3. Where an owner of property leases or rents the same to any
person as tenant or lessee, the owner or tenant or both may be
held financially responsible for any of the requirements of this
ordinance.
4. The customer shall be responsible for ensuring that the
backflow prevention assembly tester is registered with the
utility and the gauges used by the tester have been calibrated
within one year of the testing date. Failure to comply with the
requirements of this section will be grounds to reject the testing
of the backflow prevention assembly and require retesting at
the customer's expense.
(e) Thermal Expansion.
It is the responsibility of any person who owns or controls property to
eliminate the possibility of thermal expansion, if a closed system has been
created by the installation of a backflow assembly.
(f) Pressure Loss.
Any reduction in water pressure caused by the installation of a backflow
assembly is not the responsibility of the City.
Sec. 38-132. Customer Service Inspection Program.
(a) Inspection Requirements. A customer service inspection certification shall be
completed prior to providing continuous water service to new construction, on any existing
service when the water purveyor has reason to believe that cross connections or other
unacceptable plumbing practices exist, or after any material improvement, correction, or
addition to the private plumbing facilities.
(b) Inspector Qualifications. Individuals with the following credentials shall be
recognized as capable of conducting a customer service inspection certification:
1. Plumbing Inspectors and Water Supply Protection Specialists licensed
by the Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners.
2. Certified Waterworks Operators and members of other water related
professional groups who have completed a training course, passed an
examination administered by the Commission or its designated agent,
and hold an endorsement granted by the Commission or its designated
agent.
3. Licensed Plumbers may perform customer service inspections on
single family residential services.
4. Registered Professional Engineers.
5. Registered Sanitarian.
(c) Inspection Certification Report.
Copies of properly completed Water Service Inspection Certifications will be kept
on file by the City and made available, upon request, for Commission review. The
certifications shall be retained for a minimum of ten years. If the certification form included
in this Section is not used, the Inspection Certifications must minimally include the name
and registration number of the inspector, the type of registration (Plumbing Inspectors,
Water Supply Protection Specialists, Certified Operator, etc.) and be dated and signed. It
must also certify that:
1. No direct connection between the public drinking water supply and a
potential source of contamination exists. Potential sources of
contamination are isolated from the public water system by an air-gap
or an appropriate backflow prevention assembly in accordance with
state plumbing regulation. Additionally, all pressure relief valves and
the thermal expansion devices are in compliance with state plumbing
codes.
2. No cross connection between the public drinking water supply and a
private water source exists. Where an actual air gap is not maintained
between the public water supply and private water supply, an approved
reduced pressure-zone backflow prevention assembly is properly
installed and a service agreement exists for annual inspection and
testing by a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester.
3. No connection exists which would allow the return of water used for
condensing, cooling, or industrial processes back to the public water
supply.
4. No pipe or pipe fitting which contains more than 8.0% percent lead
exists in private plumbing facilities installed on or after July 1, 1988.
5. No solder or flux which contains more then 0.02% percent lead exists
in private plumbing facilities installed on or after July 1, 1988.
6. No plumbing fixture is installed which is not in compliance with the
state-approved plumbing code.
(d) Inspection Fees.
Any inspection completed within the city limits shall be charged according to the
normal permit fees established. The City Council shall set the fee for inspection
systems outside the city limits by resolution.
Sec. 38-133. Closing Provisions.
(a) Responsibilities.
It is the responsibility of all property owners and their tenants and
occupants to abide by the conditions of this ordinance. In the event of any changes
to the plumbing system, it is the responsibility of the property owners to notify the
City. All costs associated with this ordinance and the purchase, installation, testing
and repair of devices is the responsibility of the property owner and their tenants.
(b) Enforcement and Penalties.
1. The Director and the City Attorney, and each of them, are
hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this ordinance
by any one or more of the enforcement mechanisms set forth
in this ordinance.
2. The representatives of the water system or agents of the City
charged with enforcement of this ordinance shall be deemed
to be performing a governmental function for the benefit of
the general public and neither the City, the Director nor
representative of the water system or agent of the City
engaged in inspection or endorsement activities under this
ordinance when acting in good faith and without malice shall
ever be held liable for any loss or damage, whether real or
asserted, caused, or alleged to have been caused, as a result of
the performance of such governmental function.
3. Failure on the part of any customer to discontinue the use of
all cross connections and to physically separate cross
connections is sufficient cause for the immediate
discontinuance of public water service to the premises.
4. Violations. A person commits an offense if:
a. He fails to maintain backflow prevention
assemblies in compliance with this section.
b. He fails to comply with a repair order issued by
the regulatory authority or the City.
c. Any backflow from premises he owns, operates
or manages enters the public water supply
system.
d. Fails to pay any fees required by this article.
e. He violates any section of this article.
f. He reinstates water service to premises
discontinued or disconnected under this article,
except as directed by the regulatory authority.
g. He allows an unregistered tester to perform
testing work at their establishment.
h. He tests a backflow prevention assembly within
the City without being registered with the
regulatory authority and the City.
i. He tests a backflow prevention assembly within
the City without being certified by the TNRCC.
5. Temporary disconnection of water service. When the
Director believes that an emergency affecting public health or
safety exists, the director may immediately discontinue water
service. It shall be an emergency affecting public health and
safety, if an approved backflow prevention assembly is not
installed as required by this chapter or an actual cross
connection between the public and private water system
exists. The temporary disconnection will continue until the
cross connection is eliminated as required by this chapter.
Reasonable advance notice and an opportunity to be heard
shall be provided to the customer if it is not an emergency. If
it is an emergency, notice and an opportunity to be heard shall
be provided to the customer as soon as possible after the
disconnection of such water service.
6. Refusal of water service. Failure to obtain and comply with
the appropriate plumbing or building permits shall result in
placement of a hold on the issuance of certificate of
occupancy and termination of water service provided during
construction.
7. Failure to comply with this ordinance is a criminal offense.
8. Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this ordinance and
this code shall be fined not more than two thousand dollars
($2000.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
9. Any persons violating any of the provisions of this ordinance
shall become civilly liable to the City for any expense, loss or
damage occasioned by the City by reason of such violation.
In addition to the penalties provided herein, the City may recover reasonable attorney’s
fees, court costs, court reporter fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit
against the person found to have violated this ordinance or the orders, rules, regulations,
and permits issued hereunder.
Article VII. LIQUID WASTE
DIVISION I. GENERALLY
38-140. Purpose and Policy.
1) This Article sets forth uniform requirements for liquid waste generators and liquid waste
transporters operating in the City of Temple, Texas, to ensure that the City of Temple
complies with all applicable State and Federal laws and regulations, including the Clean
Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.)
2) The objectives of this Article are:
a) To aid in the prevention of wastewater overflows resulting from blockages and
obstructions due to the accumulation of fats, oils, and greases from commercial and
industrial facilities;
b) To promote the proper maintenance of grease interceptors and grit traps/oil separators;
and,
c) To ensure the proper handling, disposal, transport, and tracking of trap waste and other
liquid waste.
38.141. Definitions.
1) The definitions set forth in Section 38-93 of this Chapter are incorporated herein.
2) Approved - means accepted as satisfactory under the terms of this Article and given
formal and official sanction by the City of Temple.
Car Wash – means establishments primarily engaged in cleaning, washing, and/or waxing
automotive vehicles, such as passenger cars, trucks, vans, and trailers and are categorized by
North American Industry Classification System Number 811192 and by Standard Industrial
Classification Number 7542.
Director - means the Public Works Director of the City of Temple, or his/her authorized
representative.
Disposal – means the discharge, deposit, release, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or
placing of any liquid waste into or on any land or water, intentionally or unintentionally, so
that such waste or any constituent thereof may enter the environment, be emitted into the air,
or discharged to any wastewaters or waters, including ground waters.
Disposal Site – means a permitted site or part of a site at which liquid waste is processed,
treated, and/or intentionally placed into or on any land and at which the waste will remain.
Disposer – means a person who receives, stores, retains, processes, or disposes of liquid
waste.
Fats, Oils, and Grease (FOG) - means organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or
plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are
detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR § 136, as
may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes collectively referred to herein as
“grease” or “greases.”
Food Processing Facility – means every commercial or industrial establishment where raw
ingredients are transformed, by physical or chemical means into food, or of food into other
forms to produce marketable food products that can be easily prepared and served by the
consumer.
Food Service Facility - means every food preparation and food service establishment
including, but not limited to bakeries, bars, butcher shops, cafes, clubhouses, delicatessens,
ice cream parlors, hospitals, hotels, restaurants, schools, or similar places where meat,
poultry, seafood, dairy products, or fried foods are prepared, served, or offered for sale, but
shall not apply to any single-family residence or dwelling not used for the commercial
preparation and/or sale of food items.
Generator - means any person who causes, creates, generates, or otherwise produces liquid
waste, or a person who, for any reason, has liquid waste removed from his property by a
transporter of liquid waste.
Grease Interceptor (or “Grease Trap”) - means a device designed to separate and retain
light density liquids, waterborne fats, oils, and greases by their specific gravity, prior to the
wastewater entering the POTW. These devices also serve to collect settleable solids,
generated by and from food preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and
entering the POTW.
Grease Interceptor Waste - means any organic, inorganic, greasy or fatty liquid, semiliquid,
and/or solid wastes collected by and removed from a grease trap.
Grit Trap/Oil Separator (or “Grit Trap”) – means a watertight receptacle designed and
constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of petroleum based oil, grease wastes and
solids into the POTW to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected.
Grit Trap Waste - means oil and grease waste, and/or inorganic solids generated by a
commercial facility that are collected by and removed from a grit trap/oil separator.
Hazardous Waste – means any liquid, semi-liquid or solid waste (or combination of wastes),
which because of its quantity, concentration, physical, chemical or infectious characteristics
may:
a. Be toxic, corrosive, and irritant, a strong sensitizer, flammable or combustible, explosive
or otherwise capable of causing substantial personal injury or illness;
b. Pose a substantial hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated,
stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise improperly managed, and is identified or
listed as a hazardous waste as defined by the Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act or the
administrator, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the Federal
“Solid Waste Disposal Act”, as amended by the “Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act of 1976” (RCRA), and as it may be amended in the future.
Immediately – means within 24 hours.
Liquid Waste – means water-borne solids and liquids containing dissolved or suspended
waste material including but not limited to septage and wastes from grease traps and grit
traps.
Manifest – means the written multi-part documentation required to be in the possession of
the transporter enabling disposal of hauled grit trap waste, grease trap waste, and septage at a
permitted or registered disposal site.
Manifest System - means a system consisting of a five-part trip ticket used to document the
generation, transportation, and disposal of liquid waste.
Septage – means liquid waste and sludge containing sufficient liquid content, which is
removed from a portable toilet, chemical toilet, septic tank, or cesspool. Septage does not
include non-domestic wastes from commercial or industrial facilities.
Storm Water System – means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, inlets, gutters, ditches, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, or storm drains) owned or operated by the City
and designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water, and which is not used for
collecting or conveying sewage and which is not part of a Publicly Owned Treatment Works
(POTW) as defined at 40 C.F.R § 403.3.
Transporter – means any person who is registered with and authorized by the TCEQ to
transport sewage sludge, water treatment sludge, domestic septage, chemical toilet waste, grit
trap waste, or grease trap waste in accordance with 30 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter
312, Subchapter G, § 312.142.
Trip Ticket – means the shipping document originated and signed by the transporter that
contains the information required by the City.
Washwater – means the water-borne solids, liquids, gaseous substances, or other residue and
debris resulting from a washing or cleaning process.
Washwater operation – means any cleaning process generally conducted outdoors, such as
washing vehicles, equipment, structures, or paved surfaces which generates washwater and
does not drain to a grease trap or grit trap. Examples include cleaning of petroleum products
from parking lots or service station drives, mobile washing operations, or equipment/vehicle
washing, which do not drain to a grit trap.
Wastestream – means the aggregate flow of waste materials from generation to treatment to
final disposition.
38-142. Applicability and Prohibitions.
1) This Article applies to all Users, as defined in Section 38-93 of this Chapter, of the
POTW and transporters as defined by this Article.
2) Grease traps or grease interceptors are not required for residential users.
3) Facilities generating fats, oils, or grease as a result of food manufacturing, processing,
preparation, or food service must install, use, and maintain appropriate grease interceptors as
required in Section 38-143 of this Article. These facilities include but are not limited to
restaurants, food manufacturers, food processors, hospitals, hotels, motels, schools, nursing
homes, and any other facility preparing, serving, or otherwise making any foodstuff available
for consumption. Failure to install, maintain, or use grease traps in accordance with this
Article is unlawful.
4) It is unlawful for a User to intentionally or unintentionally allow the discharge of any
petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, mineral oil, or any fats, oils, or grease of animal
or vegetable origin into the POTW in concentrations greater than those permitted and set
forth in Article V, Chapter 38, of the City of Temple Code of Ordinances, as may be
amended from time to time.
5) It shall be unlawful to discharge transported liquid waste, except as set forth in this
Article and in compliance with all federal, state, and local law and at discharge points
designated by the City.
6) It shall be unlawful for a person to discharge or expose grease, wastewater, or other
organic waste in such way as to be a potential instrument or medium of disease transmission
to a person or between persons.
7) It shall be unlawful to discharge washwater to the storm water system or POTW;
washwater may require pretreatment before being discharged to the POTW.
DIVISION 2. LIQUID WASTE GENERATORS
38-143. Installations.
1) New Facilities.
a) Food processing facilities or food service facilities, which are newly proposed or
constructed, or existing facilities, which will be expanded or renovated to include a food
service facility where such facility did not previously exist, shall be required to design,
install, operate, and maintain a grease interceptor in accordance with locally adopted
plumbing codes or other applicable ordinances. Grease interceptors must be installed and
inspected prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
b) Facilities that perform washing, cleaning, or servicing of automobiles, trucks, buses, or
similar equipment, which are newly proposed or constructed with floor drains in areas of
operation, shall be required to design, install, operate, and maintain a grit trap/oil
separator in accordance with locally adopted plumbing codes or other applicable
ordinances and guidelines as required by the City. Grit traps/oil separators shall be
installed and inspected prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
c) A generator shall install a sample port to allow access to sample the wastestream as close
as possible to the connection with the City wastewater collection main within the bounds
of the facility property. The port shall be installed according to the specifications of the
City. The port shall be installed and maintained at the generator’s expense. The port shall
be installed perpendicular to the effluent flow to allow visual observation and sampling.
2) Existing Facilities.
a) Existing grease interceptor or grit trap/oil separator must be operated and maintained in
accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations and in accordance with these
standards referenced herein, unless otherwise specified in writing and approved by the
City. The City may require some users to install an approved grease interceptor or grit
trap/oil separator when the concentration of oil, grease waste, or suspended solids is
greater than concentrations permitted and set forth in Article V, Chapter 38 of the City of
Temple Code of Ordinances or when discharges may cause blockages in the POTW.
b) Existing food processing or food service facilities that change in ownership, existing
facilities which will be expanded or renovated to include a food service facility, where
such facility did not previously exist, and facilities with a lack of, or an inadequately
sized, grease interceptor, are required to design, install, operate, and maintain a grease
interceptor in accordance with locally adopted plumbing codes, or other applicable
ordinances. Grease interceptors shall be installed and inspected prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy and prior to issuance of a permit under Chapter 14, City of
Temple Code of Ordinances.
c) Existing facilities which perform washing, cleaning, or servicing of automobiles, trucks,
buses, or similar equipment with floor drains in the areas of operation that change in
ownership, are expanded or renovated to include floor drains in areas of operation, or
where there is a lack of, or inadequately sized, grit trap/oil separator shall be required to
design, install, operate, and maintain a grit trap/oil separator in accordance with locally
adopted plumbing codes, or other applicable ordinances. Grit traps/oil separators shall be
installed and inspected prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
3) Grease interceptors and grit traps/oil separators shall be installed pursuant to a single
certificate of occupancy. No person or persons shall allow the use of an interceptor or trap by
more than one business as covered by a certificate of occupancy without prior written
approval from the Director.
38-144. Responsibilities.
1) A generator of liquid waste must have all liquid waste material removed from their
premises by a liquid waste transporter, which holds a valid permit from the City, and the
liquid waste must be transported to an approved site for disposal.
2) Cleaning Schedule
a) All grease interceptors shall be maintained in an efficient operating condition at all times.
Grease interceptors shall be cleaned as often as necessary to ensure that:
i) Sediment and floating materials do not accumulate and impair the efficiency of
the grease interceptor;
ii) The discharge is in compliance with local wastewater discharge limits; and
iii) No visible grease is observed in the discharge.
b) Grease interceptors shall be completely evacuated at a minimum of every ninety (90)
days, or more frequently when:
i) Twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the wetted height of the grease interceptor,
as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains
floating materials, sediment, oils, or greases;
ii) The discharge exceeds BOD, COD, TSS, FOG, pH, or other pollutant levels
established by the City; or
iii) The Public Works Department determines that more frequent evacuations are
needed for public safety.
3) Grit traps/oil separators shall be completely evacuated at a minimum of every 180 days
unless an exception is granted by the Director.
4) Any person who owns or operates a grease interceptor may submit to the City a request in
writing for an exception to the required pumping frequency of the grease interceptor. The
City may grant an extension for required cleaning frequency on a case-by-case basis when:
a) The grease interceptor owner/operator has demonstrated the specific interceptor will
produce an effluent with no visible grease, and, based on defensible analytical results, can
demonstrate consistent compliance with established local discharge limits such as BOD,
TSS, FOG, or other parameters as determined by the POTW; and
b) Less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the wetted height of the grease interceptor, as
measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contained floating
materials, sediment, oils, or greases.
5) The City may also require interceptors or traps to be serviced on a single-event basis or
scheduled basis if deemed necessary for the proper operation of the grease interceptor or grit
trap/oil separator. Such determination will be at the Director’s discretion.
6) In the event that an establishment ceases operation, the establishment is required to pump
the interceptor or trap before abandoning the property. If the owner of the business or his/her
agent fail to empty the interceptor or trap, it will become the responsibility of the property
owner.
7) A generator of liquid waste must not have hazardous waste, or liquid waste in
combination with hazardous waste, removed from their premises by a liquid waste hauler
operating under a City permit.
8) When a load is picked up by a permitted transporter, the generator shall verify the
accuracy of the trip ticket and then certify the statements contained therein by legibly
completing and signing the trip ticket. The generator must keep a copy of all trip tickets for a
period of three years at the site of generation, unless otherwise approved. The City may
inspect and copy these records at any time.
9) A generator must:
a) Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the City;
b) Position the grease interceptor or grease trap/oil separator in a manner that provides ready
and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection;
c) Maintain the trap in effective operating condition;
d) Not install or utilize any system, process or pretreatment involving the use of enzymes,
bacteria, or other additives, nor alter the design or function of the grease interceptor or
grit trap/oil separator unless approved in writing by the City;
e) Supervise proper cleaning and removal of the contents of the trap;
f) Maintain the grease interceptor or grit trap/oil separator and its surrounding areas in
sanitary conditions, free of litter and odors;
g) Immediately report spills and accidents involving liquid waste to the City; and
h) Clean up all spills and abate all unsanitary conditions immediately and have material used
for abatement, such as absorbent materials, disposed of by approved means and in a
timely manner. If immediate clean-up is not feasible, the generator must provide to the
City a written, detailed explanation of the circumstances and the plan for clean-up and
abatement, including a request for additional time.
10) A generator of washwater or other liquid waste must:
a) Contain, collect, and dispose of liquid waste by approved means;
b) Protect the storm water system, the POTW, and the environment from discharges of
liquid waste or other contaminants;
c) Use approved methods for on-site or mobile treatment of liquid waste; and
d) Accurately measure, by approved means, the volume of liquid waste collected and
disposed of by the transporter.
2) Rates for sampling and/or analysis. Should any sampling and/or analysis be required
by the City pursuant to any provision in this Article, the payment of such fees incurred for
sampling and analysis will be the responsibility of the generator.
DIVISION 3. LIQUID WASTE TRANSPORTERS
38-145. Permit Required.
1) Permit Required. All persons owning or operating a vacuum truck, cesspool pump truck,
liquid waste transport truck, or other vehicle must not service any septic tank, seepage pit,
grease interceptor, grit trap/oil separator, or cesspool without first having received a valid
transport truck discharge (TTD) permit.
2) Permit Application and Fee. TTD permits will be issued by the City upon proper
application and payment of a fee established by the City Council and on file in the City
Secretary’s office. All TTD permits will be valid for one (1) year, running from January 1
through December 31.
a) The City may deny a permit, deny the renewal of a permit, revoke a permit in its entirety,
suspend the permit for a stated period of time, place the permit holder on terms of
probation, or place other conditions thereon as the City deems necessary and appropriate
if the City finds that any requirement of the permit has been violated or that false
statements were made on any application, agreement, or any required submittal.
3) Unloading or discharge of waste or wastewater. It is unlawful for any person to unload
or discharge waste or wastewater within the City except in a manner and at a place specified
by the City. All transporters must discharge waste in an approved facility and provide an
approved manifest for said discharge.
38.146. Manifest Requirements.
1) Persons who generate, collect, and transport grease interceptor and grit trap/oil separator
waste must maintain a record of each individual collection and deposit. Such records will be
in the form of a manifest. The manifest must include:
a) Name, address, telephone, and TCEQ registration number of transporter;
b) Name, signature, address, and telephone of the person who generated the waste and the
date collected;
c) Type and amount(s) of waste collected or transported;
d) Name and signature(s) of responsible person(s) collecting, transporting, and depositing
the waste;
e) Date and place where the waste was deposited;
f) Identification (permit or site registration number, location, and operator) of the facility
where the waste was deposited;
g) Name and signature of the facility on-site representative acknowledging receipt of the
waste;
h) The volume of the waste received; and
i) A consecutive numerical tracking number to assist transporters, waste generators, and
regulating authorities in tracking the volume of grease transported.
2) Transporters shall obtain manifests from the City of Temple.
3) Manifests must be divided into five parts and records shall be maintained as follows:
a) One part of the manifest must have the generator and transporter information completed
and will be provided to the generator at the time of waste pickup.
b) The remaining four parts of the manifest must have all required information completely
filled out and signed by the appropriate party before distribution of the manifest. The
remaining four parts will be distributed as follows:
i) One part of the manifest must be provided to the receiving facility;
ii) One part must be kept by the transporter, who must retain a copy of all manifests
showing the collection and disposition of waste;
iii) One part of the manifest must be returned by the transporter to the waste generator
within fifteen (15) days after the waste is received at the disposal or processing
facility; and
iv) One part of the manifest must be returned by the transporter to the City of Temple
Environmental Programs Office within fifteen (15) days after the waste is received at
the disposal or processing facility.
4) Copies of manifests returned to the waste generator must be retained for three years and
be readily available for review by the City.
38-147. Responsibilities.
1) Each grease interceptor or grit trap/oil separator that is pumped must be fully evacuated
unless the trap volume is greater than the tank capacity on the vacuum truck, in which case
the transporter shall arrange for additional transportation capacity so that the trap is fully
evacuated within a twenty four (24) hour period, in accordance with 30 Texas Administrative
Code, Chapter 312, § 312.143.
2) The City, or its representative(s), will have the right to enter the premises of any generator
or transporter to determine whether the generator or transporter is complying with all
requirements of this Article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder.
The generator or transporter must allow the representatives from the City access to all parts
of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying,
and the performance of any additional duties.
3) The City has the right to set up on the generator or transporter’s property, or require
installation of such devices as necessary to conduct sampling and/or investigation of the
user’s operations.
DIVISION 4. Abatement of Violations
38-148. Enforcement actions.
1) Notice of Violation.
a) If the City determines that a violation of this Article, a permit or order issued in
accordance with this Article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement has
occurred, a written notice of violation may be issued to the person determined to be in
violation.
b) Upon receipt of written notice and within the timeframe specified in the notice, the
person must submit an explanation of the violation and detailed plan, including specific
actions to be taken, for satisfactory remedy of the violation at issue and methods for
prevention of repeat or future offenses.
c) Submitting a corrective action plan in response to a written notice does not relieve the
person of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of
violation.
d) Nothing contained in this section will be construed as to require the City to first issue a
written notice of violation before taking any action, including emergency action, or
pursuing other enforcement remedies.
2) Administrative Orders.
a) Compliance Orders.
i) If the City determines that a violation of this Article, a permit or order issued in
accordance with this Article, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement has
occurred, a compliance order may be issued to the person, as defined in 38-93 of this
Chapter, responsible for the discharge directing that the person come into compliance
within a specified time period.
ii) If the person does not come into compliance within the time period provided in
the compliance order, water or wastewater service may be discontinued and any
permits issued by the City may be revoked.
iii) Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address
noncompliance, including, but not limited to, additional self-monitoring and
management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to
the POTW.
iv) A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a
pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the User of
liability for any violation, including any continuing violation.
v) Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the User.
b) Cease and Desist Orders.
i) If the City determines that a violation of this Article, any permit or order issued
by the City, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement has occurred or that the
person’s past violations are likely to reoccur, the City may issue an order to the person
directing them to cease and desist all such violations and:
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements of this Article; and
(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly
address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or
terminating the discharge.
3) Service of notice or order. Any notice or order issued under this Article must be in
writing and served in person or by registered or certified mail on the User or transporter of
the liquid waste and/or any other persons determined to be responsible for such violation.
4) Termination of service and revocation of permit. The City may, if a violation is
continuing or reoccurring or may reoccur, revoke any permit issued by the City to the person
ordered to correct or abate such violation if such violation has not been corrected or abated
within the time specified in a compliance order or cease and desist order.
5) Emergency suspension of service.
a) Suspension. The City may, without prior notice, suspend water service, wastewater
service and/or storm water access to a person discharging to the POTW or storm water
system when such suspension is necessary in the opinion of the City to stop an actual or
threatened discharge that:
i) Presents or may present imminent substantial danger to the environment or to the
health or welfare of persons;
ii) Presents or may present imminent substantial danger to the POTW, storm water
system, or waters of the state; or
iii) Will cause pass through or interference of the POTW.
b) Notice of suspension. As soon as is practicable after the suspension of service, the City
shall notify the person discharging to the POTW or storm water system of the suspension,
and order such person to cease the discharge immediately.
c) Reinstating service. The City will reinstate a person’s suspended water and/or
wastewater services:
i) Upon proof by such person that the non-complying discharge has been eliminated;
ii) Upon payment by such person of any outstanding water and wastewater utility
charges;
iii) Upon arrangement of payment by such person of all costs incurred by the City in
responding to the discharge or threatened discharge; and
iv) Upon arrangement of payment by such person of all costs incurred by the City in
reconnecting service.
d) Written statement. Prior to reinstatement of service, the person must submit to the City
a detailed written statement describing the cause of the discharge and the measures taken
to prevent any future occurrence as instructed by the City.
38-149. Penalties.
1) A person who violates any provision of this Article may be subject to civil and/or
criminal penalties.
2) Criminal Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this Article will be subject
to criminal prosecution. Violation of any provision contained within this Article is a Class C
Misdemeanor, to be punished by imposition of a fine upon conviction in the municipal court
of up to $2,000. Each day that the violation exists is a separate offense under this Article.
3) Civil Penalties. The City, its City Attorney, or authorized designee is authorized to
commence a civil action for appropriate legal or equitable relief in a court of competent
jurisdiction. Such relief may include, but is not limited to:
a) An injunction to prevent a violation of this Article;
b) Recovery for damages to the POTW or storm water system resulting from a violation of
this Article; and/or
c) Recovery for expenses incurred by the City in responding to a violation of this Article.
4) Penalties Cumulative. Nothing contained in this Article will be construed as to limit the
remedies available to the City or to prevent the City from seeking both civil and criminal
penalties.
Chapter 39
WRECKERS
Sec. 39-1. City wrecker service to be by bid.
Sec. 39-2. City service bid not a restriction on choice.
Sec. 39-3. Call to accident scene.
Sec. 39-4. Soliciting business.
Sec. 39-5. Intercepting radio messages.
Sec. 39-6. Local option.
Chapter 39
WRECKERS
Sec. 39-1. City wrecker service to be by bid.
The City of Temple shall advertise for bids and contract for wrecker service with the
lowest acceptable bidder. The contract shall be for a term of two (2) years and shall require
the successful bidder to provide motor vehicle wrecker service within the City of Temple,
as needed and required by the police department, and to operate and maintain a storage
facility for impounded vehicles. Specifications for bids shall be prepared by the purchasing
agent of the City of Temple.
Sec. 39-2. City service bid not a restriction on choice.
Nothing contained in the bid or contract shall prohibit any citizen from utilizing any
other wrecker service.
Sec. 39-3. Call to accident scene.
No person shall drive a wrecker to or near the site of a motor vehicle accident on the
streets of the city, unless such person has been summoned by the police department or the
owner of a vehicle involved in the accident; provided, however, when necessary to prevent
death or bodily injury the prohibition of this section shall be inapplicable.
Sec. 39-4. Soliciting business.
No person shall solicit on the public streets, directly or indirectly, the business of
towing, repair or acquisition of any vehicle which is wrecked or disabled on a public street.
Sec. 39-5. Intercepting radio messages.
It shall be unlawful for any person to intercept, receive or assist the interception or
reception of any message emanating through the medium of the city police radio station and
to divulge or publish the existence, contents or substance of such communication for the
purpose of allowing or aiding a wrecker service to respond to the site of a motor vehicle
accident when not otherwise summoned to the scene under the provisions of section 39-3.
Sec. 39-6. Local option.
The City of Temple exercises the option provided in Article 6687-9a, Revised Civil
Statutes of Texas, Section 13(a), to exempt vehicle storage facilities located in and
operating within the territorial limits of the City of Temple from the requirements of
Article 6687-9a, and all regulations adopted under the authority of Article 6687-9a.
Chapter 40
NUISANCES
ARTICLE I. PURPOSE AND SCOPE
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
ARTICLE III. ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 3.1 Designation.
Sec. 3.2 Code Enforcement Officers Authorized.
Sec. 3.3 Right of Entry and Inspection.
Sec. 3.4 Warrants.
ARTICLE IV. NUISANCES
Sec. 4.1 Public Nuisance.
Sec. 4.2 Conditions Constituting a Nuisance.
Sec. 4.3 Responsibility to Abate Nuisance.
ARTICLE V. HIGH WEEDS AND GRASS
Sec. 5.1. High Weeds or Grass Unlawful.
Sec. 5.2 Larger Lots; Fire Break Required.
Sec. 5.3 Bamboo.
Sec. 5.4 Exception; Wildflowers.
Sec. 5.5 Notice to Abate.
Sec. 5.6 Abatement of Dangerous Weeds without Notice.
Sec. 5.7 Administrative Hearing Before Code Enforcement Manager.
ARTICLE VI. JUNKED VEHICLES
Sec. 6.1 Authorization.
Sec. 6.2 Designation of Official; Administration.
Sec. 6.3 Right of Inspection.
Sec. 6.4 Definitions.
Sec. 6.5 Junked Vehicle Declared a Public Nuisance.
Sec. 6.6 Responsibility to Abate.
Sec. 6.7 Notice to Abate and Remove Nuisance.
Sec. 6.8 Requirements of Notice.
Sec. 6.9 Hearing before the Official; Notice of Hearing.
Sec. 6.10 Order for Removal.
Sec. 6.11 Voluntary Abatement.
Sec. 6.12 Offense; Criminal Penalty.
Sec. 6.13 Disposal of Junked Vehicles.
Sec. 6.14 Notice of Removal to Texas Department of Transportation.
Sec. 6.15 Inapplicability of Article.
ARTICLE VII. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Sec. 7.1 Notice of Violation.
Sec. 7.2 Citation.
Sec. 7.3 Abatement by City.
Sec. 7.4 Abatement of Recurring Nuisance without Further Notice.
Sec. 7.5 Assessment of Expenses and Liens.
Sec. 7.6 Criminal Penalty.
Chapter 40- NUISANCES
Article I. Purpose and Scope
This Chapter is set forth pursuant to the authority granted to home rule municipalities in Texas
Local Government Code §217.041, et. seq., as amended, and Texas Health and Safety Code Chapter 342,
as amended.
The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
the City of Temple by requiring a minimum level of maintenance of private property to protect the livability,
appearance and economic stability of the City, to protect the public from health and safety hazards and the
impairment of property values that result from the neglect and deterioration of property, to eliminate
conditions that lead to blighted neighborhoods, and to safeguard the health of the citizens by preventing the
spread of disease.
The City, through this Chapter, sets forth the requirements necessary to prohibit and abate nuisance
conditions that interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of private property, or cause hazardous or injurious
conditions that may be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public, or depreciate the
community in which the property is situated.
This Chapter sets forth the conditions which may be considered an illegal nuisance and provides
for enforcement and administrative remedies when such conditions exist.
Article. II. Definitions
Abate- includes eliminating by removal, repairing, rehabilitation, demolition, cleaning, filling,
draining, disinfecting, vacating, or by other means complying with applicable ordinances or laws;
Bamboo- includes any tropical or semitropical grass of the genera Bambusa, Dendrocalamus or of
any other related genera;
Brush- includes all trees, shrubbery, bushes, groundcover, ivy, vines, and similar vegetation under
seven (7) feet in height which are not cultivated or cared for by a person owning or controlling the
premises;
Days- shall mean calendar days unless otherwise specified;
Objectionable, unsightly, or unsanitary matter- includes all uncultivated vegetable growth,
objects, items, and matters which are liable to produce or tend to produce an unhealthy, unwholesome, or
unsanitary condition on the premises where the same is situated, or which tends to cause discomfort to the
senses of persons of ordinary sensibilities in the vicinity, or which tends to lend to the blight of
neighborhoods, or depreciate the community in which the property is situated;
Property- includes all real property, lots, or parcels of real estate within the city limits, whether
developed or undeveloped, containing structures or vacant;
Premises- includes all privately owned property including vacant land or a building or structure
designed or used for residential, commercial, business, industrial or religious purposes, as well as the
yard, ground, driveway, walkway, sidewalks, fence, porch, steps or other structure appurtenant to the
property;
Rubbish- includes all refuse, junk, trash, debris, discarded tin and plastic containers, glass, paper,
metal, wood or other building materials, old vessels, bottles, cans, useless articles, discarded clothing and
textiles of all sorts, discarded furniture, tires, or other material discarded or sold by a previous owner at a
nominal price, and in general all litter and other things usually included within the generally accepted
meaning of the term;
Trailer-means a vehicle, other than a pole trailer, with or without motive power, designed to be
drawn by a motor vehicle and to transport persons or property;
Uncultivated- means unmanaged, unimproved or not refined or assisted by human intervention;
Vehicle- means a device that can be used to transport or draw persons or property. The term
includes, but is not limited to, a boat, recreational vehicle, all-terrain vehicle, camper, trailer or aircraft.
The term does not include a device exclusively used on stationary rails or tracks, or manufactured housing
as that term is defined by Chapter 1201, Occupations Code;
Weeds- includes all uncultivated vegetable growth or matter, including grass;
Wildflower- means a flower of any uncultivated variety or a flower growing freely without human
intervention.
Article III. Administration
Sec. 3.1 Designation. The code enforcement manager is designated and charged with enforcing this
Chapter. The code enforcement manager, or his designee, shall conduct administrative hearings as provided
by this Chapter.
Sec. 3.2 Code Enforcement Officers Authorized. Code enforcement officers are authorized under the
direction of the code enforcement manager to administer procedures under this Chapter, except that any
authorized person may abate a nuisance.
Sec. 3.3. Right of Entry and Inspection. The code enforcement manager, a code enforcement officer, or
an authorized designee of the code enforcement manager, may enter any private property or premises for
purposes of enforcing this Chapter.
Sec. 3.4. Warrants. The municipal court judge has the authority as granted by State law to issue warrants
as necessary for the investigation and enforcement of this Chapter.
Article IV. Nuisances
Sec. 4.1. Public Nuisance. It shall be unlawful to maintain, use, place, deposit, leave or permit to be on or
remain on any public or private property an item, condition, or action that is dangerous to human health or
welfare, renders the ground, water, air or food a hazard to human health, tends to diminish the economic
value or property values of the community, or is injurious to the senses of an individual of ordinary
sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof.
Sec. 4.2. Conditions Constituting a Nuisance. The following specific acts, conditions, items, and things
are declared a nuisance and are unlawful; provided, however, that this list shall not be deemed or construed
to be conclusive, limiting or restrictive:
(1) The deposit or accumulation of any filth, any decaying, rotten or putrid substance, or other
impure, unwholesome or offensive matter, including animal carcasses or flesh of dead animals,
foul liquids, gases, dusts, fumes, mist, and sprays to the extent any one of them may become
hazardous to the health or a source of discomfort to persons living or passing in the vicinity;
(2) The accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk or other abandoned materials, metals, lumber,
stagnant water, or any object or matter that may cause injury, death or disease to human beings;
(3) Any condition that provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes and other vermin, including wild
or undomesticated bees;
(4) A polluted well, cistern, spring or stream, or the pollution of any body of water used for
drinking purposes;
(5) The maintenance of any privy, vault, or cesspool, except as authorized by the Unified
Development Code;
(6) Keeping any building, structure, or room, in such a state of uncleanliness or disrepair as to
endanger the health of persons dwelling within;
(7) Allowing cellars, temporary tents, or sheds to be used as sleeping rooms;
(8) A building or portion of a building occupied as a dwelling which is not provided with a plentiful
supply of pure water or adequate ventilation;
(9) Permitting property to be in such a condition that it holds or is liable to hold stagnant water,
or be in such a condition that may cause disease, or produce, harbor or spread disease, germs
of any nature, or tend to render the surrounding area unhealthy, offensive or obnoxious;
(10) Permitting the accumulation of water, stagnant or otherwise, in which mosquitos breed, or
which may become a breeding place for mosquitos;
(11) Permitting urine, feces, vomit, or other bodily fluids in or on any property, including a
sidewalk adjacent to any paved portion of a street abutting the property, that may be accessible
to the public or in such a manner that the presence of any of the foregoing may be detected in
the vicinity of the property;
(12) Permitting the accumulation of animal waste;
(13) Allowing, permitting, or maintaining a property or premises with high weeds, grass or
other uncultivated vegetation or brush;
(14) Allowing, permitting or maintaining a property or premises with uncultivated or overgrown
bamboo;
(15) Allowing, permitting, or maintaining the storage or accumulation of any appliances,
building materials, equipment, indoor (non-weather resistant) furniture, or other goods outside
of an enclosed structure or not fully screened in a manner compliant with the Unified
Development Code, that can be seen from any portion of adjoining or adjacent property,
including the street or alleyway;
a) This provision does not apply to firewood that is neatly stacked a minimum of twelve (12)
inches off of the ground, or
b) Building materials stored in a workman-like manner as part of, and in conjunction with, an
active building permit and in compliance with all other City ordinances.
(16) Parking, or allowing others to park vehicles in the yard, grass, or on any other unimproved
parking surface or portion of a property, unless screened from public view in compliance with
the Unified Development Code;
(17) Allowing, permitting or maintaining a “junked vehicle” as defined in Texas Transportation
Code Chapter 683, Subchapter E, as amended.
Sec. 4.3. Responsibility to Abate Nuisance. It shall be the responsibility of any property owner, tenant,
and/or occupant to maintain property inside the city limits in compliance with this Code. Upon notification
that a violation exists, it shall be the responsibility of the noticed individual to abate, remove or eliminate
the nuisance within the time frame given. Failure to abate a nuisance as required constitutes an offense.
Article V. High Weeds and Grass
Sec. 5.1. High Weeds or Grass Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant, or tenant to allow
weeds, grass, or other rank or uncultivated vegetable growth to exceed nine (9) inches in height on any lot
that is two (2) acres in size or less or that contains one or more structures.
Sec. 5.2. Larger Lots; Fire Break Required. For properties, larger than (2) acres in size with no existing
structures, or that are zoned agricultural or have a current agricultural exemption filed with Bell County,
grass, weeds, and other vegetation shall not exceed nine (9) inches in height within fifty (50) feet of any
property line or structure, or more than forty-eight (48) inches in height on the remaining portion of the
property.
Sec. 5.3. Bamboo.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant, or tenant to allow bamboo to be planted, maintained
or otherwise permitted to exist in a manner that encroaches or grows upon any adjoining
neighboring property, including sidewalks, streets, public property and rights-of-way held by the
City.
(b) Owners, occupants, and/or tenants shall take such measures necessary to prevent bamboo from
invading, encroaching, or growing onto adjoining or neighboring property. Such measures may
include, but are not limited to, the installation of sheathing comprised of metal or other material
impenetrable by bamboo at a sufficient depth around where the bamboo is planted or is growing to
prevent the growth or encroachment upon adjoining or neighboring property.
Sec. 5.4. Exception; Wildflowers. During the period beginning March 1st and ending May 31st of each
year, portions of property containing concentrated wildflowers in areas where grasses and weeds do not
exceed eighteen (18) inches in height are exempt from the provisions of this Article.
Sec. 5.5. Notice to Abate. Notice of violation of this article shall be sent by first class mail with a certificate
of mailing to the owner, occupant, or tenant of the property or premises where high grass or weeds are
found to exist in violation of this section. The code enforcement officer shall provide ten (10) days’ notice
for the abatement of the violation.
Sec. 5.6. Abatement of Dangerous Weeds without Notice.
(a) The City may abate, without notice, grass, weeds or other uncultivated vegetation that has grown
higher than forty-eight (48) inches and are an immediate danger to the health, life, or safety of any
person. The City shall provide notice to the owner, occupant, or tenant in the manner required
under Section 7.1 of this Chapter.
(b) The notice shall contain an identification of the property, a description of the violation, a statement
that the City abated the weeds, and an explanation that the person has a right to request an
administrative hearing by filing a written request with the code enforcement manager not later than
the 30th day after the date of the abatement of the high grass, weeds or other uncultivated vegetation.
Sec. 5.7 Administrative Hearing Before Code Enforcement Manager.
(a) The code enforcement manager shall conduct an administrative hearing on the abatement of weeds
under Section 5.6 of this Chapter, if not later than the 30th day after the date of the abatement of
grass, weeds, or uncultivated vegetation, the property owner, occupant, or tenant, files a written
request for a hearing.
(b) The hearing shall be conducted not later than the 20th day after the date a request for a hearing is
filed.
(c) The property owner, occupant, or tenant may testify or present witnesses or written information
relating to the City’s abatement of high grass, weeds, or uncultivated vegetation.
(d) After hearing and considering all evidence presented at the hearing, the code enforcement manager
will determine whether a dangerous nuisance existed warranting immediate abatement and whether
the abatement by the City was justified. The determination of the code enforcement manager shall
be final.
(e) The City may assess expenses and assess liens under this section as it assesses expenses and liens
under Section 7.5 of this Chapter.
Article VI. Junked Vehicles
Sec. 6.1. Authorization. This article is set forth pursuant to the authority given to municipalities in Texas
Transportation Code Chapter 683, Subchapter E, as amended, to adopt procedures for the abatement and
removal from private or public property or public right-of-way of a junked vehicle or part or a junked
vehicle as a public nuisance.
Sec. 6.2. Designation of Official; Administration. The code enforcement manager is hereby designated
and charged with enforcing the procedures for abatement and removal of a public nuisance under this article
and shall be the designated “official” for the purposes contained herein. A code enforcement officer is
authorized at the direction of the code enforcement manager to administer the procedures for abatement
and removal of a junked vehicle, except that any authorized person may move or remove a junked vehicle
to abate the nuisance.
Sec. 6.3. Right of Inspection. A person authorized to administer the procedures set forth herein, may enter
private property to examine a public nuisance, to obtain information to identify the nuisance, and to remove
or direct the removal of the nuisance.
Sec. 6.4. Definitions.
(a) In this article, “junked vehicle” means:
1. A vehicle, watercraft, or aircraft that:
a. Is self-propelled; and
b. Is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
c. Is Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
i. 72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
ii. 30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
2. A motor vehicle that displays an expired license plate or does not display a license plate; or
3. An aircraft that does not have lawfully printed on the aircraft an unexpired federal aircraft
identification number registered under the Federal Aviation Administration aircraft registration
regulations in 14 C.F.R. Part 47; or
4. A watercraft that:
a. Does not have lawfully on board an unexpired certificate of number; and
b. Is not a watercraft described by Section 31.055 of the Texas Parks and Wildlife Code.
Sec. 6.5. Junked Vehicle Declared a Public Nuisance. A junked vehicle, including part of a junked vehicle
that is visible at any time of the year from a public place or public right-of-way:
(a) Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public;
(b) Tends to reduce the value of private property;
(c) Invites vandalism;
(d) Creates a fire hazard;
(e) Is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors;
(f) Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the City of
Temple; and
(g) Is a public nuisance.
Sec. 6.6. Responsibility to Abate. The owner, occupant, or tenant of a property on which a junked vehicle
is located, or if the junked vehicle is located on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-ofway,
shall be responsible for abating and removing a junked vehicle.
Sec. 6.7. Notice to Abate and Remove Nuisance. Whenever a public nuisance exists on premises within
the city in violation of Section 6.6 of this article, the official shall provide ten (10) days written notice to
abate and remove the public nuisance to:
(a) The last known registered owner of the nuisance;
(b) Each lienholder of record of the nuisance; and
(c) The owner or occupant of:
1. The property on which the nuisance is located; or
2. If the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way.
Sec. 6.8. Requirements of Notice. The notice to abate and remove the public nuisance shall be personally
delivered, sent certified mail with five-day return requested, or delivered by the United States Postal Service
with signature confirmation service and shall state:
(a) The nature of the nuisance;
(b) The nuisance must be abated and removed not later than the tenth (10th) day after the date on which
the notice was mailed or personally delivered; and
(c) That any request for a public hearing must be made before the ten (10) day period expires.
(d) If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice
may be placed on the nuisance, or if the owner is located, personally delivered.
(e) If notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier
than the 11th day after the date of the return.
Sec. 6.9. Hearing before the Official; Notice of Hearing.
(a) A public hearing before the official is required before removal of the public nuisance, if such
hearing is requested by a person for whom notice is required under Section 6.7 within the ten (10)
day period following the notice to abate and remove the nuisance.
(b) Unless a later date is requested by the person for whom notice is required under Section 6.7 of this
article, the official shall set a date, time, and the location for a hearing on the notice to remove and
abate the nuisance. The hearing shall be held not earlier than the eleventh (11th) day after the date
of the return of the notice.
(c) If the person for whom notice is required under Section 6.7 of this article requests the official to
reschedule the hearing date, the official at his discretion shall reschedule the hearing date; however,
the person is not entitled to additional service of notice for the rescheduled hearing.
(d) At the hearing, the junked motor vehicle, watercraft, or aircraft is presumed to be inoperable, unless
otherwise demonstrated by the owner.
(e) The determination of the official at the hearing shall be final and binding, and the official may issue
an order to remove or abate the nuisance immediately.
Sec. 6.10. Order for Removal.
(a) The official may issue an order to remove and abate the nuisance that shall be final and binding on
the persons for whom notice is required under Section 6.7 who did not request a hearing or appear
at the hearing before the official.
(b) If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, the order requiring the removal of the
nuisance must include the description of the vehicle, the vehicle identification number, and license
plate number.
Sec. 6.11. Voluntary Abatement. If, within ten (10) days of the notice to abate the nuisance, a person for
whom notice is required under Section 6.7, provides written consent to the official to remove the nuisance,
he/she shall be considered to be in compliance with this article, and further enforcement action shall be
suspended.
Sec. 6.12. Offense; Criminal Penalty.
(a) Violation of this article shall constitute a Class C misdemeanor, which shall be prosecuted in the
municipal court, and punishable by a fine not to exceed $200.00. Each day a violation exists
constitutes a separate offense.
(b) The owner, occupant, or tenant of the property on which the nuisance is located, or if the nuisance
is located in the public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way, shall be subject to
criminal prosecution for maintenance of a nuisance at the discretion of the official, if the nuisance
remains unabated after the tenth (10th) day on which notice to abate the nuisance was mailed or
delivered, or if the nuisance remains unabated after the issuance of an order for removal as set forth
in this article.
(c) The procedures for abatement and removal of a public nuisance by the official under this article are
independent and cumulative of any criminal penalties imposed.
Sec. 6.13. Disposal of Junked Vehicles.
(a) A junked vehicle may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard, demolisher, or a suitable site
operated by a municipality or county.
(b) A junked vehicle taken into custody and removed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not
be reconstructed or made operable.
Sec. 6.14. Notice of Removal to Texas Department of Transportation. The official shall give notice of
removal of the junked vehicle, identifying the vehicle or vehicle part, to the Texas Department of
Transportation not later than the fifth (5th) day after the date of the removal.
Sec. 6.15 Inapplicability of Article.
(a) Procedures adopted under this article may not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part that is:
1. completely enclosed in a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or other
public or private property; or
2. stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property, in connection with the business of a
licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a
motor vehicle collector on the collector’s property, if the vehicle or part and the storage area,
if any, are:
a. maintained in an orderly manner;
b. not a health hazard; and
c. screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly
growing trees, or shrubbery.
(b) In this section:
1. Antique vehicle means a passenger car or truck that is at least 35 years old.
2. Motor vehicle collector means a person who:
a. owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; and
b. acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of an
antique or special interest vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or
special interest vehicle for historical interest.
3. Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from
original manufacturer’s specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved
by a hobbyist.
Article VII. Enforcement and Penalties
Sec. 7.1. Notice of Violation.
(1) When a violation of this Chapter is found to exist, the code enforcement official shall provide
written notice to the owner, occupant, or tenant of the property or premises to abate the public
health notice within ten (10) days.
(2) The notice to abate shall be sent by first class mail, with a certificate of mailing, and shall
contain:
a. An identification of the property, premises, or location where the public health
nuisance is located;
b. A description of the violation;
c. A statement that a violation of this Code is a Class C misdemeanor, and may be
punishable by a fine of up to $2000.00 per day per violation, unless otherwise set forth
in this Chapter, for which the owner or occupant will be criminally prosecuted and that
if the violation is not abated within ten (10) days, a citation will be issued and the
owner, occupant, or tenant will be required to appear in municipal court;
d. A statement that if the owner, occupant, or tenant of the property commits another
violation of the type or nature originally noticed in this section within one (1) year, the
City without further notice may correct the violation at the owner’s expense and file a
lien against the property.
Sec. 7.2. Citation.
(a) A code enforcement officer is authorized to issue a citation to any person who violates a provision
of this Chapter.
(b) The citation shall contain:
a. An identification of the property, premises or location where the violation exists;
b. A description of the offense;
c. A statement that violation of this Chapter is a Class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine
of up to $2000.00 per day per violation, unless otherwise set forth in this Chapter, and that
a criminal complaint will be filed for which the person will be required to appear in
municipal court.
(c) The citation shall be delivered:
a. Personally by hand delivery;
b. By letter addressed to the last known address of the person; or
c. If personal service cannot be achieved and the address of the person is unknown:
i. By publication at least twice within ten (10) consecutive days;
ii. By posting the notice and citation on or near the front door of each building on the
property to which the violation relates;
iii. By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the
property to which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings; or
d. As provided by Chapter 17A. Corporations and Associations, Texas Code of Criminal
Procedure.
Sec. 7.3. Abatement by City.
(a) If the owner, occupant, or tenant does not comply with the notice of violation, and the nuisance is
not abated within ten (10) days, the City may do the work required to abate the nuisance and bill
the same for all expenses and fees incurred.
(b) If the invoice remains unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days, the City may assess a lien against the
property, which may accumulate 10% interest per year.
Sec. 7.4. Abatement of Recurring Nuisance without Further Notice.
(a) If the owner, occupant, or tenant commits or permits another violation of the same kind or nature
on or before the first anniversary date of the notice of violation as provided in Section 7.1, the City
may without further notice, remedy the violation at the owner, occupant, or tenant’s expense and
assess a lien against the property.
(b) If a violation occurs within the one-year period as provided in subsection (a) above, and the City
has not been informed of an ownership change, then the City may take any action permitted by
Section 7.3 of this Chapter.
Sec. 7.5. Assessment of Expenses and Liens.
(a) The City may assess expenses incurred in the abatement, removal, elimination, remedy or repair of
any violation under this Chapter against the real property on which the work was done or
improvements made.
(b) The code enforcement manager shall prepare and file a statement of expenses with the county clerk
of Bell County, Texas to obtain a lien against the property.
(c) The lien is security for the expenditures made by the City and interest may accrue at the rate of ten
(10) percent annually on the amount due from the date of the expenditure by the City.
(d) The lien is inferior only to tax liens and liens for street improvements.
(e) The City may bring suit for foreclosure in the name of the City to recover the expenditures and
interest due.
(f) The City may foreclose on a lien in a proceeding relating to the property brought under Subchapter
E, Chapter 33 of the Tax Code.
(g) The statement of expenses, or a certified copy of the statement, is prima facie proof of the expenses
incurred by the City in doing the work or making the improvements.
Sec. 7.6. Criminal Penalty.
(a) Procedures for the abatement or removal of a nuisance under this section are independent and
cumulative of criminal penalties provided herein.
(b) A person that commits, permits or allows a violation of Article IV or Article VI of this Chapter is
subject to criminal prosecution.
(c) The owner, occupant, or tenant, of the property on which the nuisance is located commits an offense
if the person fails to abate a nuisance as required, and is subject to criminal prosecution.
(d) An offense under this Chapter is a Class C misdemeanor, which shall be prosecuted in the municipal
court. For offenses which are determined to affect fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation,
a fine of up to $2000.00 per offense may be assessed, unless otherwise set forth in this Chapter.
For all other violations of this Chapter, a fine of up to $500 per offense may be assessed, unless
otherwise set forth in this Chapter. Each day a violation occurs is a separate offense.
Page 1 of 6
Chapter 41
CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESSES
ARTICLE I. CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESSES
State law reference—Credit Organizations, V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 393.001 et seq.; credit access businesses,
V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 393.601 et seq.
41-1. Short title and purpose.
(a) This Article may be known and cited as “Credit Access Businesses Regulation.”
(b) The purpose of this Article is to protect the welfare of the citizens of the City of Temple by monitoring credit
access businesses in an effort to reduce abusive and predatory lending practices. To this end, this Article
establishes a registration program for credit access businesses, imposes restrictions on extensions of
consumer credit made by credit access businesses, and imposes recordkeeping requirements on credit access
businesses.
(Prior Code, § 41-1)
41-2. Definitions.
As used in this Article:
(1) CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION means a certificate of registration issued by the director under this Article
to the owner or operator of a credit access business.
(2) CITY means the City of Temple, Texas, the City Council of Temple, Texas, or its representatives, employees,
agents, or designees.
(3) CONSUMER means an individual who is solicited to purchase or who purchases the services of a credit
access business.
(4) CONSUMER’S LANGUAGE OF PREFERENCE is the language the consumer understands best.
(5) CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESS has the meaning given that term in Section 393.601 of the Texas Finance Code,
as amended.
(6) DEFERRED PRESENTMENT TRANSACTION has the meaning given that term in Section 393.601 of the
Texas Finance Code, as amended.
Page 2 of 6
(7) DIRECTOR means the director of the department designated by the City of Temple’s City Council, City
Manager, or their designee, to enforce and administer this Chapter.
(8) EXTENSION OF CONSUMER CREDIT has the meaning given that term in Section 393.001 of the Texas
Finance Code, as amended.
(9) MOTOR VEHICLE TITLE LOAN has the meaning given that term in Section 393.601 of the Texas Finance
Code, as amended.
(10) OWNER means any person who directly or indirectly owns a credit access business. For publicly traded
companies, the term means any person who directly or indirectly owns or controls 10% or more of the
outstanding shares of stock in the credit access business.
(11) PERSON means any individual, corporation, organization, partnership, association, financial institution,
or any other legal entity.
(12) REGISTRANT means a person issued a certificate of registration for a credit access business under this
Article and includes all owners and operators of the credit access business identified in the registration
application filed under this Article.
(13) STATE LICENSE means a license to operate a credit access business issued by the Texas Consumer Credit
Commissioner under Chapter 393, Subchapter G of the Texas Finance Code, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 41-2)
41-3. Violations; penalty.
(a) A person who violates a provision of this Article, or who fails to perform an act required of the person by this
Article, commits an offense. A person commits a separate offense for each violation of this Article and for
each day or portion of a day during which a violation is committed, permitted, or continued.
(b) An offense under this Article is a Class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
(c) A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this Article and need not be
proved.
(d) The penalties provided for in Subsection (b) are in addition to any other remedies that the City may have under
city ordinances and state law.
(Prior Code, § 41-3)
41-4. Defense.
Page 3 of 6
It is a defense to prosecution under this Article that at the time of the alleged offense the person was not required
to be licensed by the state as a credit access business under Chapter 393, Subchapter G, of the Texas Finance
Code, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 41-4)
41-5. Registration required.
A person commits an offense if the person acts, operates, or conducts business as a credit access business without
a valid certificate of registration. A certificate of registration is required for each physically separate credit access
business.
(Prior Code, § 41-5)
41-6. Registration application.
(a) To obtain a certificate of registration for a credit access business, a person must submit an application on a
form provided for that purpose to the director. The application must contain the following:
(1) the name, street address, mailing address, facsimile number, and telephone number of the applicant;
(2) the business or trade name, street address, mailing address, facsimile number, and telephone number of
the credit access business;
(3) the names, street addresses, mailing addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners of the credit access
business and the nature and extent of each owner’s interest in the credit access business;
(4) a copy of a current, valid state license held by the credit access business pursuant to Chapter 393,
Subchapter G of the Texas Finance Code, as amended;
(5) a copy of a current, valid certificate of occupancy showing that the credit access business is in compliance
with the City of Temple Code of Ordinances; and
(6) a fifty dollar ($50.00) non-refundable application fee.
(b) An applicant or registrant must notify the director within forty-five (45) days after any material change in the
information contained in the application for a certificate of registration, including, but not limited to, any
change of address and any change in the status of the state license held by the applicant or registrant.
(Prior Code, § 41-6)
41-7. Issuance and display of certificate of registration; presentment upon request.
(a) The director will issue to the applicant a certificate of registration upon receiving a completed application
under Sec. 41-6.
Page 4 of 6
(b) A certificate of registration issued under this Section must be conspicuously displayed to the public in the
credit access business. The certificate of registration must be presented upon request to the director or any
peace officer for examination.
(Prior Code, § 41-7)
41-8. Expiration and renewal of certificate of registration.
(a) A certificate of registration expires on the earlier of:
(1) one year after the date of issuance; or
(2) the date of revocation, suspension, surrender, expiration without renewal, or other termination of the
registrant’s state license.
(b) A certificate of registration may be renewed by making application in accordance with Sec. 41-6. A registrant
must apply for renewal at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of the registration.
(Prior Code, § 41-8)
41-9. Non-transferability.
A certificate of registration for a credit access business is not transferable.
(Prior Code, § 41-9)
41-10. Maintenance of records.
(a) A credit access business must maintain a complete set of records of all extensions of consumer credit arranged
or obtained by the credit access business, which must include the following information:
(1) the name and address of the consumer;
(2) the principal amount of cash actually advanced;
(3) the length of the extension of consumer credit, including the number of installments and renewals;
(4) the fees charged by the credit access business to arrange or obtain an extension of consumer credit; and
(5) the documentation used to establish a consumer’s income under Sec. 41-12 of this ordinance.
(b) A credit access business must maintain a copy of each written agreement between the credit access business
and a consumer evidencing an extension of a consumer credit (including, but not limited to, any refinancing
or renewal granted to the consumer).
Page 5 of 6
(c) A credit access business must maintain copies of all quarterly reports filed with the Texas Consumer Credit
Commissioner under Section 393.627 of the Texas Finance Code, as amended.
(d) The records required to be maintained by a credit access business under this Section must be retained for at
least three years and made available for inspection by the City upon request during the usual and customary
business hours of the credit access business.
(Prior Code, § 41-10)
41-11. Reserved.
41-12. Restrictions on extensions of consumer credit.
(a) The cash advanced under an extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains for a consumer
or assists a consumer in obtaining in the form of a deferred presentment transaction may not exceed twenty
percent (20%) of the consumer’s gross monthly income.
(b) The cash advanced under an extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains for a consumer
or assists a consumer in obtaining in the form of a motor vehicle title loan may not exceed the lesser of:
(1) three percent (3%) of the consumer’s gross annual income; or
(2) seventy percent (70%) of the retail value of the motor vehicle.
(c) A credit access business must use a paycheck or other documentation establishing income to determine a
consumer’s income.
(d) An extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in
obtaining and that provides for repayment in installments may not be payable in more than four installments.
Proceeds from each installment must be used to repay at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the principal
amount of the extension of consumer credit. An extension of consumer credit that provides for repayment in
installments may not be refinanced or renewed.
(e) An extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in
obtaining and that provides for a single lump sum repayment may not be refinanced or renewed more than
three times. Proceeds from each refinancing or renewal must be used to repay at least twenty-five percent
(25%) of the principal amount of the original extension of consumer credit.
(f) For purposes of this Section, an extension of consumer credit that is made to a consumer within seven (7) days
after a previous extension of consumer credit has been paid by the consumer will constitute a refinancing or
renewal.
(Prior Code, § 41-12)
Page 6 of 6
41-13. Requirements of consumer understanding of agreement.
(a) Every agreement between the credit access business and a consumer evidencing an extension of consumer
credit (including, but not limited to, any refinancing or renewal granted to the consumer), must be written in
the consumer’s language of preference. Every credit access business location must maintain on its premises,
to be available for use by consumers, agreements in the English and Spanish languages.
(b) Every disclosure and notice required by law must be written and provided to the consumer in the consumer’s
language of preference. Every credit access business location must maintain on its premises, to be available
for use by consumer, required disclosures and notices in the English and Spanish languages.
(1) A credit access business with a current City certificate of registration as of February 21, 2019 must comply
with Subsection (b) upon renewal of their certificate of registration.
(c) For every consumer who cannot read, every agreement between the credit access business and a consumer
evidencing an extension of consumer credit (including, but not limited to, any refinancing or renewal granted
to the consumer) must be read to the consumer in its entirety in the consumer’s language of preference, prior
to the consumer’s signature.
(d) For every consumer who cannot read, every disclosure and notice required by law must be read to the
consumer in its entirety in the consumer’s language of preference, prior to the consumer’s signature.
(Prior Code, § 41-13)
41-14. Referral to consumer credit counseling.
A credit access business must provide a form, to be prescribed by the director, to each consumer seeking
assistance in obtaining an extension of consumer credit which references non-profit agencies that provide
financial education and training programs and agencies with cash assistance programs. The form must also
contain information regarding extensions of consumer credit and must include the information required by 41-
10(a)(1)-(5) of this ordinance specific to the loan agreement with the consumer. If the director has prescribed a
form in the consumer’s language of preference, the form must be provided in the consumer’s language of
preference.
(Prior Code, § 41-14)
5.1
Appendix A of the City Code
Ordinance No. 2010-4413
Adopted 12/16/2010
(Repealed: Appendix to Chapter 32, Streets; Chapter 33, Subdivisions; and Appendix A,
Zoning Ordinance, of the City Code)
Effective 12/16/2010
City of Temple, Texas
Last Modified 08/01/2017
Last Modified 02/15/2018
Unified Development Code
Note: If you are viewing a digital version of this UDC, you may click on any cross-reference or
asterisk (as in the dimensional tables in Sec. 4.5 or Sec. 4.6) and you will be taken
automatically to the appropriate Section.
Table of Contents
Article 1 General Provisions......................................................1-1
Sec. 1.1. Title .................................................................................................................................. 1-1
Sec. 1.2. Purpose ............................................................................................................................ 1-1
Sec. 1.3. Compliance ...................................................................................................................... 1-1
Sec. 1.4. Enforcement .................................................................................................................... 1-1
Sec. 1.5. Violations and Penalties .................................................................................................... 1-1
Sec. 1.6. Authority .......................................................................................................................... 1-1
Sec. 1.7. Jurisdiction ........................................................................................................................ 1-2
Sec. 1.8. Definition Reference ........................................................................................................ 1-2
Sec. 1.9. Rules of Language and Statutory Construction ................................................................ 1-2
Sec. 1.10. Completion of Building Under Construction .............................................................. 1-3
Sec. 1.11. Vested Rights ............................................................................................................... 1-3
Sec. 1.12. Severability ................................................................................................................... 1-5
Article 2 Development Review Bodies ......................................2-1
Sec. 2.1. General ............................................................................................................................. 2-1
Sec. 2.2. City Council ..................................................................................................................... 2-1
Sec. 2.3. Zoning Board of Adjustment ............................................................................................ 2-1
Sec. 2.4. Planning and Zoning Commission .................................................................................... 2-2
Sec. 2.5. Development Review Committee ................................................................................... 2-3
Sec. 2.6. Chief Building Official ....................................................................................................... 2-5
Sec. 2.7. Director of Planning ......................................................................................................... 2-5
Article 3 Development Review Procedures...............................3-1
Sec. 3.1. Common Review Procedures .......................................................................................... 3-1
Sec. 3.2. UDC Text Amendment ................................................................................................... 3-3
Sec. 3.3. Zoning District Map Amendment (Rezoning) .................................................................. 3-4
Sec. 3.4. Planned Development ...................................................................................................... 3-6
Sec. 3.5. Conditional Use Permit.................................................................................................... 3-9
Sec. 3.6. Subdivision Plat Review .................................................................................................. 3-12
Sec. 3.7. Replat Without Plat Vacation ......................................................................................... 3-20
Sec. 3.8. Minor or Amending Plat ................................................................................................. 3-23
Sec. 3.9. Plat Vacation................................................................................................................... 3-26
Sec. 3.10. Sidewalk Waiver ........................................................................................................ 3-27
Sec. 3.11. Reserved .................................................................................................................... 3-28
Sec. 3.12. Administrative Adjustment ........................................................................................ 3-29
Sec. 3.13. Building Permit .......................................................................................................... 3-30
Sec. 3.14. Sign Permit ................................................................................................................. 3-33
Sec. 3.15. Variance ..................................................................................................................... 3-35
Sec. 3.16. Appeal of Administrative Decision............................................................................. 3-37
Article 4 Zoning Districts ..........................................................4-1
Sec. 4.1. General ............................................................................................................................. 4-1
Sec. 4.2. Newly Annexed Territory ............................................................................................... 4-3
Sec. 4.3. Zoning District Purpose Statements ................................................................................ 4-3
Sec. 4.4. Measurements and Special Cases .................................................................................. 4-10
Sec. 4.5. Residential Dimensional Standards................................................................................. 4-17
Sec. 4.6. Nonresidential Dimensional Standards .......................................................................... 4-27
Article 5 Use Standards ............................................................5-1
Sec. 5.1. Use Table ......................................................................................................................... 5-1
Sec. 5.2. Classification of New and Unlisted Uses ....................................................................... 5-12
Sec. 5.3. Specific Use Standards ................................................................................................... 5-13
Sec. 5.4. Personal Wireless Service Facilities ................................................................................ 5-30
Sec. 5.5. Accessory Uses and Structures ...................................................................................... 5-35
Sec. 5.6. Temporary Uses ............................................................................................................ 5-41
Article 6 Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts ............6-1
Sec. 6.1. MH, Manufactured Home ................................................................................................ 6-1
Sec. 6.2. MU, Mixed Use ................................................................................................................ 6-4
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational ........................................................................ 6-9
Sec. 6.4. PD, Planned Development Overlay ............................................................................... 6-47
Sec. 6.5. H, North Central Temple Historic Overlay .................................................................. 6-48
Sec. 6.6. FP, Floodplain Overlay ................................................................................................... 6-49
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay ............................................................................. 6-51
Sec. 6.8. 1st and 3rd Overlay District......................................................................................... 6-101
Article 7 General Development Standards................................7-1
Sec. 7.1. Performance Standards .................................................................................................... 7-1
Sec. 7.2. Access and Circulation ..................................................................................................... 7-4
Sec. 7.3. Sidewalks .......................................................................................................................... 7-8
Sec. 7.4. Landscaping ...................................................................................................................... 7-9
Sec. 7.5. Off-Street Parking and Loading ...................................................................................... 7-16
Sec. 7.6. Signs ............................................................................................................................... 7-24
Sec. 7.7. Screening and Buffering.................................................................................................. 7-65
Sec. 7.8. Building Exterior Materials ............................................................................................. 7-72
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements ......................8-1
Sec. 8.1. General Provisions ........................................................................................................... 8-1
Sec. 8.2. Design Standards .............................................................................................................. 8-4
Sec. 8.3. Park Land Dedication ..................................................................................................... 8-18
Sec. 8.4. Improvement Guarantees .............................................................................................. 8-22
Sec. 8.5. City Participation ............................................................................................................ 8-23
Article 9 Nonconformities.........................................................9-1
Sec. 9.1. General ............................................................................................................................. 9-1
Sec. 9.2. Nonconforming Uses and Structures ............................................................................... 9-1
Sec. 9.3. Nonconforming Signs ....................................................................................................... 9-2
Article 10 Enforcement, Violations and Penalties.....................10-1
Sec. 10.1. Enforcement .............................................................................................................. 10-1
Sec. 10.2. Violations ................................................................................................................... 10-1
Sec. 10.3. Penalties ..................................................................................................................... 10-1
Article 11 Definitions................................................................11-1
Sec. 11.1. Abbreviations ............................................................................................................. 11-1
Sec. 11.2. Defined Terms ........................................................................................................... 11-2
Index
[This page intentionally left blank]

Article 1 – General Provisions
Table of Contents
Sec. 1.1. Title .................................................................................................................................. 1-1
Sec. 1.2. Purpose ............................................................................................................................ 1-1
Sec. 1.3. Compliance ...................................................................................................................... 1-1
Sec. 1.4. Enforcement .................................................................................................................... 1-1
Sec. 1.5. Violations and Penalties .................................................................................................... 1-1
Sec. 1.6. Authority .......................................................................................................................... 1-1
Sec. 1.7. Jurisdiction ........................................................................................................................ 1-2
Sec. 1.8. Definition Reference ........................................................................................................ 1-2
Sec. 1.9. Rules of Language and Statutory Construction ................................................................ 1-2
Sec. 1.10. Completion of Building Under Construction .............................................................. 1-3
Sec. 1.11. Vested Rights ............................................................................................................... 1-3
Sec. 1.12. Severability ................................................................................................................... 1-5
[This page intentionally left blank]
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
1-1
Article 1 General Provisions
Sec. 1.1. Title
This Ordinance is known as the Unified Development Code. References to “this Code” or “this UDC”
are interpreted as references to this Unified Development Code.
Sec. 1.2. Purpose
1.2.1 This UDC is established in accordance with the City’s Comprehensive Plan for the purpose
of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the City. It is designed to:
A. Lessen the congestion in the streets;
B. Secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers;
C. Provide adequate light and air;
D. Prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid undue concentration of population; and
E. Facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, wastewater, schools, parks
and other public requirements.
Sec. 1.3. Compliance
1.3.1 No land may be hereafter used or occupied and no structure may be hereafter designed,
erected, altered, used, or occupied except in compliance with all standards established in this
UDC.
1.3.2 No land may be used or occupied and no structure may be designed, erected, altered, used,
or occupied except in compliance with all conditions set forth and approved by City Council
through ordinance or resolution.
Sec. 1.4. Enforcement
1.4.1 The Director of Planning, in coordination with the Chief Building Official and the Director of
Public Works, will be responsible for the administration, interpretation, and enforcement of
this UDC. The City Manager may make a final staff ruling, if necessary, concerning any
administration, interpretation or enforcement of this UDC.
1.4.2 The City Attorney may institute appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction to
enforce the provisions of this UDC with respect to any applicable violation that occurs within
any area subject to the provisions of this UDC.
Sec. 1.5. Violations and Penalties
1.5.1 All violations are subject to the enforcement and penalties established in Chapter 1, Sec. 1-9
of the City Code of Ordinances.
Sec. 1.6. Authority
1.6.1 This UDC is adopted under authority of the constitution and laws of the State of Texas,
including particularly Chapters 211, 212, 213, 216 and 242 of the Local Government Code,
and pursuant to the provisions of the Charter of the City.
Article 1: General Provisions
Sec. 1.7. Jurisdiction
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
1-2
1.6.2 Wherever this UDC cites a local, state or federal statute that is later amended or
superseded, the citation is deemed to refer to the amended statute or the statute that most
closely corresponds to the superseded statute.
Sec. 1.7. Jurisdiction
1.7.1 Within City Limits
The provisions of this UDC apply to all land within the City Limits.
1.7.2 Within the City’s Extraterritorial Jurisdiction
Under the authority of Chapter 242 of the Local Government Code and the Interlocal
Agreement between the City and Bell County (Resolution 2002-32-68-R), the City applies the
subdivision provisions of this UDC to the City’s extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ).
Sec. 1.8. Definition Reference
Article 11 contains the definitions used throughout this UDC. Definitions related to Signs are contained in
Sec. 7.6.2.
[Ord. 2013-4580]
Sec. 1.9. Rules of Language and Statutory Construction
1.9.1 The following general rules of statutory construction apply when interpreting this UDC.
A. Words in the present tense include the future. The reverse is also true.
B. Words in the singular number include the plural number. The reverse is also true.
C. The word "building" includes the word "structure.”
D. The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "tract.”
E. The words “must” and “may not” are mandatory and the word “may” is permissive.
F. The word “district” means zoning district.
G. The word "City" means the City of Temple, Texas.
H. The text material of this UDC controls over illustrative material.
I. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the use of terms such as “including,”
“such as,” or similar language are intended to provide examples, not to be exhaustive
lists of all possibilities.
J. Commentaries are sometimes included in this UDC as a means of clarifying certain
provisions or providing supplemental information thought to be useful for UDC users.
Text marked as “commentary” has no regulatory effect. It is intended solely as a guide
for administrative officials and the public.
COMMENTARY: When commentaries are provided, they will appear in this
manner.
K. All references to other city, county, state or federal regulations in this UDC refer to the
most current version and citation for those regulations, unless expressly indicated
Article 1: General Provisions
Sec. 1.10. Completion of Building Under Construction
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 15 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
1-3
otherwise. If the referenced regulations have been repealed and not replaced by other
regulations, requirements for compliance are no longer in effect.
L. All references to “days” are to be deemed working days unless otherwise expressly
stated. The time in which an act must be completed is computed by excluding the first
day and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday observed by
the City, that day is excluded. A day concludes at the close of business (5:00 p.m.), and
any materials received after that time will be deemed to have been received the
following day.
M. Wherever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or another official or
employee of the City to perform an act or duty, that provision is construed as
authorizing the department head or official to delegate that responsibility to a designee.
1.9.2 In construing this UDC, all provisions are given equal weight, unless the context clearly
demands otherwise.
Sec. 1.10. Completion of Building Under Construction
This UDC does not require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building actually
under construction at the time of the passage of this UDC if the entire building is completed within one
year from the date of the passage of this UDC.
Sec. 1.11. Vested Rights
1.11.1 Adoption of Chapter 245
The City adopts Chapter 245 of the Texas Local Government Code by reference, including
any future amendments to Chapter 245 that the Texas Legislature adopts, and declares
Chapter 245 a part of this UDC as fully as if the Chapter was incorporated into this UDC in
its entirety. Should Chapter 245 be repealed by the Texas Legislature, this Section remains in
effect for one year from the date of such repeal. During such time, the City Council may take
action it deems appropriate to provide vested rights protection of ongoing projects.
1.11.2 Purpose
A. It is the intent of the City to consider approval of all development permits, except as
provided in this UDC or by State law, on the basis of those standards and regulations
that are in effect on the date that original application or a master plan for a development
was filed. This Section applies to projects that were in progress on, or commenced
after, September 1, 1997. As provided in this Section, those “vested rights” accrue on
the date of the original application for a development permit for a developmental
project or a master plan for real property that gives the City reasonable notice of the
project and the nature of the permit being sought. When a particular developmental
project requires a series of permits, the City will regard each permit in that project as
part of a single series of permits, and subject to the standards and regulations in effect
when the first development permit application or a master plan for real property was
filed.
B. While the City provides for the expiration of development permits under certain terms
and conditions as provided in Sec. 1.11.3, the City will not shorten the normal life of any
permit in the series of permits needed for a developmental project, after the application
Article 1: General Provisions
Sec. 1.11. Vested Rights
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
1-4
for the initial permit for that project is accepted as administratively complete by the
City, except for those permits specifically excluded from the application of this Section
by State law. Regardless of the granting of any vested rights to an applicant as provided
in this Section, an applicant may still take advantage of subsequently adopted changes in
standards and regulations that benefit the applicant’s project without forfeiting the
applicant’s vested rights.
1.11.3 Expiration of Permit Applications
A. The intent of this Section is to provide an expiration date for applications for
development permits which otherwise lack an expiration date, in accordance with Local
Government Code Section 245.002(e).
B. Whenever the City requires the filing of an application for a development permit, no
rights shall accrue to the applicant until an administratively complete application, in
terms of form and content, is filed with the City. An application for a development
permit expires 45 calendar days after filed with the City, if:
1. The applicant fails to provide documents or other information necessary to
comply with the City’s technical standards related to the form and content of the
permit application;
2. The City provides written notice to the applicant within 10 business days after the
application is filed that specifies what documents or information is missing from
the application, and provides the date that the application will expire; and
3. The applicant fails to provide the document or additional information by the date
specified in the City’s written notice to the applicant.
1.11.4 Dormant Projects
A. In accordance with Section 245.005, “Dormant Projects,” of Chapter 245 of the Local
Government Code, the City adopts an expiration date of two years from the date of
issue of any development permit issued by the City if no progress has been made
towards completion of the project, provided that the expiration date of any permit,
including the first permit and the preliminary plat for a project, in a series of permits
required for a project shall not be earlier than the fifth anniversary date of the date that
the first permit application for the project. Nothing in this Section may be deemed to
affect the timing or expiration of a permit that the Texas Commission on Environment
Quality or its authorized agents have issued solely under the authority of Chapter 366 of
the Texas Health and Safety Code.
B. For purposes of this Section, “progress towards completion of the project,” includes any
one of the following:
1. The applicant submits an application for a Final Plat is to the Planning & Zoning
Commission;
2. The applicant makes a good faith attempt to file with the Planning & Zoning
Commission an administratively complete application for a permit necessary to
begin or continue towards completion of the applicant’s project,
Article 1: General Provisions
Sec. 1.12. Severability
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 15 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
1-5
3. The applicant has incurred costs towards developing the infrastructure needed for
the development including but not limited to roadways, utilities or other
infrastructure needed to serve, in whole or part, the project;
4. The applicant posts fiscal security with the City to ensure the applicant’s
performance of an obligation required by the City; or
5. The applicant has paid utility connection fees to the City.
1.11.5 Process for Certifying Vested Rights Associated with a Project
An applicant may request a letter certifying that a project is subject to vested rights, and the
Director of Planning must issue such a letter, if the applicant has demonstrated compliance
with the following criteria for vested rights under this Section or Chapter 245:
A. The applicant used its property or filed an application as provided in Texas Local
Government Code Section 43.002 prior to annexation of that property, and that the
regulations against which vested rights are claimed are not subject to an exemption as
provided in Texas Local Government Code Section 43.002(c); or
B. The applicant filed an application as provided in Texas Local Government Code Chapter
245 prior to adoption of the regulations against which vested rights are claimed, that
regulations against which vested rights are claimed are not subject to an exemption as
provided in Texas Local Government Code Section 245.004, and that the project has
not become dormant as defined in Texas Local Government Code Section 245.005 or
Sec. 1.11.4 of this ordinance.
[Ord. 2011-4451]
Sec. 1.12. Severability
If any provision or application of this UDC is judged invalid, such judgment does not affect the validity of
other provisions or applications of this UDC not related to the provision or application judged invalid.
Article 1: General Provisions
Sec. 1.12. Severability
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
1-6
[This page intentionally left blank]
Article 2 – Development Review Bodies
Table of Contents
Sec. 2.1. General ............................................................................................................................. 2-1
Sec. 2.2. City Council ..................................................................................................................... 2-1
Sec. 2.3. Zoning Board of Adjustment ............................................................................................ 2-1
Sec. 2.4. Planning and Zoning Commission .................................................................................... 2-2
Sec. 2.5. Development Review Committee ................................................................................... 2-3
Sec. 2.6. Chief Building Official ....................................................................................................... 2-5
Sec. 2.7. Director of Planning ......................................................................................................... 2-5
[This page intentionally left blank]
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
2-1
Article 2 Development Review Bodies
Sec. 2.1. General
This Article establishes or describes the development review bodies that pertain to this UDC and that
are not established elsewhere in the City Code.
Sec. 2.2. City Council
2.2.1 Establishment, Membership and Procedure
Information regarding the establishment, membership and rules of procedure of the City
Council is available in Article Four of the City Charter and in the City Council’s policies and
procedures for City Council meetings (Resolution 99-2288-R).
2.2.2 Final Action
The City Council hears and takes final action on the following development review
procedures:
A. UDC Text Amendment;
B. I-35 Appeal;
C. Zoning District Map Amendment;
D. Planned Development;
E. Conditional Use Permit;
F. Approval of plats requiring exceptions; and
G. Extension of time for completing plat review process.
Sec. 2.3. Zoning Board of Adjustment
2.3.1 Establishment
A Zoning Board of Adjustment is established in accordance with and controlled by the
provisions of Chapter 211 of the Local Government Code.
2.3.2 Final Action
The Zoning Board of Adjustment hears and takes final action on the following development
review procedures:
A. Variance; and
B. Appeal of Administrative Decision.
2.3.3 Membership
A. Appointment and Term
1. For the purposes of this Section, except as otherwise indicated, the terms
“member” and “alternate” are synonymous.
2. The Zoning Board of Adjustment consists of five members and four alternates,
each to be appointed by resolution of the City Council for a term of two years.
02Article 2: Development Review Bodies
Sec. 2.4. Planning and Zoning Commission
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
2-2
Vacancies are filled for the unexpired term of any member, whose place becomes
vacant for any cause, in the same manner as the original appointment was made.
Each member reappointed or each new appointee must serve for a full term of
two years unless removed as provided below.
B. Removal
Members are removable for cause by the City Council upon written charges and after
public hearing.
2.3.4 Proceedings
A. Chair of the Board and Vice-Chair
The Chair of the Board, or in the absence of the Chair, the acting Chair, may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The Chair must vote and meetings of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment may be held at the call of the Chair and at such other times
as members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may determine.
B. Meetings
All meetings of the Board are open to the public.
C. Quorum and Vote Required
1. A minimum of 75 percent of the members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
must hear each case.
2. The concurring vote of 75 percent of the members of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment is necessary to approve a Variance or an Appeal of Administrative
Decision.
D. Rules of Proceeding
The Zoning Board of Adjustment must adopt rules to govern its proceedings provided
that such rules are not inconsistent with this UDC or statutes of the State of Texas.
E. Minutes
The Zoning Board of Adjustment must keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the
vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicate such
fact and must keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which
must be immediately filed with the Board and are a public record. The Director of
Planning is the permanent secretary and regular technical advisor to the Board and must
prepare written staff reports on each case that the Board hears.
Sec. 2.4. Planning and Zoning Commission
2.4.1 Establishment
The Planning and Zoning Commission is established by the Planning Commission Ordinance in
accordance with the City Charter Sec. 3.26 and in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
211 of the Local Government Code.
Article 2: Development Review Bodies
Sec. 2.5. Development Review Committee
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
2-3
2.4.2 Powers and Duties
The following powers and duties are assigned to the Planning and Zoning Commission under
this UDC.
A. Review and Recommendation
The Planning and Zoning Commission must review and make a recommendation on the
following development review procedures:
1. UDC Text Amendment;
2. I-35 Appeal;
3. Zoning District Map Amendment;
4. Planned Development; and
5. Conditional Use Permit.
[Ord. 2013-4580]
B. Final Action
Unless otherwise provided in this Article, the Planning and Zoning Commission must
take final action on the following development review procedures:
1. Preliminary Plat;
2. Final Plat;
3. Replat Without Plat Vacation; and
4. Plat Vacation.
2.4.3 Policies and Procedures
The City Council determines by ordinance or resolution the number of members, quorum,
qualifications for appointment, appointment process, orientation of new members,
attendance requirements, goal-setting, reporting, meeting schedule, meeting procedures and
other policies and procedures for the Planning and Zoning Commission.
2.4.4 Overrule of Planning & Zoning Commission Denial Recommendation
A minimum 75 percent vote of all the members of the City Council is required to overrule a
recommendation by the Planning & Zoning Commission that a proposed UDC Text
Amendment, Zoning District Map Amendment, Planned Development or Conditional Use
Permit be denied.
Sec. 2.5. Development Review Committee
2.5.1 Establishment
A Development Review Committee is established to provide a coordinated and centralized
technical review body. The Development Review Committee is composed of persons from
various City departments that have an interest in development review.
02Article 2: Development Review Bodies
Sec. 2.5. Development Review Committee
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
2-4
2.5.2 Review and Recommendation
The Development Review Committee must review and make a recommendation on the
following development review procedures:
A. Planned Development;
B. Conditional Use Permit;
C. Preliminary Plat;
D. Final Plat;
E. Replat Without Plat Vacation;
F. TMED Warrants per Sec. 6.3.6
G. Minor or Amending Plat; and
H. Plat Vacation.
2.5.3 Membership
A. Chair
The Director of Planning serves as Chair of the Development Review Committee and is
responsible for all final actions of the Committee.
B. Other Members
In addition to the Chair, the Development Review Committee is composed of the
following members:
1. Director or Construction Safety;
2. Director of Public Works;
3. Director of Parks and Leisure Services;
4. Director of Information Technology;
5. City Attorney;
6. Fire Chief; and
7. Any other City staff or external agencies the Chair deems necessary for the
professional review of an application.
2.5.4 Proceedings
The Development Review Committee meets as often as necessary to fulfill its duties or upon
call of the Chair of the committee to discuss and review the applications listed in Sec. 2.5.2
above. The meeting notes of each meeting must be filed with the Director of Planning and
sent to the applicant.
Article 2: Development Review Bodies
Sec. 2.6. Chief Building Official
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
2-5
Sec. 2.6. Chief Building Official
The Chief Building Official must take final action on the following development review applications:
2.6.1 Building Permits; and
2.6.2 Sign Permits.
Sec. 2.7. Director of Planning
2.7.1 Powers and Duties
The following powers and duties are assigned to the Director of Planning under this UDC.
A. Review and Recommendation
The Director of Planning must review and make a recommendation on the following
development review procedures:
1. UDC Text Amendment;
2. Zoning District Map Amendment;
3. Planned Development;
4. Conditional Use Permit;
5. Preliminary Plat;
6. Final Plat;
7. Replat Without Plat Vacation;
8. Plat Vacation;
9. Building Permit;
10. Sign Permit; and
11. Variance.
B. Final Action
Unless otherwise provided in this Article, the Director of Planning must take final action
on the following development review procedures:
1. Minor or Amending Plat;
2. Administrative Adjustment;
3. TMED Warrants per Sec. 6.3.6
4. Sidewalk Waiver requests or may refer the request to the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the City Council; and
5. Determination of Comparable Temporary Uses.
[Ord. 2011-4430], [Ord. 2015-4701], [Ord. No. 2018-4896]
02Article 2: Development Review Bodies
Sec. 2.7. Director of Planning
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
2-6
[This page intentionally left blank]
Article 3 – Development Review Procedures
Table of Contents
Sec. 3.1. Common Review Procedures .......................................................................................... 3-1
Sec. 3.2. UDC Text Amendment ................................................................................................... 3-3
Sec. 3.3. Zoning District Map Amendment (Rezoning) .................................................................. 3-4
Sec. 3.4. Planned Development ...................................................................................................... 3-6
Sec. 3.5. Conditional Use Permit.................................................................................................... 3-9
Sec. 3.6. Subdivision Plat Review .................................................................................................. 3-12
Sec. 3.7. Replat Without Plat Vacation ......................................................................................... 3-20
Sec. 3.8. Minor or Amending Plat ................................................................................................. 3-23
Sec. 3.9. Plat Vacation................................................................................................................... 3-26
Sec. 3.10. Sidewalk Waiver ............................................................................................................. 3-27
Sec. 3.11. TMED Site Plan Review ................................................................................................. 3-28
Sec. 3.12. Administrative Adjustment ............................................................................................. 3-29
Sec. 3.13. Building Permit ............................................................................................................... 3-30
Sec. 3.14. Sign Permit ..................................................................................................................... 3-33
Sec. 3.15. Variance.......................................................................................................................... 3-35
Sec. 3.16. Appeal of Administrative Decision ................................................................................. 3-37
[This page intentionally left blank]
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-1
Article 3 Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.1. Common Review Procedures
3.1.1 Application Initiation
A. Who May Initiate
Any party having proprietary interest in any property may initiate a Development
Review Application for a development review procedure described in this Article. The
City Manager or Planning and Zoning Commission may, on its own motion or on
request from the City Council, institute an amendment to the provisions of this UDC or
the Zoning District Map in accordance with this Article.
B. Application Forms
Development review applications set forth in this UDC must be made upon a form
provided by the Director of Planning, Chief Building Official or Director of Public
Works, as appropriate. A development review application must be submitted to the
Director who provides the applications.
C. Application Fees
The fees for processing a development review application must be set by resolution of
the City Council.
3.1.2 Plats Approved Unless Disapproved Within 30 Days
The Planning and Zoning Commission must take final action on a plat within 30 days of the
application being deemed administratively complete by the Development Review Committee.
The City Council must take final action on a plat requiring an exception to the standards in
Sec. 3.6.7 within 30 days of the application being reviewed by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. A plat is deemed approved unless it is denied within that period or unless such
time is extended by agreement with the applicant in writing.
3.1.3 Appeals
A. Administrative Decisions
With the exception of decisions related to building exterior material requirements set
forth in Sec. 7.8, or the provisions of the I-35 Corridor Overlay zoning district, any party
aggrieved by any final decision of any administrative official regarding the provisions of
this UDC may appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with Sec. 3.16.
B. Quasi-Judicial Decisions
Any party aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may present to
the court of competent jurisdiction a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such
decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of illegality. Such petition
must be presented to the court within 10 days after the filing of the decision by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.1. Common Review Procedures
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-2
C. Building Exterior Materials
Any party aggrieved by a decision of the Director of Planning on building exterior
material requirements set forth in Sec. 7.8 may appeal to City Council. In deciding an
appeal, the City Council will consider the same criteria applicable to exceptions found in
subsection 7.8.4H.
D. I-35 Corridor Overlay Zoning District
Any party aggrieved by a decision of the Director of Planning on a development review
application in the I-35 Corridor Overlay zoning district may appeal to the City Council
for final action.
[Ord. 2012-4514]
E. 1st and 3rd Street Overlay
Any party aggrieved by a decision of the Director of Planning on an administrative
exception in the 1st and 3rd Street Overlay District may appeal to the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council.
3.1.4 Revocation of Permit or Approval
A development review body may revoke any permit or approval it has issued where there has
been a violation of the provisions of this UDC or a misrepresentation of fact on the
development review application.
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.2. UDC Text Amendment
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-3
Sec. 3.2. UDC Text Amendment
3.2.1 Applicability
The City Council may amend the text of this UDC.
3.2.2 Review Process
A. Director of Planning Review
The Director of Planning must review the submitted application and
make a recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission
and City Council.
B. Planning and Zoning Commission Review
Following notice in accordance with Sec. 3.2.3 below, the Planning
and Zoning Commission must hold a public hearing and make a
recommendation to the City Council.
C. City Council Final Action
Following notice in accordance with Sec. 3.2.3 below, the City
Council must hold a public hearing and approve, approve with
conditions or deny the UDC Text Amendment.
3.2.3 Public Notice and Public Hearing
A. Planning and Zoning Commission
A proposed UDC Text Amendment requires notice of the public
hearing of the Planning and Zoning Commission by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City. Such notice must state
the time and place of such hearing and the nature of the subject to
be considered. The notice must be published before the 10th day
before the date of the public hearing.
B. City Council
A proposed UDC Text Amendment requires notice of the public
hearing of the City Council by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the
City. Such notice must state the time and place of such hearing and the nature of the
subject to be considered. The notice must be published before the 15th day before the
date of the public hearing.
3.2.4 Limitation on Resubmittal
A UDC Text Amendment application that has been denied by the City Council may not again
be considered either by the City Council or the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to the
expiration of six months from the date of the original action by the City Council.
Application
Initiation
Staff
Review
Recommendation
Schedule
Hearing
Public
Notice
P&Z
Public
Hearing
City Council
Public
Hearing
Final Action
Recommendation
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.3. Zoning District Map Amendment (Rezoning)
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-4
Sec. 3.3. Zoning District Map Amendment (Rezoning)
3.3.1 Applicability
The City Council may amend the Zoning District Map.
3.3.2 Review Process
A. Director of Planning Review
The Director of Planning must review the submitted application and
make a recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission
and City Council.
B. Planning and Zoning Commission Review
Following notice in accordance with Sec. 3.3.3 below, the Planning
and Zoning Commission must hold a public hearing and make a
recommendation to the City Council.
C. City Council Final Action
Following notice in accordance with Sec. 3.3.3 below, the City
Council must hold a public hearing and approve, approve with
conditions or deny the Zoning District Map Amendment.
3.3.3 Public Notice and Public Hearing
A. Planning and Zoning Commission
1. Mailed Notice
A proposed Zoning District Map Amendment requires notice of
the public hearing of the Planning and Zoning Commission by
mail to all owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the
property on which the change is requested. Such notice must
be mailed before the 10th day before the date of the public
hearing.
2. School District Notice
A proposed Zoning District Map Amendment affecting
residential or multi-family zoning requires notice of the
public hearing of the Planning and Zoning Commission by
mail to each school district in which the property for which the change in
classification is proposed is located. The notice must be mailed before the
10th day before the date of the public hearing.
3. Published Notice
A proposed Zoning District Map Amendment requires notice of the public hearing
of the Planning and Zoning Commission by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City. Such notice must state the time and place of such hearing
and the nature of the subject to be considered. The notice must be published
before the 10th day before the date of the public hearing.
Application
Initiation
Staff
Review
Recommendation
Schedule
Hearing
Public
Notice
P&Z
Public
Hearing
City Council
Public
Hearing
Final Action
Recommendation
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.3. Zoning District Map Amendment (Rezoning)
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-5
[Ord. 2014-4631]
B. City Council
A proposed Zoning District Map Amendment requires notice of the public hearing of
the City Council by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. Such
notice must state the time and place of such hearing and the nature of the subject to be
considered. The notice must be published a minimum of 15 days before the date of the
public hearing.
3.3.4 Protest
A. A Zoning District Map Amendment application requires a three-fourths vote of the City
Council in order to be approved if a written protest has been signed and submitted by
the owners of a minimum of 20 percent of either:
1. The area of the properties covered by the proposed change; or
2. The area of the properties immediately adjoining the area covered by the
proposed change and extending 200 feet from that area.
B. In computing the percentage of land area under Subsection A above, the area of streets
and alleys must be included.
3.3.5 Limitation on Resubmittal
A Zoning District Map Amendment application that has been denied by the City Council may
not again be considered either by the City Council or the Planning and Zoning Commission
prior to the expiration of six months from the date of the original action by the City Council.
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.4. Planned Development
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-6
Sec. 3.4. Planned Development
3.4.1 Applicability
A Planned Development is a flexible overlay zoning district designed to respond to unique
development proposals, special design considerations and land use transitions by allowing
evaluation of land use relationships to surrounding areas through development plan approval.
3.4.2 Review Process
A. Except as described below, the Planning and Zoning Commission
and City Council review of a Planned Development application
must follow the review process, public notice, public hearing,
protest and limitation on resubmittal requirements for a Zoning
District Map Amendment set forth in Sec. 3.3.
B. The Director of Planning must review the Planned Development
application and, with input from the Development Review
Committee, make a recommendation to the Planning and Zoning
Commission and City Council. Development Review Committee
review must focus on the design elements of the submitted
Development Plan.
C. In approving a Planned Development, the City Council may require
additional standards deemed necessary to create a reasonable
transition to, and protection of, adjacent property and public areas,
including but not limited to, access and circulations, signs, parking,
building design, location and height, light and air, orientation,
building coverage, outdoor lighting, landscaping, homeowners or
property owners associations, open space, topography and
screening.
3.4.3 Development Plan
A. A Development Plan of the entire property within the Planned
Development must be submitted concurrently with a Planned
Development application.
B. A Development Plan may be approved for a portion of a Planned
Development district where the district is divided by a major
thoroughfare and the Development Plan includes all the property
located on one side of the street.
C. In approving a Planned Development district, a standard may not
be modified unless this UDC expressly permits such modification, and in no case may a
standard be modified if this UDC prohibits such modifications.
D. Approval of a Development Plan will determine the design elements listed in 3.4.2C
above.
Application
Initiation
Staff &
DRC
Review
Recommendation
Schedule
Hearing
Public
Notice
P&Z
Public
Hearing
City Council
Public
Hearing
Final Action
Recommendation
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.4. Planned Development
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-7
3.4.4 Binding Nature of Approved Development Plan
Development Plan conditions must be complied with before a Certificate of Occupancy is
issued for the Planned Development.
3.4.5 Review Criteria
In determining whether to approve, approve with conditions or deny a Planned Development
application, the review bodies in Sec. 3.4.2 above must consider the following criteria.
A. The plan complies with all provisions of the Design and Development Standards Manual,
this UDC and other ordinances of the City.
B. The environmental impact of the development relating to the preservation of existing
natural resources on the site and the impact on the natural resources of the surrounding
properties and neighborhood is mitigated.
C. The development is in harmony with the character, use and design of the surrounding
area.
D. Safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems are provided.
E. Off-street parking and loading facilities are designed to ensure that all such spaces are
usable and are safely and conveniently arranged.
F. Streets are designed with sufficient width and suitable grade and location to
accommodate prospective traffic and to provide access for firefighting and emergency
equipment to buildings.
G. Streets are coordinated so as to compose a convenient system consistent with the
Thoroughfare Plan of the City.
H. Landscaping and screening are integrated into the overall site design:
1. To provide adequate buffers to shield lights, noise, movement or activities from
adjacent properties when necessary; and
2. To complement the design and location of buildings.
I. Open space areas are designed to ensure that such areas are suitable for intended
recreation and conservation uses.
J. Water, drainage, wastewater facilities, garbage disposal and other utilities necessary for
essential services to residents and occupants are provided.
3.4.6 Modification of Approved Development Plan
A. Consideration of modification to an approved Development Plan must take into
consideration the effect of the proposed modification on the remainder of the property.
Amendments to the approved Development Plan or any Planned Development
conditions which are substantive require public hearings in the routine manner required
for a Zoning District Map Amendment.
B. The Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council, in approving modifications to
the Development Plan or Planned Development conditions, must be guided by the
purpose intended by the base zoning district and general intent of this UDC.
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.4. Planned Development
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-8
3.4.7 Expiration
If no development has occurred on a Planned Development zoned tract or lot within two
years of the date of approval, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council may
require a new public hearing to evaluate the appropriateness of the previously authorized
Planned Development approval.
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.5. Conditional Use Permit
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-9
Sec. 3.5. Conditional Use Permit
3.5.1 Applicability
A. The Conditional Use Permit (CUP) provides a means for developing
certain uses in a manner in which the conditional use will be
compatible with adjacent property and consistent with the desired
character of the area according to the Comprehensive Plan. These
uses generally have unusual nuisance characteristics or are of a public
or semi-public character often essential or desirable for the general
convenience and welfare of the community. Because, however, of the
nature of the use or possible adverse impact on neighboring
properties of the use, review, evaluation and exercise of planning
judgment relative to the location and site plan of the proposed use
are required.
B. Conditional uses are identified in the use table in Article 5.
3.5.2 Review Process
A. Except as described below, the Planning and Zoning Commission and
City Council review of a CUP application must follow the review
process, public notice, public hearing, protest and limitation on
resubmittal requirements for a Zoning District Map Amendment set
forth in Sec. 3.3.
B. Application for a CUP must occur in conjunction with the submittal of
a site plan.
C. The Director of Planning must review the CUP application and, with
input from the Development Review Committee, make a
recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission and City
Council. Development Review Committee review must focus on the
operational and design elements of the submitted CUP site plan.
D. A Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy may not be issued for
any use that requires a CUP unless a CUP has first been approved in
accordance with the provisions of this Section.
3.5.3 Duration
An approved CUP runs with the land and does not expire without City Council revocation as
set forth in Sec. 3.5.6. At its discretion, the City Council may impose an expiration date on an
approved CUP. The City Council may require that the property owner reapply for CUP
approval prior to expiration in order for the conditional use to continue operation.
[Ord. 2012-4505]
3.5.4 Review Criteria
In determining whether to approve, approve with conditions or deny a CUP application, the
review bodies in Sec. 3.5.2 above must consider the following criteria.
Application
Initiation
Staff &
DRC
Review
Recommendation
Schedule
Hearing
Public
Notice
P&Z
Public
Hearing
City Council
Public
Hearing
Final Action
Recommendation
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.5. Conditional Use Permit
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-10
A. The conditional use is compatible with and not injurious to the use and enjoyment of the
property, and does not significantly diminish or impair property values within the
immediate vicinity.
B. The establishment of the conditional use does not impede the normal and orderly
development and improvement of surrounding vacant property.
C. Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and other necessary support facilities have
been or will be provided.
D. The design, location and arrangement of all driveways and parking spaces provide for
the safe and convenient movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic without adversely
affecting the general public or adjacent development.
E. Adequate nuisance prevention measures have been or will be taken to prevent or
control offensive odors, fumes, dust, noise and vibration.
F. Directional lighting is provided so as not to disturb or adversely affect neighboring
properties.
G. There is sufficient landscaping and screening to insure harmony and compatibility with
adjacent property.
3.5.5 Additional Conditions
In authorizing a CUP, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend and the City
Council may impose additional reasonable conditions necessary to protect the public interest
and welfare of the community, including a time period for which a CUP is valid. The Planning
and Zoning Commission and the City Council, in considering and determining the additional
conditions, may impose such developmental standards and safeguards as conditions and
locations indicate to be important to the welfare and protection of adjacent property from
excessive noise, vibration, dust, dirt, smoke, fumes, gas, odor, explosion, glares, offensive
view or other undesirable or hazardous conditions.
3.5.6 Revocation and Modification
A CUP may be revoked or modified, after notice to the property owner and a hearing before
the City Council, for any of the following reasons:
A. The CUP was obtained or extended by fraud of deception;
B. One or more of the conditions imposed by the permit has not been met or has been
violated; or
C. The CUP previously authorized is determined to be detrimental to the public health,
safety and/or welfare.
3.5.7 Modification of Approved CUP
The procedure for amendment of a CUP is the same as for a new application. However, the
Director of Planning may approve minor variations to the CUP Site Plan or conditions of the
permit that do not increase density, change traffic patterns or result in any increase in external
impact on adjacent properties or neighborhoods. Otherwise, variations require consideration
of an amendment as required as described in Sec. 3.5.2.
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.5. Conditional Use Permit
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-11
3.5.8 Limitation on Resubmittal
A Conditional Use Permit application that the City Council has denied may not again be
considered either by the City Council or the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to the
expiration of six months from the date of the original action by the City Council.
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.6. Subdivision Plat Review
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-12
Sec. 3.6. Subdivision Plat Review
3.6.1 Applicability
A. Pursuant to the authority granted in Chapter 212 of the Local Government Code, the
owner of a tract of land located within the City limits or in the extraterritorial
jurisdiction who divides the tract in two or more parts must have a plat prepared in
order to lay out:
1. A subdivision;
2. Lots; or
3. Streets, alleys, squares, parks or other parts of the tract intended to be dedicated
to public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent
to the streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts.
B. A division of a tract under this subsection includes a division regardless of whether it is
made:
1. Using a metes and bounds description in a deed of conveyance;
2. In a contract for a deed, by using a contract of sale or other executory contract to
convey; or
3. Using any other method.
3.6.2 Exemptions from Required Plat
The following actions do not require development review under these subdivision provisions:
A. A division of land into lots all of which are five acres or more in the City limits and 10
acres or more in the ETJ, where each lot has public street access and no public
improvement is being dedicated;
B. Establishment of a cemetery complying with all state and local laws and regulations;
C. Acquisition of land for a governmental purpose by dedication, condemnation or
easement; or
D. Partitions of land among co-tenants by a court.
3.6.3 Application Process
A subdivision of land must generally proceed in accordance with the following steps:
A. Pre-Application Conference;
B. Preliminary Plat (where applicable per 3.6.5);
C. Final Plat;
D. Construction Plans;
E. Construction Permit;
F. Recordation; and
G. Acceptance of public improvements for ownership and maintenance
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.6. Subdivision Plat Review
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-13
[Ord. 2017-4878]
3.6.4 Pre-Application Conference
Prior to the submittal of a subdivision application, a pre-application conference must be held
with the Director of Planning and Development and other assigned City staff to discuss the
proposed subdivision unless determined otherwise by the Director of Planning and
Development.
3.6.5 Preliminary Plat
Applicability.
A. A preliminary plat is required for:
All development projects where the subdivision constitutes a
unit of a larger tract or group of tracts that is 100 acres or
larger under common ownership or control; and
All development projects where the subdivision is planned for
multiple phases.
B. Preliminary Plat Requirements
The Preliminary Plat must include all information needed to
ensure compliance with Article 8 of this UDC, the
Comprehensive Plan, other master plans, the Design and
Development Service manual, and applicable State Laws as
identified in the established Plat Application Checklist.
C. Review Process
The Development Review Committee must review the
submitted application and determine whether the
application is administratively complete or not. Such
determination should include comments relative to the
proposed Preliminary Plat’s compliance with Article 8 of
this UDC, the Comprehensive Plan, the Design and
Development Service Manual, other master plans and
applicable State Laws.
1. Director of Planning Review
The Director of Planning must review the submitted application and make a
recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Such recommendation
should include comments relative to the proposed Preliminary Plat’s compliance
with the Comprehensive Plan, other master plans, the Design and Development
Standards Manual, and applicable state laws.
[Ord. 2013-4580]
Application
Initiation
Staff &
DRC
Review
Recommendation
P&Z
Public
Meeting
City Council
Public
Meeting
Final Action
(Exceptions
requested)
Final Action
(No exceptions
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.6. Subdivision Plat Review
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-14
2. Planning and Zoning Commission Final Action
a. If no exceptions to the subdivision design and improvements standards found
in Article 8 have been requested as set forth in Sec. 3.6.7 below, the
Planning and Zoning Commission must hold a public meeting and approve,
approve with conditions or deny the Preliminary Plat. A conditional approval
can include the requirements and specific changes the Planning and Zoning
Commission determines necessary for the Preliminary Plat to comply with
this UDC, or the conditional approval can be specifically given by the
Commission as an expression of approval of the layout submitted on the
preliminary plat as a guide to the installation of streets, water, sewer and
other required improvements and utilities and to the preparation of the final
or recorded plat.
b. If exceptions to the subdivision design and improvements standards found in
Article 8 have been requested as set forth in Sec. 3.6.7 below, the Planning
and Zoning Commission must hold a public meeting and make a
recommendation to the City Council.
c. Approval of a Preliminary Plat does not constitute automatic approval of the
Final Plat.
3. City Council Final Action
If exceptions to the subdivision design and improvements standards found in
Article 8 have been requested as set forth in Sec. 3.6.7 below, or if the applicant
wishes to appeal the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission, then the
City Council must hold a public meeting and approve, approve with conditions or
deny the Preliminary Plat.
D. Expiration
Notwithstanding the provisions of Sec. 3.6.8, a Preliminary Plat for a subdivision that is
not phased or not to be developed sequentially expires and is deemed null and void five
years from the date of approval unless a Final Plat is filed and approved for all of the
Preliminary Plat within that time or unless the term is extended as provided in
paragraph E below. A new application must be filed to request approval for subdivision
of land for which a Preliminary Plat has expired.
[Ord. 2011-4451]
E. Extension of Plat Term
The term of a Preliminary Plat may be extended by one of the following procedures
before the initial term or an extension of the initial term expires.
1. Final Platting and Construction
a. The Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council, as appropriate, must
approve a Final Plat for a phase of the subdivision that is reasonable in size
and layout and must find that the Final Plat substantially conforms to the
Preliminary Plat.
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.6. Subdivision Plat Review
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-15
b. The developer must begin construction of the required subdivision
improvements.
c. Each Final Plat phase extends the term of the Preliminary Plat for two
additional years from the date the last Final Plat phase was approved.
2. Administrative Extension
a. The owner or the developer of property for which an unexpired Preliminary
Plat has been approved may apply for, and the Director of Planning may
approve, a two-year extension of the life of the Preliminary Plat. In making a
decision as to whether to approve or deny an application for extension of
the life of a Preliminary Plat, the Director of Planning may consider, among
other factors, evidence that the owner, developer or City produces that
shows for the prior two-year period:
i. The state of the national and regional economy and housing market;
ii. The state of the local economy and housing market, including:
(A) The number of new lots platted within the City limits;
(B) The number of building permits for single-family residences
issued within the City limits; and
(C) The inventory of platted single-family lots within the City limits.
iii. The availability (or lack thereof) of financing for construction of
subdivision improvements, home construction, or for end-purchasers
of single-family residences during the previous two years;
iv. The inventory of unsold homes and lots in Temple; and
v. The owner’s or developer’s prior experience in completing multiphase
subdivisions.
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.6. Subdivision Plat Review
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-16
b. An applicant denied a request for an extension of the life of
a Preliminary Plat may appeal the Director of Planning’s
decision to the City Manager whose decision is final.
[Ord. 2011-4451]
3.6.6 Final Plat
A. Review Process
1. Development Review Committee Review
The Development Review Committee must review the
submitted application and determine whether the application is
administratively complete or not. Such determination should
include comments relative to the proposed Final Plat’s
compliance with the Comprehensive Plan, the Design and
Development Standards Manual, other master plans and
applicable state laws.
2. Director of Planning Review
The Director of Planning must review the submitted application
and make a recommendation to the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Such recommendation should include comments
relative to the proposed Final Plat’s compliance with the
Comprehensive Plan and other master plans.
3. Planning and Zoning Commission Final Action
a. If no exceptions to the subdivision design and
improvements standards found in Article 8 have been
requested as set forth in Sec. 3.6.7 below, the Planning and Zoning
Commission must hold a public meeting and approve or deny the Final Plat.
b. If exceptions to the subdivision design and improvements standards found in
Article 8 have been requested as set forth in Sec. 3.6.7 below, the Planning
and Zoning Commission must hold a public meeting and make a
recommendation to the City Council.
4. City Council Final Action
If exceptions to the subdivision design and improvements standards found in
Article 8 have been requested as set forth in Sec. 3.6.7 below, or if the applicant
wishes to appeal the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission, then the
City Council must hold a public meeting and approve or deny the Final Plat.
B. Conformance to Preliminary Plat
A Final Plat must conform substantially to the approved Preliminary Plat.
Application
Initiation
Staff &
DRC
Review
Recommendation
P&Z
Public
Meeting
City Council
Public
Meeting
Final Action
(Exceptions
requested)
Final Action
(No exceptions
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.6. Subdivision Plat Review
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-17
C. Construction Plans
Construction plans for public improvements must be approved or conditionally
approved by the City Engineer before construction of the subdivision may begin and
before the Chief Building Official approves Building Permits.
D. Expiration
An approved Final Plat must be recorded within 12 months after final approval. All
approved Final Plats must be recorded in the deed records of Bell County before the
City accepts the completed public improvements for the subdivision or issues Building
Permits for construction of homes, unless the following conditions are satisfied:
1. Water and wastewater services are available to serve the property being
permitted; and
2. A letter of credit, escrow account or other means suitable to the City Attorney to
ensure funds are available for completion of the remaining subdivision
improvements is filed with the Director of Public Works in accordance with
paragraph Error! Reference source not found. below.
[Ord. 2017-4878]
3.6.7 Exceptions
A. An applicant may request an exception to the subdivision design and improvement
standards found in Article 8. The applicant must submit written justification for such
exception along with the plat application. Exceptions may be granted only when in
harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter so that the public health,
safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice served.
B. The City Council may approve, approve with conditions or deny the request after
consideration of the following factors:
1. That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such
that the strict application of the provisions of Article 8 would have a substantial
adverse impact on the applicant's reasonable use of the land;
2. That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area; and
3. That the granting of the exception will not have the effect of preventing the
orderly subdividing of other land in the area in accordance with the provisions of
this Section.
C. In considering the above criteria, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City
Council must take into account, at least, the nature of the proposed use of the land
involved, existing uses of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or
work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of such exception upon traffic
conditions.
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.6. Subdivision Plat Review
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-18
3.6.8 Resubmission of Plats
In the event that either or both of the following conditions occur during the processing of a
subdivision plat, the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council may require
resubmission of the plat as a Preliminary or Final Plat.
A. Significant Change or In Proposal
Resubmittal of the plat is required when a proposal has undergone a significant change
or changes during the process of plat review that make it desirable or necessary to
review its impact on the Comprehensive Plan, the Design and Development Standards
Manual, other master plans and applicable state laws.
B. Extended Delays in Processing by Applicant
When the applicant does not complete the review process within 24 months from the
date of filing, the City Council may grant extensions for good cause for additional sixmonth
periods.
3.6.9 Procedures Following Final Plat Approval
A. Certificate of Approval
An approved Final Plat may be recorded after all required acknowledgments and
certifications are complete. The Chair of the Planning and Zoning Commission is
authorized to execute the certificate of approval on a Final Plat and duplicate originals of
a plat that the Planning and Zoning Commission approved.
B. Coordination with County
The approved Final Plat for any subdivision located outside the City limits but within the
ETJ must also be submitted to the Commissioner’s Court of Bell County for approval
before recording. After the Commissioner’s Court action, a reproducible copy of the
Final Plat must be returned to the City bearing all appropriate signatures and seals.
C. Final Plat Copies
After approval of the Final Plat, the applicant must file in the office of the Director of
Planning, one Mylar reproducible print, complete with all necessary signatures, 13
copies or blue line prints and one digital drawing of the Final Plat. All figures and letters
shown must be plain, distinct and of sufficient size to be easily read, and must be of
sufficient density to make a lasting and permanent record. The drawing must contain
separate layers for features such as text, subdivision boundary, easements, lot lines, lot
numbers, block numbers and edge of curbs or pavement, as appropriate for the type of
drawing submitted. The format of the digital drawing must be the current or previous
release of AutoCAD ADWG drawing format or a similar substitute that the Director of
Public Works approves.
D. Acceptance of Improvements
Before the City accepts the subdivision improvements the applicant must submit the
following:
1. One ”As-Built Drawings” or “Record Drawings.”
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.6. Subdivision Plat Review
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-19
2. One copy of the as-built drawings in pdf format.
3. One copy of the base CAD file.
[Ord. 2017-4878]
3.6.10 Obligation by City for Maintenance of Improvements
Approval of the Final Plat does not impose any duty upon the City concerning the
maintenance of improvements of any such dedicated parts until the Director of Public Works
has signed a statement for the acceptance of the improvements.
3.6.11 No City Obligation
The City’s acceptance of a Final Plat does not in any manner obligate the City to finance or
furnish any storm sewers, drainage structures, street, water or wastewater improvements or
any other improvements within the approved subdivision, except under the provisions
provided in this UDC.
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.7. Replat Without Plat Vacation
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-20
Sec. 3.7. Replat Without Plat Vacation
3.7.1 Applicability
A. A replat of a subdivision or part of a subdivision may be recorded and is controlling over
the preceding plat without vacation of that plat if the replat:
1. Is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property being replatted;
and
2. Does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions.
B. The subdivision standards imposed are those in effect at the time of
original platting of the subdivision.
3.7.2 Review Process
A. Development Review Committee Review
The Development Review Committee must review the submitted
application and determine whether the application is administratively
complete or not. Such determination should include comments
relative to the proposed Replat Without Plat Vacation’s compliance
with Article 8 of this UDC, the Comprehensive Plan, the Design and
Development Standards Manual, other master plans and applicable
State Laws.
B. Director of Planning Review
The Director of Planning must review the submitted application and
make a recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Such recommendation should include comments relative to the
proposed Replat Without Plat Vacation’s compliance with Article 8 of
this UDC, the Comprehensive Plan, the Design and Development
Standards Manual, other master plans and applicable State Laws.
C. Planning and Zoning Commission Final Action
If the criteria in subsection 3.7.3A below apply to the property, then
following notice in accordance with subsections 3.7.3B and 3.7.3C
below, the Planning and Zoning Commission must hold a public
hearing and approve or deny the Replat Without Plat Vacation. If the
criteria in Sec. 3.7.3 do not apply to the property, then the public
notice requirement in Sec. 3.7.3 below does not apply; however, a public hearing is still
required.
3.7.3 Public Hearing and Public Notice
A. Criteria
Public notice in accordance with subsections B and C below is required prior to
approval of a Replat Without Plat Vacation if during the preceding five years:
1. Any of the area to be replatted was zoned UE, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SFA, SFA-2, SFA-
3, 2F, or TH; or
Application
Initiation
Staff &
DRC
Review
Recommendation
P&Z
Public
Hearing
City Council
Public
Meeting
Final Action
(Exception Requested)
Final Action
(No Exception Requested)
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.7. Replat Without Plat Vacation
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-21
2. Deed restrictions limited any lot in the preceding plat to not more than two
residential units per lot.
B. Mailed Notice
A proposed Replat Without Plat Vacation for property meeting the criteria listed in
paragraph A above requires notice of the public hearing of the Planning and Zoning
Commission by mail to all owners of lots that are in the original subdivision and that are
within 200 feet of the lots to be replatted, as indicated on the most recently approved
county tax roll of the property upon which the Replat Without Plat Vacation is
requested. The notice must be mailed, with a copy of subsection Sec. 3.7.4 attached,
before the 15th day before the date of the public hearing.
C. Published Notice
A proposed Replat Without Plat Vacation requires notice of the public hearing of the
Planning and Zoning Commission to be given by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City. Such notice must state the time and place of such hearing and the
nature of the subject to be considered. The notice must be published before the 15th
day before the date of the public hearing.
3.7.4 Protest
A. A Zoning District Map Amendment application requires a three-fourths vote of the City
Council in order to be approved if a written protest has been signed and submitted by
the owners of a minimum of 20 percent of either:
1. The area of the properties covered by the proposed change; or
2. The area of the properties immediately adjoining the area covered by the
proposed change and extending 200 feet from that area.
B. In computing the percentage of land area under subsection 3.3.4A above, the area of
streets and alleys must be included.
3.7.5 Expiration
An approved Replat Without Plat Vacation must be recorded within 12 months after final
approval. All approved Replats Without Vacation must be recorded in the deed records of
Bell County before the City accepts the completed public improvements for the subdivision
or issues Building Permits for construction of homes, unless the following conditions are
satisfied:
A. Water and wastewater services are available to serve the property being permitted; and
B. A letter of credit, escrow account or other means suitable to the City Attorney to
ensure funds are available for completion of the remaining subdivision improvements is
filed with the Director of Public Works in accordance with paragraph Error! Reference
source not found. above.
[Ord. 2017-4878]
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.7. Replat Without Plat Vacation
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-22
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.8. Minor or Amending Plat
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-23
Sec. 3.8. Minor or Amending Plat
An approved Minor or Amending Plat must be recorded within 12 months after final approval.
All approved Minor or Amending Plats must be recorded in the deed records of Bell County
before the City accepts the completed public improvements for the subdivision or issues
Building Permits.
[Ord. 2017-4878]
3.8.1 Applicability
Minor or Amending Plats may be approved in accordance with this Section.
A. Minor Plat
1. A Minor Plat is any plat for four or fewer lots fronting on an existing street and not
requiring the creation of any new street or the extension of public facilities.
2. The Director of Planning may approve a Minor Plat involving extension of an
existing City street or the addition of a turning lane to an existing street, provided
that all other standards of Article 8 are met, including specifically the requirement
that the applicant satisfy requirements for street improvement by escrowing funds
with the City, or providing a letter of credit, in the amount of the requirement
improvement.
3. Any plat that requires an exception from the subdivision design and improvement
standards of Article 8, any public utility dedication or any public dedication of land
may not be processed as a Minor Plat.
B. Amending Plat
The purpose of an Amending Plat is to:
1. Correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding plat;
2. Add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding plat;
3. Correct an error in a real property description shown on the preceding plat;
4. Indicate monuments set after the death, disability or retirement from practice of
the surveyor responsible for setting monuments;
5. Show the location or character of a monument that has been changed in location
or character or that is shown incorrectly as to location or character on the
preceding plat;
6. Correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission on a previously
approved plat, including lot numbers, acreage, street names and identification of
adjacent recorded plats;
7. Correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two adjacent lots if:
a. Both lot owners join in the application for amending the plat;
b. Neither lot is abolished;
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.8. Minor or Amending Plat
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-24
c. The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or
restrictions; and
d. The amendment does not have a material adverse effect on the property
rights of the other owners in the plat;
8. Relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other
improvements on a lot line or easement;
9. Relocate one or more lot lines between one or more adjacent lots if:
a. The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat;
b. The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or
restrictions; and
c. The amendment does not increase the number of lots;
10. Make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six or fewer lots in the
subdivision or a part of the subdivision covered by the preceding plat if:
a. The changes do not affect applicable zoning and other regulations of the
municipality;
b. The changes do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or
restrictions; and
c. The area covered by the changes is located in an area that the Planning and
Zoning Commission or City Council has approved, after a public hearing, as
a residential improvement area;
11. Replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street if the:
a. Owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat;
b. Amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or
restrictions;
c. Amendment does not increase the number of lots; and
d. Amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or make
necessary the extension of municipal facilities.
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.8. Minor or Amending Plat
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-25
3.8.2 Review Process
A. Development Review Committee Review
The Development Review Committee must review the submitted application and
determine whether the application is administratively complete or not. Such
determination should include comments relative to the proposed
Minor or Amending Plat’s compliance with Article 8 of this UDC, the
Comprehensive Plan, the Design and Development Standards Manual,
other master plans and applicable State Laws.
B. Director of Planning Final Action
1. The Director of Planning may approve a Minor or Amending Plat.
2. The Director of Planning may not deny a Minor or Amending
Plat. Any such plat that does not meet the requirements of this
UDC must be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
recommendation and to the City Council for final action.
3.8.3 Expiration
An approved Minor or Amending Plat must be recorded within 120 days after final approval.
All approved Minor or Amending Plats must be recorded in the deed records of Bell County
before the City accepts the completed public improvements for the subdivision or issues
Building Permits.
Application
Initiation
Planning Dir.
Final Action
Staff &
DRC
Review
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.9. Plat Vacation
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-26
Sec. 3.9. Plat Vacation
3.9.1 Applicability and Review Process
A. The proprietors of a tract covered by a plat may vacate the plat at any time before any
lot in the plat is sold.
B. If lots in a plat have been sold, the plat, or any part of the plat, may be vacated on the
application of all the owners of the lots in the plat with approval obtained in the manner
prescribed for the original plat.
C. The plat is vacated when a signed, acknowledged instrument declaring the plat vacated
is approved and recorded in the manner prescribed for the original plat.
D. On the execution and recording of the vacated instrument, the vacated plat has no
effect.
3.9.2 Expiration
An approved Plat Vacation must be recorded within 120 days after final approval in the deed
records of Bell County.
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.10. Sidewalk Waiver
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-27
Sec. 3.10. Sidewalk Waiver
3.10.1 Applicability
As part of the platting procedures described in Sec. 3.6 through Sec. 3.8 above or the Building
Permit procedure in Sec. 3.13, an applicant may request a waiver of the sidewalk
requirements in Sec. 8.2.3.
3.10.2 Review Process
The Director of Planning must approve, approve with conditions or deny a
written request for waiver of the sidewalk requirements in Sec. 8.2.3 or the
Director of Planning may refer a request for waiver to the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Council.
3.10.3 Review Criteria
In determining whether to approve, approve with conditions or deny a
Sidewalk Waiver application, the Director of Planning must consider the
following criteria.
A. Special topographical or other conditions exist on the property being
platted, developed or redeveloped, such that a literal enforcement of
this section would result in unnecessary hardship.
B. The purpose of this UDC is observed and substantial justice is done.
C. The waiver is in the public interest.
D. The anticipated volume of vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the area
based on the proposed development and the current or future uses of
surrounding property as set forth in the Comprehensive Plan, Zoning
District Map and Citywide Trails Master Plan.
E. The likelihood that a proposed new sidewalk will connect to other
sidewalks in the adjoining areas within five years.
F. The likelihood of the area for which a waiver is being requested to
serve as a pedestrian link between public or private facilities in adjoining
areas.
G. Whether due to the width or the anticipated reconstruction of
adjoining roadways, construction of a sidewalk on the property under
consideration makes economic sense.
[Ord. 2011-4430]
Staff &
DRC
Review
Final Action
Council
Public
Meeting
(if referred by DCS)
Recommendation
Application
Initiation
Chief Bldg Official
Final Action
P&Z
Public
Meeting
(if referred by DCS)
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.11. Reserved
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-28
Sec. 3.11. Reserved
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.12. Administrative Adjustment
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-29
Sec. 3.12.Administrative Adjustment
3.12.1 Applicability
A. The Director of Planning has the authority to authorize minor building encroachments
of up to 15 percent into the front, side or rear setbacks.
B. The Director of Planning must refer to the Zoning Board of Adjustment as a Variance to
be reviewed in accordance with Sec. 3.15 any request involving an encroachment
exceeding 15 percent of the required setback.
3.12.2 Application Submittal
An Administrative Adjustment application must be submitted to the Director of Planning a
minimum of five days before the date when the adjustment is needed. A copy of the survey of
the property depicting the encroachment, to include readable dimensions, must accompany
the request.
3.12.3 Review Process
A. The Director of Planning must approve, approve with conditions or
deny an Administrative Adjustment application.
B. When an encroachment is between 10 percent and 15 percent of the
required setback, the Director of Planning may notify adjacent
property owners and consider their input in making a decision.
3.12.4 Review Criteria
In determining whether to approve, approve with conditions or deny an
Administrative Adjustment, the Director of Planning must consider whether
the encroachment is generally consistent with the purpose of this UDC as set forth in Sec.
1.2.
Application
Initiation
Dir. Of Planning.
Final Action
Staff
Review
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.13. Building Permit
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-30
Sec. 3.13.Building Permit
3.13.1 Applicability
A Building Permit may not be issued for any property until one of the following events has
occurred.
A. Approved Plat
The lot appears on an approved plat of record filed in the plat records of Bell County.
[Ord. 2017-4878]
B. Development Plan Approval
The property is all or part of a Development Plan that the City Council has officially
approved in a Planned Development district in accordance with Sec.
3.4.2. The Development Plan must provide all utility and drainage
easements, alleys, streets and other public improvements necessary to
meet the normal requirements for platting including designation of
building areas. Such easements, alleys and streets must have been
properly dedicated and the necessary public improvements provided.
C. Unplatted Property
A Building Permit for only one principal building may be issued without
requiring Final Plat approval in accordance with Sec. 3.6 where the
property faces upon a publicly dedicated street and the last division of
the property from other land occurred prior to:
1. September 1st, 1983;
2. City annexation; or
3. Extension of the City’s extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Application
Initiation
Staff
Review
Recommendation
Chief Building Official
Final Action
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.13. Building Permit
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-31
3.13.2 Site Plan Required with Building Permit for Nonresidential or Multiple
Family Uses
A. Applicability
1. In addition to the above requirements, a Building Permit may not be issued for any
nonresidential or multiple family property until a Site Plan has been submitted for
review and approval by the Director of Planning.
2. Site Plan submission and review for projects in the Temple Medical and
Educational (TMED) Overlay District will be conducted in accordance with Sec.
3.11.
3. Site Plan submission and review for projects in the I-35 Corridor Overlay District
will be conducted in accordance with Sec 6.7.4.
B. Site Plan Requirements
1. The applicant must submit a legible Site Plan together with a Site Plan check list
certified for completeness with the applicant’s signature.
2. The Site Plan may be submitted in advance or concurrently with the building
permit application.
3. The Site Plan must be drawn to scale, dimensioned and labeled and include all
information needed to ensure compliance with Articles 7 and 8 of this UDC, the
Comprehensive Plan, other master plans, the Design and Development Service
Manual, and all requirements identified in the established Plat Application
Checklist.
[Ord. 2013-4580]
3.13.3 Review Process
A. Director of Planning Review
The Director of Planning must review the submitted application and make a
recommendation to the Chief Building Official.
1. The Director of Planning must determine whether a Site Plan is complete and
satisfies the submittal requirements.
2. If the Site Plan is determined incomplete, the Director of Planning must notify the
applicant in writing. The notification must list all missing or incomplete items.
3. The Director of Planning may request additional information that is required for
the accurate review of the proposal.
4. Upon receipt of the complete Site Plan, the Director of Planning must review the
Site Plan and the submitted Building Permit application for compliance with
development standards and make a recommendation to the Chief Building Official.
B. Chief Building Official Final Action
1. The Chief Building Official must approve, approve with conditions or deny the
Building Permit.
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.13. Building Permit
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-32
3.13.4 Review Process
A. Director of Planning Review
The Director of Planning must review the submitted application and make a
recommendation to the Chief Building Official.
B. Chief Building Official Final Action
The Chief Building Official must approve, approve with conditions or deny the Building
Permit.
3.13.5 Construction Plans
Construction plans for public improvements must be approved or conditionally approved by
the City Entineer before construction of the subdivision may begin or before the Chief
Building Official may approve a Building Permit.
[Ord. 2017-4878]
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.14. Sign Permit
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-33
Sec. 3.14.Sign Permit
3.14.1 Applicability
A. It is unlawful for any person to erect, relocate structurally alter or change the face panel
or copy of any sign requiring a Sign Permit within the City without first obtaining a Sign
Permit.
B. A Sign Permit is not required for repair, repainting or maintenance that does not entail
structural change or for changing the copy on a permitted message board sign as
described in Sec. 7.6.
[Ord. 2010-4440]
3.14.2 Review Process
A. Director of Planning Review
The Director of Planning must review the submitted application and
make a recommendation to the Chief Building Official.
B. Chief Building Official Final Action
The Chief Building Official must approve, approve with conditions or
deny the Sign Permit.
3.14.3 Review Criteria
In determining whether to approve, approve with conditions or deny a Sign
Permit, the review bodies listed in Sec. 3.14.2 above must consider whether
the proposed sign complies with the sign standards in Sec. 7.6 and all other
standards of the City.
3.14.4 Expiration
If the work authorized under a Sign Permit is not completed within six months after the date
of issuance, the permit becomes null and void.
3.14.5 Sign Permit Application Contents
Application for a Sign Permit must be made upon a form that the Chief Building Official
provides and must contain the following information:
A. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and name and firm of person
erecting sign;
B. If applicant is not the owner of real property where sign is proposed to be erected,
written consent of the property owner;
C. Location of building, structure, address or legal lot and block to which or upon which
the sign or other advertising structure is to be attached or erected;
D. Site plan, indicating street frontage, property lines, sight visibility triangles, proposed and
existing public street rights-of-way, location of sign on property, relationship of
proposed sign to ingress and egress points and relationship of proposed sign to any
other sign within 15 feet spacing of the proposed sign;
Application
Initiation
Staff
Review
Recommendation
Chief Bldg Official
Final Action
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.14. Sign Permit
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-34
E. Copy of stress diagrams or plans containing information necessary for the Chief Building
Official to determine safety and structural integrity of sign;
F. Indicate whether the sign will require electricity, and if so, obtain an electrical permit as
required;
G. Copy of Texas Department of Transportation approved permit if state law requires a
state permit; and
H. Such other information as the Chief Building Official may require to show full
compliance with this Section and all other City standards.
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.15. Variance
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-35
Sec. 3.15. Variance
3.15.1 Applicability
A. In accordance with the provisions of the Chapter 211 of the Local Government Code,
the Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) has the authority to hear and take final action on
requests for a Variance from standards to the height, yard, area, coverage, sign,
landscaping, and parking regulations in Article 6 and 7 as may be
necessary to secure appropriate development of a parcel of land.
B. Exceptions to the subdivision design and improvement standards in
Article 8 are not Variances and must be requested in accordance
with Sec. 3.6.7.
C. Any Variance request less than or equal to 15 percent of any front,
side or rear setback may be treated as an Administrative Adjustment
in accordance with Sec. 3.12.
3.15.2 Review Process
A. Director of Planning Review
The Director of Planning must review the submitted application and
make a recommendation to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. Zoning Board of Adjustment Final Action
Following notice in accordance with Sec. 3.15.3, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment must hold a public hearing and approve, approve with
conditions or deny the Variance.
3.15.3 Public Notice and Public Hearing
A. Mailed Notice
A proposed Variance requires notice of the public hearing of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment by mail to all owners of real property lying within 200 feet
of the property on which the change is requested. Such notice must be mailed a
minimum of 15 days before the date of the public hearing
B. Published Notice
A proposed Variance requires notice of the public hearing of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. Such notice
must state the time and place of such hearing and the nature of the subject to be
considered. The notice must be published a minimum of 15 days before the date of the
public hearing.
3.15.4 Review Criteria
A. Required Findings
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may authorize a Variance from the provisions of this
UDC. In exercising its power to grant a Variance, the Zoning Board of Adjustment must
make findings and show in its minutes that:
Application
Initiation
Staff
Review
Recommendation
Schedule
Hearing
Public
Notice
ZBA
Public
Hearing
Final Action
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.15. Variance
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-36
1. Special Circumstances on Subject Property
There are special circumstances existing on the property on which the application
is made related to size, shape, area, topography, surrounding conditions and
location that do not apply generally to other property in the same area and the
same zoning district.
2. Other Property in Vicinity
A Variance is necessary to permit the applicant the same rights in the use of this
property that other properties in the vicinity and zoning district presently enjoy
under this UDC, but which rights are denied to the property on which the
application is made.
3. Comprehensive Plan
Granting the Variance will not conflict with the Comprehensive Plan.
4. No Material Detriment
The Variance, if granted, will be no material detriment to the public welfare or
injury to the use, enjoyment or value of property in the vicinity.
5. Purpose of UDC
The Variance does not violate the purpose of this UDC as set forth in Sec. 1.2.
6. Signs
The unusual shape or topography of the property in question or some other
significant factor prevents signs allowable under the provisions of this UDC from
adequately identifying the business or other activity located on such property.
B. Limitations
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may not grant a Variance if the effect of the Variance
would authorize a use other than a use permitted in the district for which the Variance
is sought.
3.15.5 Limitation on Resubmittal
An applicant may not apply to the Zoning Board of Adjustment for the same Variance on the
same piece of property prior to the expiration of two years from a previous ruling of the
Board unless other property in the immediate vicinity within the two-year period has been
changed or the Board or City Council has acted upon the property so as to alter the facts and
conditions on which the previous Board action was based. Such change of circumstances
permits the rehearing of a Variance request prior to the expiration of a two-year period, but
such conditions in no way have any force in law to compel the Board, after a hearing, to grant
a subsequent Variance. Such subsequent Variance request must be considered entirely on its
merits and on the peculiar and specific conditions related to the property on which the appeal
is brought.
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.16. Appeal of Administrative Decision
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-37
Sec. 3.16.Appeal of Administrative Decision
3.16.1 Applicability
A. Pursuant to the authority granted to the City in Chapter 211 of the Local Government
Code, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is error in any final order, requirement, decision or determination made by any
administrative official responsible for administration, interpretation, or enforcement of
this UDC. In exercising its authority under this subsection, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the administrative
official’s order, requirement, decision or determination from which an appeal is taken
and make the correct order, requirement, decision or determination and for that
purpose the Zoning Board of Adjustment has the same authority as the administrative
official.
B. Appeal of a decision of the Director of Planning on building exterior
material requirements set forth in Sec. 7.8 or the I-35 Corridor
Overlay zoning district, must be in accordance with the procedure
described in paragraph 3.1.3C and D.
3.16.2 Review Process
A. Initiation
An Appeal of Administrative Decision must be taken within 15 days
after the decision has been rendered by filing a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds of the appeal with the Director of Planning.
Following initiation of the appeal, the Director of Planning must
immediately transmit to the Zoning Board of Adjustment all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action that is appealed was
taken.
B. Effect of Appeal
An appeal stays all proceedings of the action that is appealed unless the
administrative official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment in writing facts supporting the opinion
that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings may only be stayed by a restraining order that the Zoning
Board of Adjustment or a court of record may grant after notice to the
administrative official from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause
shown.
C. Zoning Board of Adjustment Final Action
1. Following notice in accordance with Sec. 3.16.3, the Zoning Board of Adjustment
must hold a public hearing and reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the
order, requirement, decision or determination of the administrative official.
2. The Zoning Board of Adjustment must take final action on the appeal within 15
days of initiation.
Application
Initiation
Recommendation
Schedule
Hearing
Public
Notice
ZBA
Public
Hearing
Final Action
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.16. Appeal of Administrative Decision
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-38
3. In exercising its final decision, the Zoning Board of Adjustment has the same
authority as the administrative official.
4. At the public hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
3.16.3 Public Notice and Public Hearing
The Zoning Board of Adjustment must give notice of the public hearing for the Appeal of
Administrative Decision, as well as due notice to the parties in interest.
Article 3: Development Review Procedures
Sec. 3.16. Appeal of Administrative Decision
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
3-39
[This page intentionally left blank]

Article 4 – Zoning Districts
Table of Contents
Sec. 4.1. General ............................................................................................................................. 4-1
Sec. 4.2. Newly Annexed Territory ............................................................................................... 4-3
Sec. 4.3. Zoning District Purpose Statements ................................................................................ 4-3
Sec. 4.4. Measurements and Special Cases .................................................................................. 4-10
Sec. 4.5. Residential Dimensional Standards................................................................................. 4-17
Sec. 4.6. Nonresidential Dimensional Standards .......................................................................... 4-27
[This page intentionally left blank]
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-1
Article 4 Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.1. General
4.1.1 Zoning Districts Established
A. The following zoning districts are established under authority of Chapter 211 of the
Local Government Code. The use and dimensional regulations as set forth in this Article
are uniform in each district.
B. Where the phrase “residential zoning district” is used in this UDC, it means the zoning
districts listed under the “Residential Zoning Districts” heading on the table below.
C. Where the phrase “nonresidential zoning district” is used in this UDC, it means the
zoning districts listed under the “Nonresidential Zoning Districts” heading on the table
below.
Abbreviated
Designation Zoning District Name
Residential Zoning Districts
UE Urban Estate
SF-1 Single-Family Dwelling 1
SF-2 Single-Family Dwelling 2
SF-3 Single-Family Dwelling 3
SFA Single-Family Attached Dwelling 1
SFA-2 Single-Family Attached Dwelling 2
SFA-3 Single-Family Attached Dwelling 3
2F Two-Family Dwelling
TH Townhouse
MF-1 Multiple-Family Dwelling 1
MF-2 Multiple-Family Dwelling 2
MF-3 Multiple-Family Dwelling 3
Nonresidential Zoning Districts
O-1 Office 1
O-2 Office 2
NS Neighborhood Service
GR General Retail
CA Central Area
C Commercial
LI Light Industrial
HI Heavy Industrial
Special Purpose and Overlay Districts
AG Agricultural
MH Manufactured Home
MU Mixed Use
TMED Temple Medical and Educational
PD Planned Development Overlay
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.1. General
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-2
Abbreviated
Designation Zoning District Name
H North Central Temple Historic Overlay
FP Flood Plain Overlay
I35 Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
4.1.2 Zoning District Map
A. The boundaries of the zoning districts established in Sec. 4.1 are delineated upon the
official Zoning District Map of the City. The Zoning District Map is hereby adopted by
reference and declared a part of this UDC as fully as if the map were set forth in detail.
B. The official Zoning District Map is available on the City’s website. The Director of
Planning must post all amendments to the map as soon as possible after the effective
date of the Zoning District Map amendment.
C. Reproductions for information purposes may, from time to time, be made of the official
Zoning District Map.
4.1.3 Zoning District Boundaries
The district boundary lines shown on the Zoning District Map are usually along existing and
proposed streets, alleys or property lines. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of
districts as shown on the Zoning District Map, the following rules apply.
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or
alleys are construed to follow such centerlines.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines are construed as
following such lot lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits are construed as following
City limits.
D. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines are construed to follow the centerline of
the public street right-of-way or if no centerline is established, the boundary is
interpreted to be midway between the public street right-of-way lines.
E. Boundaries indicated as following shore lines are construed to follow such shore lines,
and in the event of change in the shore line are construed as moving with the actual
shore line; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams,
rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water are construed to follow such centerlines.
F. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in A through E
above are so construed. The scale of the map determines distances not specifically
indicated on the original Zoning District Map.
G. Whenever the City Council vacates a street, alley or other public street right-of-way or
whenever such area is franchised for building purposes, the zoning district line adjoining
each side of such street, alley or other public way is automatically extended to the
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.2. Newly Annexed Territory
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-3
centerline of such vacated public street right-of-way and all areas so involved become
subject to all regulations of the extended districts.
H. Where physical features on the ground vary from information shown on the official
Zoning District Map or when there arises a question as to how or whether a parcel of
property is zoned and the application of this Section cannot resolve such question the
property must be considered as classified AG, Agricultural zoning district, temporarily in
the same manner as provided for newly annexed territory and the issuance of a Building
Permit and the determination of permanent zoning must be in accordance with the
provisions provided in Sec. 4.2 for newly annexed territory.
Sec. 4.2. Newly Annexed Territory
A. All territory hereafter annexed to the City must be temporarily classified in the AG,
Agricultural zoning district, until the City Council establishes a permanent zoning district
for the property. The procedure for establishing permanent zoning on annexed territory
must conform to the procedure established in Sec. 3.3.
B. In an area temporarily classified as AG, Agricultural zoning district:
1. A person may not erect, construct or proceed or continue with the erection or
construction of any building or structure or add to any building or structure or
cause the same to be done in any newly annexed territory to the City without first
applying for and obtaining a Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy.
2. The Chief Building Official may only issue a Building Permit or Certificate of
Occupancy for a structure or use permitted in the AG, Agricultural zoning district,
unless and until the City Council rezones such territory to a zoning district other
than the AG, Agricultural zoning district in accordance with the procedure in Sec.
3.3.
3. When annexation and permanent zoning of territory is under consideration, both
annexation and zoning may be recommended and acted upon simultaneously.
Sec. 4.3. Zoning District Purpose Statements
Zoning is used to achieve compatible land use arrangements in implementing the City's
Comprehensive Plan. Summarized below are the purpose statements for the City's zoning
districts with a brief explanation of the principal uses allowed in each.
4.3.1 AG, Agricultural
A. The Agricultural zoning district allows single-family detached residences and related
accessory structures. The Agricultural zoning district is the typical zoning district
assigned to property upon annexation.
B. The Agricultural zoning district consists generally of areas containing rural land uses or
undeveloped acreage that is not anticipated to be put to an urban use in the near future.
This district is intended for areas that are farther from the City center and large enough
that municipal wastewater facilities are not required. This district allows the
continuation of general rural uses within the City with the intent that the area can be
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.3. Zoning District Purpose Statements
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-4
reassessed and classified as an appropriate urban district according to its characteristics
and suitability as urban development occurs.
4.3.2 UE, Urban Estate
The Urban Estate zoning district permits single-family detached residences and related
accessory uses and accommodates large lot single-family residential developments. This
district is suitable for estate development or areas in which it is desirable to permit only lowdensity
development. Projects should typically be rural in character and well buffered from
more intensely developed uses.
4.3.3 SF-1, Single-Family Dwelling 1
The Single-Family Dwelling 1 zoning district permits single-family detached residences and
related accessory structures and provides standard single-family lots and should serve as a
transition between larger and smaller lot single-family districts.
4.3.4 SF-2, Single-Family Dwelling 2
The Single-Family Dwelling 2 zoning district permits single-family detached residences and
related accessory structures and provides for smaller single-family lots. This district may also
be used as a transition from the SF-1 district to less restrictive or denser residential zoning
districts.
4.3.5 SF-3, SingleFamily Dwelling 3
The Single-Family Dwelling 3 zoning district permits single-family detached residences and
related accessory structures and provides single-family development at urban densities in
locations well served by public utilities and roadways. This district should have adequate
thoroughfare access and be relatively well connected with community and neighborhood
facilities such as schools, parks and shopping areas and transit services.
4.3.6 SFA, Single-Family Attached Dwelling 1
The Single-Family Attached Dwelling 1 zoning district permits single-family attached or
detached residences, patio homes, and related accessory structures on smaller lots with
higher densities. The application of this district should be in urban areas of the City where
public facilities and services such as transit, schools, parks and shopping are available. This
district should be located near collector thoroughfares to accommodate the higher density of
population that can occur.
4.3.7 SFA-2, Single-Family Attached Dwelling 2
The Single-Family Attached Dwelling 2 zoning district permits single-family attached or
detached residences and related accessory structures and provides for smaller singlefamily
lots. This district may also be used as a zone of transition from the more restrictive singlefamily
district to lesser restrictive or denser residential zoning districts.
4.3.8 SFA-3, Single-Family Attached Dwelling 3
The Single-Family Attached Dwelling zoning district 3 permits single-family attached or
detached residences or patio homes and related accessory structures and provides for the
development of single-family homes on smaller lots and higher densities. The development in
this district should be of higher intensity use that requires close proximity to services such as
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.3. Zoning District Purpose Statements
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-5
schools, parks, transit and shopping. This district should be located near collector
thoroughfares to accommodate the higher density of population that can occur.
4.3.9 2F, Two-Family Dwelling
The Two-Family dwelling zoning district permits single-family to duplex housing, with
approximately seven units per acre possible is designed to accommodate single-family and
duplex dwellings as an intermediate classification allowing an orderly transition from singlefamily
neighborhoods to higher densities of residential use.
4.3.10 TH, Townhouse Dwelling
The Townhouse Dwelling zoning district permits townhouses with a maximum density of 13
units per acre and is used as a zone of transition between lower density residential and higher
density residential or business use areas. This district should require nearby vehicle access to
major thoroughfares.
4.3.11 MF-1, Multiple-Family Dwelling 1
The Multiple-Family Dwelling 1 zoning district permits typical garden apartment development
of one to two stories, allowing approximately 15 units per acre and is intended to be located
near, and reasonably accessible to, collectors and arterials, due to the traffic generating
capacity of medium density multiple family dwellings.
4.3.12 MF-2, Multiple-Family Dwelling 2
A. The Multiple-Family Dwelling 2 zoning district permits more modest sized dwelling
units and an increased number of units within the multiple-family complexes, allowing
approximately 20 units per acre in buildings three to four stories.
B. The Multiple Family Dwelling 2 zoning district should be designed for a higher density
use of the land with amenities and facilities such as major thoroughfares, parks,
transit and utilities close by and adequate for the volume of use.
4.3.13 MF-3, Multiple-Family Dwelling 3
A. The Multiple-Family Dwelling 3 zoning district permits conventional and high density
high rise apartment development (from five to 10 stories) allowing approximately 40
units per acre. Other permitted uses include boarding house, hotel or motel and
home for the aged.
B. The MultipleFamily Dwelling 3 zoning district is utilized in areas intended for high
intensity uses. Located along major arterials for direct vehicular access, this district is
suitable near major employment centers, the downtown urban core and other high
intensity areas.
4.3.14 O-1, Office 1
A. The Office 1 zoning district permits low rise garden-type office development
providing professional, financial, medical and other office services to residents in
nearby neighborhoods.
B. The Office 1 zoning district should be located convenient to residential areas and
should be complimentary to the character of the residential neighborhood served.
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.3. Zoning District Purpose Statements
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-6
This district is designed to be a transitional zone allowing low intensity administrative
and professional offices. Permitted uses are not intended to be major traffic
generators.
4.3.15 O-2, Office 2
A. The Office 2 zoning district permits a variety of low, mid and high rise office
development. Apartments are allowed. Buildings in the O-2 District may be built to any
legal height. Office buildings over 40 feet in height must provide additional yard space.
B. The Office 2 zoning district is intended to allow for office uses in an area that is primarily
business or high density residential. This district provides for professional, financial,
medical and other office services and may include corporate offices and major
employment centers. Uses in this district generally have low traffic generation
characteristics and do not require high visibility to conduct business.
4.3.16 NS, Neighborhood Service
A. The Neighborhood Service zoning district permits limited retail services, usually for a
small neighborhood area, with uses such as a convenience store, bank, barber or beauty
shop, small cleaners or florist, as well as any residential use except apartments.
B. The Neighborhood Service zoning district is the most restrictive retail district and is
intended to provide day-to-day retail and service needs for residential neighborhood
service areas. This district should be located convenient to residential areas in locations
such as the corner of a local road and a collector that serves the neighborhood.
4.3.17 GR, General Retail
A. The General Retail zoning district is the standard retail district and allows most retail
uses including retail sales, restaurants, grocery store, department store or offices and
residential uses except apartments.
B. The General Retail zoning district is intended to serve larger service areas than
neighborhoods. This district should be located at the intersection of major arterials and
should provide total on-site traffic maneuvering such that traffic entering and exiting the
facility should have room to turn, stack and park within the confines of the retail facility.
Adjoining zoning districts should be carefully selected to reduce environmental conflicts.
4.3.18 C, Commercial
A. The Commercial zoning district permits all retail and most commercial land uses
including auto dealerships with complete servicing facilities, building material sales, light
manufacturing and heavy machinery sales and storage. Also, residential uses are allowed,
except apartments.
B. The Commercial zoning district is intended to serve citywide or regional service areas.
This district should be located along major highways and should provide total on-site
traffic maneuvering such that traffic entering and exiting the facility should have room to
turn, queue for parking areas and park within the confines of the facility. This district
should also be located at the intersection of major thoroughfares or highways. This
district should be located away from low and medium density residential development
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.3. Zoning District Purpose Statements
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-7
and may be used as a buffer between retail and industrial uses. Adjoining zoning districts
should be carefully selected to reduce environmental conflicts.
4.3.19 CA, Central Area
The Central Area zoning district principally addresses development in the Central Business
District of the City, allowing most commercial, retail and office uses. The maximum building
height may be any legal limit that other laws and ordinances do not prohibit.
4.3.20 LI, Light Industrial
A. The Light Industrial zoning district permits light industrial uses. Residential uses are not
allowed except boarding or rooming houses.
B. The Light Industrial zoning district acts as a transition from other commercial or retail
uses to industrial uses. This district is intended to be located away from areas of low and
medium density residential development. The location should be carefully selected to
avoid or reduce environmental impacts to residential areas.
4.3.21 HI, Heavy Industrial
A. The Heavy Industrial zoning district permits heavy industrial uses as defined by
performance standards in Sec. 7.1. Residential uses are not allowed.
B. The Heavy Industrial zoning district is intended for those industrial uses that may need
to be buffered. Lots should be large enough to contain air, noise, odor, and vibration
pollution to a reasonable amount. Location should include access to major thoroughfare
or highway. This district is intended to be located away from all residential
development.
4.3.22 MH, Manufactured Home
A. The Manufactured Home zoning district allows HUD-Code manufactured home
developments, HUD-Code manufactured home land lease communities, single-family
residences and family or group homes. Manufactured home land lease communities
require a minimum of five acres and a maximum density of 10 units per acre.
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.3. Zoning District Purpose Statements
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-8
B. The Manufactured Home zoning district is intended to provide moderately priced
housing opportunities in areas with less development. This district should serve as a
buffer between single-family residential development and retail and office uses.
4.3.23 MU, Mixed Use
A. The Mixed Use zoning district permits the combination of different but compatible land
uses within a single building, site or district to increase efficiency of land use and
encourage neighborhood-enhancing economic activity. A variety of housing options are
allowed, including multiple-family dwellings up to three stories. The maximum density is
20 units per acre.
B. The Mixed Use zoning district is utilized for an area encompassing a minimum of 25
contiguous acres of land. Redevelopment standards for the district accommodate infill.
4.3.24 TMED, Temple Medical and Educational District
The purpose of the TMED zoning district is to develop a unique community which requires
multi-modal, pedestrian oriented development in the form of compact neighborhoods and
mixed use centers. Attention is placed on providing a meaningful variety of housing options
and distinct physical environments.
[Ord. 2010-4415]
4.3.25 PD, Planned Development Overlay
A. The Planned Development Overlay zoning district is a flexible zoning district, designed
to respond to unique development proposals, special design considerations and land use
transitions by allowing evaluation of land use relationships to surrounding areas through
development plan approval. The base zoning district or the ordinance that creates the
Planned Development determines maximum building height for each Planned
Development Overlay District.
B. The City Council may apply the Planned Development Overlay zoning district to any
tract of land. This district is intended to be either an extension of a particular district, or
a transition between districts with different use intensities. Parking, screening, fences
and open space should create a protective transition between districts. If approved, the
base zoning of the property does not change.
C. The Planned Development Overlay zoning district is established:
1. In order that the public health, safety and general welfare may be furthered in an
era of increasing urbanization and to encourage innovations in residential and
nonresidential development;
2. So that the greater variety in type, design and layout of buildings and the
conservation and more efficient use of open space meet the growing demands of
the population;
3. In order to encourage a more efficient use of land and of public services, and to
reflect changes in the technology of land development so that resulting economies
may result;
4. To lessen the burden of traffic on streets and highways; and
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.3. Zoning District Purpose Statements
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-9
5. To encourage a procedure that can relate the type, design and layout of residential
and nonresidential development to a particular site and the particular demand at
the time of the development in a manner consistent with the preservation of the
property values within established residential areas and to ensure that the
increased flexibility of substantive regulations over land development is subject to
such standards and procedures that encourages proposals for land development
without undue delay.
4.3.26 H, North Central Temple Historic Overlay
A. The H, North Central Temple Historic Overlay zoning district is designed to protect,
enhance and perpetuate historic areas, places and landmarks that represent or reflect
distinctive and important elements of the City's cultural, social, economic, political,
archeological and architectural history.
B. Development standards for property within the North Central Temple Historic Overlay
zoning district must conform first, to the procedures and requirements contained in
Chapter 17, Historic Preservation, of the Code of Ordinances; and secondly, to
standards for the base zoning district.
4.3.27 FP, Flood Plain Overlay
The Flood Plain Overlay District provides flood protection for land that has a history of
inundation or is determined to be subject to flood hazard.
4.3.28 I35, I-35 Corridor Overlay
The purpose of the I-35 Corridor Overlay zoning district is to exercise greater control over
the aesthetic, functional and safety characteristics of development and redevelopment along
Interstate 35 within the City where higher development standards can effectively enhance the
City’s image as a desirable place to live, work and shop. This overlay zoning district is limited
to specified areas encompassing land that has already been assigned conventional base zoning
district classifications. It supplements the standards of the base zoning districts with new or
different standards that are more restrictive.
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.4. Measurements and Special Cases
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-10
Sec. 4.4. Measurements and Special Cases
The provisions of this Section provide the method of measurement and set forth any special
cases relative to the dimensional standards in Sec. 4.5 and Sec. 4.6 below.
4.4.1 Minimum Lot Area
A. Minimum lot area standards are established in the tables in Sec. 4.5 and Sec. 4.6.
B. Lot area is measured as the total area within the lot lines of the lot excluding any street
rights-of-way. A lot existing on September 19, 1991, may not be reduced in area below
the minimum lot area requirements.
C. A nonconforming lot of record as defined in Article 11 having less area than required
may solely be used for a single-family dwelling.
4.4.2 Minimum Lot Width
A. Minimum lot area standards are established in the tables in Sec. 4.5 and Sec. 4.6.
B. Lot width is measured as the distance between the side lot lines measured at the front
building line parallel to the front property line or to the cord of the front property line.
A lot existing on September 19th, 1991, may not be reduced in width below the
minimum lot width requirements.
C. A nonconforming lot of record as defined in Article 11 having less lot width than
required may solely be used for a single-family dwelling.
4.4.3 Minimum Lot Depth
A. Minimum lot depth standards are established in the tables in Sec. 4.5 and Sec. 4.6.
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.4. Measurements and Special Cases
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-11
B. Lot depth is measured as the distance from the front lot line to the rear lot line. Where
the front and rear lot lines are not parallel, the lot depth is measured by drawing lines
from the front to the rear lot lines, at right angles to the front lot line every 10 feet, and
averaging the length of these lines.
C. A lot existing on September 19th, 1991, may not be reduced in depth below the
minimum lot depth requirements. A nonconforming lot of record as described in Article
11 having less lot depth than required may solely be used for a single-family dwelling.
4.4.4 Minimum Yards
A. Open and Unobstructed
Every part of a required yard must be open and unobstructed except as authorized in
this UDC.
B. Types of Yards
Required yard types are as follows
1. Front;
2. Side;
3. Side (corner); and
4. Rear.
C. Measurement of Yards
All required yards are measured from the front,
side or rear property line to the nearest face of the
building, covered porch, covered terrace or attached accessory building.
D. Features Allowed Within Required Yards
The following features may be located within a required yard:
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.4. Measurements and Special Cases
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-12
1. Window sills, belt courses, cornices and other architectural features projecting a
maximum of 12 inches into the required side yard; and
2. Roof eaves or canopies projecting a maximum of 24 inches into the required side
yard and a maximum of 48 inches into the required front yard.
3. Window sills, belt courses, cornices, roof eaves or canopies and other
architectural features projecting a maximum of 36 inches into the required rear
yard.
4. Fences that comply with the standards in Sec. 7.7.
E. Setback Averaging
1. If buildings on a residential block face have observed an average setback which is
greater or lesser than the minimum front yard required for the district in which
the street frontage is located, then the average setback of all buildings fronting
upon such block face establishes the minimum required front yard for a new
residential structure.
2. All vacant lots are assumed to have a minimum front yard specified for the district
in computing the average front yard. These provisions may not be interpreted as
requiring a front yard greater than 50 feet nor may they be interpreted as
requiring any building to observe a front yard of more than 10 feet greater than
the front setback of any building on a contiguous lot. These setback averaging
provisions are superseded on any lot where a plat or ordinance establishes a
minimum building line.
F. Yard Requirements for Special Cases
The following special cases apply to the yard requirements in Sec. 4.5.
1. Required Front Yards
a. In all districts except the Agricultural zoning district where the frontage on
one block face is divided by two or more zoning districts, the front yard
must comply with the requirements of the most restrictive district for the
entire block face.
b. Where a plat or ordinance establishes a building line and such line requires a
front yard setback greater or lesser in depth than is prescribed in Sec. 4.5 for
the district in which the building line is located, the required front yard must
comply with the building line that the ordinance or plat established.
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.4. Measurements and Special Cases
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-13
c. The required front yard setback must be increased in the O-2 and MF-3
zoning districts one foot for each three feet of additional building height over
35 feet.
d. In the C, CA, LI and HI districts a structure may not be erected nearer than
30 feet to the centerline of any street on which such structure fronts.
e. Where a lot abuts the turnaround at the end of a cul-de-sac street, the front
yard setback required in any of the residential zoning districts may be
reduced by a maximum of 10 feet if the lesser setback is shown on the final
plat recorded with the County Clerk of Bell County. Such resulting setback
may not be less than 65 feet from the center of radius point of such
turnaround.
f. Where lots have double frontage, a required front yard is provided on both
streets unless a building line for accessory buildings has been established
along one street frontage on the plat or by ordinance, in which event only
one required front yard need be observed.
2. Required Side Yards
a. O-2 District
In the O-2 zoning district, the required side yard setback must be increased
one foot for each three feet of additional building height over forty feet.
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.4. Measurements and Special Cases
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-14
b. CA, C, LI and HI Districts
In the CA, C, LI and HI zoning districts, a side yard is not required for
nonresidential uses except where a nonresidential use abuts upon a district
boundary line dividing such districts from a residential zoning district, in
which event, the following standards apply:
i. In the CA zoning district, a minimum side yard of five feet must be
provided on the side adjacent to a residential zoning district. If the
building height exceeds 40 feet, the side yard setback must increase
one foot for each three feet over 40 feet in building height.
ii. In C, LI and HI zoning districts, a minimum side yard of 10 feet must be
provided on the side adjacent to a residential zoning district. If the
building height exceeds 40 feet, the side yard setback must increase
one foot for each three feet over 40 feet in building height.
3. Required Rear Yards
a. In the O-1, O-2, NS, GR, CA, C, LI or HI districts a minimum rear yard of 10
feet is required adjacent where a nonresidential use abuts a residential
zoning district or use. Where an alley exists, a rear yard is not required.
b. In the O-2 zoning district, where nonresidential uses back upon a common
district line dividing the district from a single-family residential zoning district,
a minimum rear yard of 40 feet is required.
4.4.5 Maximum Building Coverage
Building coverage is measured as the maximum percent of the rear half of a lot or tract that
the roof or first floor of a building may cover. Roof eaves extending less than three feet from
the walls of a building, swimming pools, uncovered porches, patios or decks may be excluded
from the building coverage computations.
4.4.6 Maximum Floor Area Ratio
A. Except as provided in this Section, a structure may not be erected, added to or altered
to exceed the maximum floor area ratio (FAR) standards set forth in the table below.
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.4. Measurements and Special Cases
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-15
Zoning District Maximum FAR
O-1, Office One 0.6:1
O-2, Office Two 0.4:1
GR, General Retail 0.6:1
CA, Central Area 20:1
C, Commercial 4:1
LI, Light Industrial 2:1
HI, Heavy Industrial 2:1
B. A structure used for off-street parking may not be computed as area subject to FAR
standards.
4.4.7 Maximum Height
A. Height is measured as the vertical distance of a building measured from the average
established grade at the street line or from the average natural front yard ground level,
whichever is higher, to (1) the highest point of the roof's surface if a flat surface, (2) to
the deck line of mansard roofs or (3) to the mean height level between eaves and ridge
for hip and gable roofs and, in any event, excluding chimneys, cooling towers, elevator
bulkheads, penthouses, tanks, water towers, radio towers, ornamental cupolas, domes
or spires and parapet walls not exceeding 10 feet in height. If the street grade has not
been officially established, the average front yard grade must be used for a base level.
B. In the zoning districts where maximum building height is restricted to two or three
stories, cooling towers, roof gables, chimneys and bent stacks may extend for an
additional height not to exceed 40 feet above the average grade line of the building.
C. A basement must be counted as a story in computing building height. A cellar may not
be counted as a story in computing building height.
D. Water stand pipes and tanks, steeples, domes and spires and school buildings and
institutional buildings may be erected to exceed three stories in height in residential
areas restricted to two or three stories in height, provided that one additional foot must
be added to the width and depth of side and rear yards for each foot that such
structures exceed three stories in height.
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.4. Measurements and Special Cases
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-16
E. Airport height zoning regulations in the vicinity of Draughon-Miller Municipal Airport act
as an overlay district and may affect maximum allowable building heights. Any
development within three miles of the existing runways must comply with airport height
zoning regulations, a copy of which is available in the office of the City Secretary, in the
office of the Airport Manager and in the office of the Director of Planning.
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.5. Residential Dimensional Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-17
4.4.8 Intersection Visibility Triangle
A. An intersection visibility triangle is established at all
intersections where the streets, alleys and driveways
intersect. It includes that portion of public street right-ofway
and any corner lot in the triangular area formed by
extending the curb lines of the intersecting streets to their
imaginary point of intersection for the first point of the
triangle, then proceeding back from this imaginary point of
intersection 15 feet along the curb lines of the intersecting
streets to establish the two remaining points of the triangle. These points must then be
connected with imaginary lines, thereby forming a triangle. If there are no curbs existing,
the triangular area are formed by extending the pavement edges to the imaginary point
of intersection of the streets and then proceeding in the same manner described above.
B. A vehicle, fence, wall, screen, view obstruction, or foliage is not allowed within the
intersection visibility triangle at elevations between
three feet and eight feet above the average street
grade. Obstructions of this nature are a public traffic
nuisance.
C. Obstruction of an intersection visibility triangle must
be abated within 10 days after written notice.
Sec. 4.5. Residential Dimensional Standards
Unless otherwise specified in Sec. 4.4 or 5.3, the
following residential uses must be developed in
accordance with the tables below. Industrialized housing
standards are identical to single-family detached dwelling standards.
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.5. Residential Dimensional Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-18
[This page intentionally left blank]
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.5. Residential Dimensional Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-19
4.5.1 Single-Family Detached Dwelling
Type of Use
AG
UE
SF-1
SF-2
SF-3
SFA-1
SFA-2
SFA-3
TH
2F
MF-1
MF-2
MF-3
O-1
O-2
NS
GR
CA
C
LI
HI
Min. Lot Area
(sq. ft.)
1
ac.
22,500 7,500 5,000 4,000 5,000 3,000 2,300 4,000 6,000 6,000 5,000 -- 6,000 6,000 6,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 -- --
Min. Lot Width
(ft.)
100 80 60 50 40 50 30 20 40 50 50 50 -- 50 50 50 50 50 50 -- --
Min. Lot Depth
(ft.)
150 125 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 -- 100 100 100 100 100 100 -- --
Min. Front
Yard Setback
(ft.)
50 30 25 25 15 25 15 15 15 25 25 25 -- 25 25* 15 15 See 4.4.4F.1.d* -- --
Min. Side Yard
Setback (ft.)
15 15
10%
of lot
width
6 min
7.5
max
5 5 5 5 5
10%
width
of lot
5 min
5
10% of lot
width 5 min
--
10%
of lot
width
5 min
10%
of lot
width
5
min*
10% of lot width 5 min -- --
Min. Side
(Corner)Yard
Setback (ft.)
15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 -- 15 15* 15 15 15 15 -- --
Min. Rear Yard
Setback (ft.)
10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 -- 10 10 10 10 10 10 -- --
Max. Building
Coverage (%)
for Rear Half
of Lot
50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 -- 50 50 50 50 50 50 -- --
Max. Height
(stories)
3 3 2 2 ½ 2 ½ 2 ½ 2 ½ 2 ½ 2 ½ 2 ½ 3 4 -- 3 ALH 2 ½ 3 ALH ALH -- --
ALH = Any Legal Height not prohibited by other laws -- = Use not permitted NA = Use permitted but standard does not apply * = See Sec. 4.4, Measurements and Special Cases
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.5. Residential Dimensional Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-20
4.5.2 Single-Family Attached Dwelling
Type of Use
AG
UE
SF-1
SF-2
SF-3
SFA-1
SFA-2
SFA-3
TH
2F
MF-1
MF-2
MF-3
O-1
O-2
NS
GR
CA
C
LI
HI
Min. Lot Area
(sq. ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- 2,300 2,300 2,300 1,600 2,300 2,300 2,300 -- 3,000 2,300 2,300 2,000 2,000 2,000 -- --
Min. Lot Width
(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- 20 20 20 30 20 20 20 -- 20 20 20 20 20 20 -- --
Min. Lot Depth
(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- 100 100 100 100 100 100 100 -- 100 100 100 100 100 100 -- --
Min. Front
Yard
Setback(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- 25 15 15 15 25 25 25 -- 25 25* 25 15 See 4.4.4F.1.d* -- --
Min. Side Yard
Setback(ft.)
(exterior lot
line/interior lot
line)
-- -- -- -- -- 5/0 5/0 5/0 5/0 5/0 5/0 6/0 -- 5/0 5/0* 5/0 5/0 5/0 5/0 -- --
Min. Side
(Corner)Yard
Setback(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 -- 15 15* 15 15 15 15 -- --
Min. Rear Yard
Setback(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- 10 10 5 10 10 10 10 -- 10 10 10 10 10 10 -- --
Max. Building
Coverage (%)
for Rear Half
of Lot
-- -- -- -- -- 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 -- 50 50 50 50 50 50 -- --
Max. Height
(stories)
-- -- -- -- -- 2 ½ 2 ½ 2 ½ 2 ½ 2 ½ 3 4 -- 3 ALH* 2 ½ 3 ALH ALH -- --
ALH = Any Legal Height not prohibited by other laws -- = Use not permitted NA = Use permitted but standard does not apply * = See Sec. 4.4, Measurements and Special Cases
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.5. Residential Dimensional Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-21
4.5.3 Patio Home
Type of Use
AG
UE
SF-1
SF-2
SF-3
SFA-1
SFA-2
SFA-3
TH
2F
MF-1
MF-2
MF-3
O-1
O-2
NS
GR
CA
C
LI
HI
Min. Lot Area
(sq. ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- 4,500 -- 2,300 1,600 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Min. Lot Width
(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- 45 -- 20 30 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Min. Lot Depth
(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- 45 -- 20 30 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Min. Front
Yard
Setback(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- 25 -- 15 15 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Min. Side Yard
Setback(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- 5 -- 5 5 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Min. Side
(Corner)Yard
Setback(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- 15 -- 15 15 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Min. Rear Yard
Setback(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- 10 -- 10 10 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Max. Building
Coverage (%)
for Rear Half
of Lot
-- -- -- -- -- 50 -- 50 50 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
Max. Height
(stories)
-- -- -- -- -- 2 ½ -- 2 ½ 2 ½ -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
ALH = Any Legal Height not prohibited by other laws -- = Use not permitted NA = Use permitted but standard does not apply * = See Sec. 4.4, Measurements and Special Cases
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.5. Residential Dimensional Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-22
4.5.4 Two-Family Dwelling
Type of Use
AG
UE
SF-1
SF-2
SF-3
SFA-1
SFA-2
SFA-3
TH
2F
MF-1
MF-2
MF-3
O-1
O-2
NS
GR
CA
C
LI
HI
Min. Lot Area
(sq. ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 4,000 4,000 3,500 -- 3,500 3,500 -- 3,500 3,500 3,500 -- --
Min. Lot Width
(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 60** 60 60 -- 60 60 -- 60 60 60 -- --
Min. Lot Depth
(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 100 100 100 -- 100 100 -- 100 100 100 -- --
Min. Front
Yard
Setback(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 25 25 -- 25 25* -- 15 See 4.4.4F.1.d* -- --
Min. Side Yard
Setback(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 5 10% of lot
width 5 min
--
10%
of lot
width
5 min
10%
of lot
width
5
min*
-- 10% of lot width 5 min -- --
Min. Side
(Corner)Yard
Setback(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 15 15 15 -- 15 15* -- 15 15 15 -- --
Min. Rear Yard
Setback(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 10 10 10 -- 10 10 -- 10 10 10 -- --
Max. Building
Coverage (%)
for Rear Half
of Lot
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 50 50 50 -- 50 50 -- 50 50 50 -- --
Max. Height
(stories)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 2 ½ 3 4 -- ALH ALH* -- ALH ALH ALH -- --
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.5. Residential Dimensional Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-23
ALH = Any Legal Height not prohibited by other laws -- = Use not permitted NA = Use permitted but standard does not apply * = See Sec. 4.4, Measurements and Special Cases
**60 ft.= See Sec. 5.3.28 allowing minimum lot width of 50 feet for a Two-Family Dwelling built on a lot platted before May 4, 2017, subject to standards for compatibility with Single-Family
Dwellings.
**25 ft. = See Sec. 5.3.28 allowing minimum front yard setback of 18 feet for a Two-Family Dwelling built on a lot platted before May 4, 2017, subject to standards for compatibility with Single-
Family Dwellings.
[Ord. 2017-4839]
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.5. Residential Dimensional Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-24
4.5.5 Multiple-Family Dwelling, 1-2 Stories
Type of Use
AG
UE
SF-1
SF-2
SF-3
SFA-1
SFA-2
SFA-3
TH
2F
MF-1
MF-2
MF-3
O-1
O-2
NS
GR
CA
C
LI
HI
Min. Lot Area
(sq. ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 3,000 2,800 2,200 -- 3,000 -- -- 1,800 -- -- --
Min. Lot Width
(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 60 60 60 -- 60 -- -- 60 -- -- --
Min. Lot Depth
(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 120 120 120 -- 120 -- -- 120 -- -- --
Min. Front Yard
Setback(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 25 25* -- 25* -- --
See
4.4.4F.1.d*
-- -- --
Min. Side Yard
Setback(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- See 5.3.3 --
See
5.3.3
-- -- See 5.3.3 -- -- --
Min. Side
(Corner)Yard
Setback(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 15 15 15 -- 15* -- -- 15 -- -- --
Min. Rear Yard
Setback(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 10 10 10 -- 10 -- -- 10 -- -- --
Max. Building
Coverage (%)
for Rear Half of
Lot
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- See 5.3.3 --
See
5.3.3
-- -- See 5.3.3 -- -- --
Max. Height
(stories)
2 2 2* 2* 2
ALH = Any Legal Height not prohibited by other laws -- = Use not permitted NA = Use permitted but standard does not apply * = See Sec. 4.4, Measurements and Special Case
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.5. Residential Dimensional Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-25
4.5.6 Multiple-Family Dwelling, 3-4 Stories
Type of Use
AG
UE
SF-1
SF-2
SF-3
SFA-1
SFA-2
SFA-3
TH
2F
MF-1
MF-2
MF-3
O-1
O-2
NS
GR
CA
C
LI
HI
Min. Lot Area
(sq. ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 2,500 2,000 -- 2,000 -- -- 600 -- -- --
Min. Lot Width
(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 60 60 -- 60 -- -- 60 -- -- --
Min. Lot Depth
(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 120 120 -- 120 -- -- 120 -- -- --
Min. Front Yard
Setback(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 25 25* -- 25* -- --
See
4.4.4F.1.d*
-- -- --
Min. Side Yard
Setback(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- See 5.3.3 --
See
5.3.3
-- -- See 5.3.3 -- -- --
Min. Side
(Corner)Yard
Setback(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 15 15 -- 15* -- -- 15 -- -- --
Min. Rear Yard
Setback(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 10 10 -- 10 -- -- 10 -- -- --
Max. Building
Coverage (%)
for Rear Half of
Lot
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- See 5.3.3 -- See
5.3.3
-- -- See 5.3.3 -- -- --
Max. Height
(stories)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 4 4* -- 4* -- -- 4 -- -- --
ALH = Any Legal Height not prohibited by other laws -- = Use not permitted NA = Use permitted but standard does not apply * = See Sec. 4.4, Measurements and Special Case
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.5. Residential Dimensional Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-26
4.5.7 Multiple-Family Dwelling, 5-10 Stories
Type of Use
AG
UE
SF-1
SF-2
SF-3
SFA-1
SFA-2
SFA-3
TH
2F
MF-1
MF-2
MF-3
O-1
O-2
NS
GR
CA
C
LI
HI
Min. Lot Area
(sq. ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 1,700 -- 1,700 -- -- 1,700 -- -- --
Min. Lot Width
(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 60 -- 60 -- -- 60 -- -- --
Min. Lot Depth
(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 120 -- 120 -- -- 120 -- -- --
Min. Front Yard
Setback(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 25* -- 25* -- --
See
4.4.4F.1.d*
-- -- --
Min. Side Yard
Setback(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
See
5.3.3
--
See
5.3.3
-- -- See 5.3.3 -- -- --
Min. Side
(Corner)Yard
Setback(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 15 -- 15* -- -- 15 -- -- --
Min. Rear Yard
Setback(ft.)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 10 -- 10 -- -- 10 -- -- --
Max. Building
Coverage (%)
for Rear Half of
Lot
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- See
5.3.3
-- See
5.3.3
-- -- See 5.3.3 -- -- --
Max. Height
(stories)
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 10* -- 10* -- -- 10 -- -- --
ALH = Any Legal Height not prohibited by other laws -- = Use not permitted NA = Use permitted but standard does not apply * = See Sec. 4.4, Measurements and Special Case
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.6. Nonresidential Dimensional Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-27
Sec. 4.6. Nonresidential Dimensional Standards
Unless otherwise specified in Sec. 4.4, nonresidential uses must be developed in accordance with the tables below.
Type of Use
AG
UE
SF-1
SF-2
SF-3
SFA-1
SFA-2
SFA-3
TH
2F
MF-1
MF-2
MF-3
O-1
O-2
NS
GR
CA
C
LI
HI
Min. Lot Area
(sq. ft.)
NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Min. Lot Width
(ft.)
NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Min. Lot Depth
(ft.)
NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Min. Front Yard
Setback(ft.)
50 50 25 25 15 25 15 15 15 25 25 25 25 25 25* 15 15 See 4.4.4F.1.d*
Min. Side Yard
Setback(ft.)
20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 5 5* 10 10 0* 0* 0* 0*
Min. Side
(Corner)Yard
Setback(ft.)
15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 10* 10 10 0* 10 10 10
Min. Rear Yard
Setback(ft.)
10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 0* 0* 0* 0* 0* 0* 0* 0*
Max. Building
Coverage (%)
NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA
Max. Height
(stories)
3 3 2 2 ½ 2 ½ 2 ½ 2 ½ 2 ½ 2 ½ 2 ½ 3 4 10 3 ALH 2 ½ 3 ALH ALH ALH ALH
ALH = Any Legal Height not prohibited by other laws -- = Use not permitted NA = Use permitted but standard does not apply * = See Sec. 4.4, Measurements and Special Case
Article 4: Zoning Districts
Sec. 4.6. Nonresidential Dimensional Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
4-28
[This page intentionally left blank]
Article 5 – Use Standards
Table of Contents
Sec. 5.1. Use Table ......................................................................................................................... 5-1
Sec. 5.2. Classification of New and Unlisted Uses ....................................................................... 5-12
Sec. 5.3. Specific Use Standards ................................................................................................... 5-13
Sec. 5.4. Personal Wireless Service Facilities ................................................................................ 5-30
Sec. 5.5. Accessory Uses and Structures ...................................................................................... 5-35
Sec. 5.6. Temporary Uses ............................................................................................................ 5-41
[This page intentionally left blank]
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-1
Article 5 Use Standards
Sec. 5.1. Use Table
5.1.1 Prohibited Uses
The following uses are prohibited in the City:
A. Mobile home;
B. Temporary sales that are unrelated and accessory to the primary use of the property
except as provided for below:
1. Temporary uses identified in Section 5.6 Temporary Uses; and
2. Temporary sales associated with fundraising campaigns sponsored by non-profit
organizations subject to the general conditions identified in Section 5.6.2.
5.1.2 Legend for Interpreting Use Table
P = Permitted by Right
L = Permitted by Right Subject to Limitation
Blank = Prohibited
C = Conditional Use Permit (CUP)
5.1.3 Use Table
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.1. Use Table
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-2
P= Permitted by Right L = Permitted by Right Subject to Limitations
[blank cell] = Prohibited C= Conditional Use Permit
Specific Use
AG
UE
SF-1
SF-2
SF-3
SFA-1
SFA-2
SFA-3
TH
2F
MF-1
MF-2
MF-3
O-1
O-2
NS
GR
C
CA
LI
HI
Standards
RESIDENTIAL USES
Boarding or rooming house P P P P P P P
Convent or monastery C C P P P P
Family or Group Home L L L L L L L L L L L L L C C C C C C C 5.3.1
Fraternity or sorority C C C C C P P P P P P
Home for the aged C C C P P C P P P P P
Industrialized housing P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
HUD-Code manufactured home land
lease community
C 5.3.2
HUD-Code manufactured home
development
L 5.3.2
Multiple-family dwelling (apartment) L L L L L 5.3.3
Patio home L L L 5.3.4
Recreational Vehicle Park C C C
Single-family attached dwelling P P L P P P P P P P P P P 5.3.5
Single-family detached dwelling P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Townhouse L L L L L L L L L L 5.3.6
Triplex C P P P P
Two-family dwelling (duplex) P P P P P P P P
Zero lot line dwelling P L P P P P P 5.3.7
NONRESIDENTIAL USES
AGRICULTURAL USES
Animal shelter (public or private) C C P P
Farm, ranch, orchard or garden P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.1. Use Table
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-3
P= Permitted by Right L = Permitted by Right Subject to Limitations
[blank cell] = Prohibited C= Conditional Use Permit
Specific Use
AG
UE
SF-1
SF-2
SF-3
SFA-1
SFA-2
SFA-3
TH
2F
MF-1
MF-2
MF-3
O-1
O-2
NS
GR
C
CA
LI
HI
Standards
Greenhouse or nursery (wholesale) P P P P P
Hatchery, fish or shrimp or fish farm C C C C
Hatchery, poultry C P P P
Kennel without veterinary hospital C C P P P
Livestock auction C C C P
COMMERCIAL USES
Bakery or confectionary (wholesale) P P P P
Building material sales P P P P
Cabinet shop P P P P
Cleaning, dyeing or laundry plant P P P P
Contractor storage or equipment yard P P P P
Flea market (indoors) P P P P P
Flea Market (outdoors) P P P
Heavy machinery sales, storage and
repair
P P P
Lithographic or print shop P P P P P
Maintenance and repair service for
building
P P P P
Mini-storage warehouse L L L 5.3.8
Open storage of furniture, appliances or
machinery
P P P
Paint shop P P P P
Plumbing shop P P P P P
Upholstery shop P P P P P
Welding or machine shop P P P P
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.1. Use Table
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-4
P= Permitted by Right L = Permitted by Right Subject to Limitations
[blank cell] = Prohibited C= Conditional Use Permit
Specific Use
AG
UE
SF-1
SF-2
SF-3
SFA-1
SFA-2
SFA-3
TH
2F
MF-1
MF-2
MF-3
O-1
O-2
NS
GR
C
CA
LI
HI
Standards
EDUCATION AND INSTITUTIONAL USES
Art gallery or museum P P P P P P P P
Cemetery, crematorium or mausoleum C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Child care: family home L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L 5.3.9
Child care: group day care home C C C C C C C C C C C C C L L L L L L L L 5.3.9
Child care: day care center C C L L L L L L L 5.3.10
College, university or seminary C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P P P P
Community center C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Correctional facility C C
Emergency Shelter C C C
Fairgrounds or exhibition area C C C C C P P P P P P
Fraternal organization lodge or union hall C C C C P P P P P P P
Halfway house C C C C C C C C C C
Hospital C P P P P P
Military reserve, national guard center P P P
Place of Worship P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Pre-school C C C C C C C C C C C C C P P P P P P L L 5.3.11
School, business P P P P P P P P
School, commercial trade P P P P
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.1. Use Table
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-5
P= Permitted by Right L = Permitted by Right Subject to Limitations
[blank cell] = Prohibited C= Conditional Use Permit
Specific Use
AG
UE
SF-1
SF-2
SF-3
SFA-1
SFA-2
SFA-3
TH
2F
MF-1
MF-2
MF-3
O-1
O-2
NS
GR
C
CA
LI
HI
Standards
School, elementary or secondary (public
or private)
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Social Service Shelter C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Substance Abuse Treatment Facility C C C C C C
Transitional shelter C C C 5.3.12
INDUSTRIAL USES
Animal feedlot C C
Asphalt or concrete batching plant
(permanent)
C P
Asphalt or concrete batching plant
(temporary)
C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P P
Brick kiln or tile plant C
Cement or hydrated lime plant C
Compost operations C C 5.3.13
Distribution Center P P
Laboratory Manufacturing P P P
Laboratory Medical, dental, scientific or
research
C C P C P P P P P
Landfill C C
Light Manufacturing P P
Industrial uses other than listed C
Recycling collection location C L L L L 5.3.14
Recycling operation inside a building C L 5.3.14
Recycling operation outside a building L 5.3.14
Slaughterhouse or meat packing plant C C
Smelter, refinery or chemical plant C
Storage Warehouse P P P
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.1. Use Table
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-6
P= Permitted by Right L = Permitted by Right Subject to Limitations
[blank cell] = Prohibited C= Conditional Use Permit
Specific Use
AG
UE
SF-1
SF-2
SF-3
SFA-1
SFA-2
SFA-3
TH
2F
MF-1
MF-2
MF-3
O-1
O-2
NS
GR
C
CA
LI
HI
Standards
Wholesale Storage and Sales P P P
Wrecking or Salvage Yard C C 5.3.24
NATURAL RESOURCE STORAGE AND
EXTRACTION USES
Caliche pit and caliche storage C C C P
Mining and storage of mining waste C C C
Petroleum or gas well C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C
Petroleum storage and collection facilities C C C P
Sand or gravel extraction or storage C C C P
Top soil, earth, clay or stone extraction or
storage
C C C P
OFFICE USES
Office P P P P P P P P
Warehouse office C P P P P
OVERNIGHT ACCOMMODATIONS
Hotel or motel P P P P P P P
Recreational vehicle park C C C
RECREATIONAL & ENTERTAINMENT USES
Alcoholic beverage sales for on-premise
consumption:
a) beer and wine only less than 75%
revenue from alcohol
C P P P P P 5.3.15
b) all alcoholic beverages 75% or more
revenue from alcohol
C C C C C C 5.3.15
c) all alcoholic beverages >50% & <75%
revenue from alcohol
C C C C C C C 5.3.15
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.1. Use Table
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-7
P= Permitted by Right L = Permitted by Right Subject to Limitations
[blank cell] = Prohibited C= Conditional Use Permit
Specific Use
AG
UE
SF-1
SF-2
SF-3
SFA-1
SFA-2
SFA-3
TH
2F
MF-1
MF-2
MF-3
O-1
O-2
NS
GR
C
CA
LI
HI
Standards
d) all alcoholic beverages 50% or less
revenue from alcohol
C C C C P C C 5.3.15
Amusement, commercial (indoor) P P P P P
Amusement, commercial (outdoor) C P P P P
Country club C P P P P P P
Dance hall C P P P P
Day camp for children P P C C C C C
Drag strip or commercial racing C C C P
Golf course C P P P
Park or playground P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Playfield or stadium P C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P P P P P
Rodeo grounds C P P P
Roller or Ice Rink C P P P P P
Sexually oriented business P
Ordinance
No. 99-2633
Shooting range (outdoor) C C C 5.3.16
Swimming pool, commercial C C P P P P
Theater or playhouse (indoor) P P P P P P P
Theater or playhouse (open or drive-in) P P P
Zoo P C C C P P
RESTAURANT USES
Restaurant (not drive-in) P P P P P P P
Restaurant (drive-in) P P P P P P
RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE USES
Alcohol beverage sales, off-premise
consumption, beer and wine store
C P P P P P
Alcohol beverage sales, off-premise C C C C C 5.3.17
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.1. Use Table
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-8
P= Permitted by Right L = Permitted by Right Subject to Limitations
[blank cell] = Prohibited C= Conditional Use Permit
Specific Use
AG
UE
SF-1
SF-2
SF-3
SFA-1
SFA-2
SFA-3
TH
2F
MF-1
MF-2
MF-3
O-1
O-2
NS
GR
C
CA
LI
HI
Standards
consumption, package store
Antique shop P P P P P P P
Art supply store P P P P P P P
Bakery or confectionary shop (retail) P P P P P P P
Bank or savings and loan P P P P P P P P
Barber shop or beauty shop P P P P P P P
Body Piercing Studio L L L L 5.3.27
Credit Access Business P P P P P P 5.3.26
Cleaning, pressing and pick up shop L L L L L L L 5.3.18
Cleaning plant (commercial) P P
Discount or department store P P P P P
Drug store or pharmacy P P P P P P P
Exercise gym C C C C P C P P P P P
Fabric store P P P P P P
Florist or garden shop P P P P P P P
Food or beverage sales store without fuel
sales
P P P P P P
Furniture and appliance sales and service P P P P P
Greenhouse or nursery (retail) P P P P P P
Handcraft and art objects shop P P P P P P P
Hardware store or hobby shop P P P P P
Key shop P P P P P P P
Kiosk L L L L L L L L 5.3.25
Laundry and cleaning (self-service) P P P P P P P
Medical appliances, fitting, sales or rental P P P P P P P
Mixed media store or newsstand P P P P P P P
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.1. Use Table
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-9
P= Permitted by Right L = Permitted by Right Subject to Limitations
[blank cell] = Prohibited C= Conditional Use Permit
Specific Use
AG
UE
SF-1
SF-2
SF-3
SFA-1
SFA-2
SFA-3
TH
2F
MF-1
MF-2
MF-3
O-1
O-2
NS
GR
C
CA
LI
HI
Standards
Mortuary or funeral home P P P P P P
Office supply store P P P P P P P
Pawn shop P P P P P
Pet shop P P P P P
Retail shop, gift, apparel, accessory and
similar items
P P P P P P P
Retail Sales and Service uses other than
listed
P P P P P P
Studio: decorator, artist, photographer,
music, dance or drama
P P P P P P P P
Tattoo Studio L L L L 5.3.27
Tool rental (indoors) P P P P P
Tool rental (outside equipment storage) P P P
Travel agency P P P P P P P P
Upholstery shop P P P P P
Veterinary office (no animal hospital) P P P P P P P P
Veterinary hospital (no kennels) P P P P P
Veterinary hospital (kennels) C C P P
TRANSPORTATION AND RELATED USES
Airport or landing field C C C P P
Bus station or terminal P P P P
Emergency vehicle service C P P P P P P
Hauling or storage company P P P P
Heliport C C C C C P P
Helistop C C C C C C C P P
Motor freight terminal P P P P
Railroad freight terminal P P P P
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.1. Use Table
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-10
P= Permitted by Right L = Permitted by Right Subject to Limitations
[blank cell] = Prohibited C= Conditional Use Permit
Specific Use
AG
UE
SF-1
SF-2
SF-3
SFA-1
SFA-2
SFA-3
TH
2F
MF-1
MF-2
MF-3
O-1
O-2
NS
GR
C
CA
LI
HI
Standards
Railroad passenger station P P P P
Railroad track right-of-way or team track P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Railroad yard or roundhouse P P P P
Parking lot, trucks, trailers and moving
vans or trucks
P P P P
Parking lot or structure (commercial
autos)
C P C P P P P
UTILITY AND SERVICE USES
Electrical energy generating plant C C C P P
Electrical substation (high voltage bulk
power)
P C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P P P P P
Electrical transmission line (high voltage) P P C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P P P P P
Fire station P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Gas line and regulating station P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Personal wireless facility See Sec. 5.4 Personal Wireless Service Facilities
Radio or television tower or transmitting
station
C C P P P P P P P P
Shop yard of local, state or federal
government
C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P P P P P
Sewage pumping station P P C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P P
Sewage treatment plant C C P
Utility and Service uses other than listed C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P P
Telephone exchange-switching-relay or
transmitting equipment
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Utility shop, storage yard or building P P P P
Utilities other than listed C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P P P
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.1. Use Table
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-11
P= Permitted by Right L = Permitted by Right Subject to Limitations
[blank cell] = Prohibited C= Conditional Use Permit
Specific Use
AG
UE
SF-1
SF-2
SF-3
SFA-1
SFA-2
SFA-3
TH
2F
MF-1
MF-2
MF-3
O-1
O-2
NS
GR
C
CA
LI
HI
Standards
Water stand pipe or elevated storage P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Water reservoir well or pumping station P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Water treatment plant C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P P P P P
VEHICLE SALES AND SERVICE USES
Auto leasing, rental P P P P P
Auto parts sales (outdoors) C P P
Auto storage or auto auction C P P
Auto sales, new or used outdoor lot L L L L L 5.3.19
Auto sales facility, new or used L L L L 5.3.20
Car wash P P P P P
Boat sales and service P P P P
Fuel sales C L L L L L 5.3.21
Motorcycle or scooter sales and service P P P P P
Trailer, recreational vehicle, portable
building or manufactured home sales or
rental
P P P
Truck sales P P P P
Truck stop P P P
Vehicle repair, major L L L L 5.3.22
Vehicle servicing, minor L L L L L 5.3.23
[Ord. 2012-4505]; [Ord. 2012-4516]; [Ord. 2015-4701]; [Ord. 2015-4707]; [Ord. 2016-4768 & 2016-4769]
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.2. Classification of New and Unlisted Uses
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-12
Sec. 5.2. Classification of New and Unlisted Uses
In order to evaluate a proposal for a land use not contained in the use table in Sec. 5.1, a determination of
the appropriate classification of any new or unlisted land use must occur as follows.
5.2.1 The Director of Planning may refer the question concerning any new or unlisted use to the
Planning and Zoning Commission requesting an interpretation of the appropriate zoning
classification for such a use.
5.2.2 The Director of Planning must submit to the Planning and Zoning Commission a statement of
facts listing the nature of the use and whether it involves dwelling activity, sales, processing,
type of product produced, amount and nature of storage, anticipated employment,
transportation requirements, the amount of noise, odor, fumes, dust, toxic material and
vibration likely to be generated and the general requirements for public utilities such as
water and wastewater.
5.2.3 The Planning and Zoning Commission must consider the nature and described performance
of the proposed use; its compatibility with the uses permitted in the various districts, and
amend the use table in accordance with the UDC Text Amendment procedures set forth in
Sec. 3.2.
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.3. Specific Use Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-13
Sec. 5.3. Specific Use Standards
5.3.1 Family or Group Home
A family or group home may be permitted in accordance with the use table in Sec. 5.1
provided that no more than one vehicle per bedroom may be allowed on the premises of a
family or group home for use of the residents of the home.
5.3.2 HUD-Code Manufactured Home Development or Land Lease Community
A HUD-Code manufactured home development or land lease community may be permitted
in accordance with the use table in Sec. 5.1 subject to the following standards.
A. Minimum Area, Density and Setbacks
1. The minimum lot area for a HUD-Code manufactured home development or land
lease community is one acre.
2. For a HUD-Code manufactured home development, only one HUD-Code
manufactured home is allowed per lot or unplatted property.
3. A HUD-Code manufactured home development or land lease community must
observe a minimum front yard setback of 50 feet.
4. A HUD-Code manufactured home development or land lease community must
observe a minimum side yard setback of 20 feet.
5. A HUD-Code manufactured home development or land lease community must
observe a minimum rear yard setback of 10 feet, unless adjacent to property
zoned AG, UE, SF-1, SF-2 or SF-3, in which case a minimum rear yard setback of
20 feet is required.
B. Perimeter Screening
1. HUD-Code Manufactured Home Land Lease Community
For HUD-Code manufactured home land lease communities screening must be
provided at the perimeter of the entire development, excluding drive approaches.
Screening must consist of walls/fences or landscaping in accordance with the
following provisions:
a. Walls and Fences. Fences and walls must be constructed of wood, masonry,
stone or pre-cast concrete with integrated color, texture and pattern.
Structural screening must be a minimum 6 feet in height above the adjacent
grade. Fences or walls used for buffering must not contain openings of more
than 20 square inches in each square foot of wall or fence surface. Gates
must be equal in height and screening characteristics to the fence or wall in
order to create a visual barrier.
b. Landscaping and Berming. Landscaping must include canopy trees and shrubs
or a combination of canopy trees, shrubs and berms. Landscape screening
must consist of a minimum of one canopy tree and six shrubs for every 40
linear feet of boundary, including street frontage. Berms from 24 inches to
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.3. Specific Use Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-14
48 inches in height at no more than a four to one slope may be substituted
for a maximum of 50% of the required perimeter landscaping.
c. Landscaping must be in conformance with Section 7.4.5- General Planting
Criteria.
2. HUD-Code Manufactured Home Development
For a HUD-Code manufactured home development, screening must be provided
on all sides of the HUD-Code manufactured home. Screening must consist of
landscaping or some combination of both fencing and landscaping in accordance
with the following provisions:
a. Landscaping. Landscape screening must consist of a minimum of one canopy
tree and five shrubs for every 30 linear feet along all sides of the
manufactured home.
b. Fencing and Landscaping Combination. The required number of trees may
be reduced by 30% when used in a combination with a decorative fence that
is a minimum of 4 feet in height; constructed of wood, wrought iron or
galvanized ornamental steel; and located behind a continuous landscaped
area.
c. Landscaping must be in conformance with Section 7.4.5- General Planting
Criteria.
C. Dimensions
1. HUD-Code manufactured homes placed in a new or expanded manufactured
home development or land lease community must be “double-wide” units a
minimum of 24 feet in width with no structure more than 15 years of age when
installed.
2. HUD-Code manufactured homes placed on an existing lot or pad in a
manufactured home development or land lease community must be single-wide or
double-wide units with no structure more than 15 years of age when installed.
[Ord. 2015-4707]
D. Transport Equipment
Running gear, tongues, axles and wheels must be removed at the time of installation.
E. Roof
The roof must be predominately double pitched and have a minimum rise of three
inches for every 12 inches of vertical run (3:12 roof pitch). The roof must be covered
with material that is commonly used on site-built single-family dwellings within the City,
including but not limited to wood, asphalt composition shingles, fiberglass or
architectural metal panels and excluding corrugated aluminum, corrugated fiberglass or
corrugated metal. The roof must have a minimum eave projection and roof overhang of
eight inches.
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.3. Specific Use Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-15
F. Siding
Exterior siding must be of a material that is commonly used on site-built single-family
dwellings within the City that does not have a high-gloss finish. It may include wood,
cementitious board, composition, clapboard, conventional vinyl or metal siding, brick,
stucco or similar materials, but exclude smooth, ribbed or corrugated metal or plastic
panels.
G. Foundation
All units not located in land lease communities must be installed on a permanent
foundation in accordance with the Texas Department of Housing and Community
Affairs rules.
H. Skirting
The perimeter of the crawl space must be skirted, with openings only for crawl space
ventilation, access and equipment operation. Skirting must be constructed of brick,
masonry, concrete, stucco or the same material as the siding on the unit. Shrubs must
be placed along a minimum of 50 percent of the skirting around each unit.
I. Storage Building
A storage building must be provided at each site and must be installed on a concrete
foundation prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. The storage building must be
placed in the rear or side yard, constructed of low maintenance materials, and if painted,
must match the color of the unit.
5.3.3 Multiple-Family Dwelling
A multiple-family dwelling may be permitted in accordance with the use table in Sec. 5.1
subject to the following standards.
A. A minimum side yard setback of 15 feet must be provided for multiple-family dwellings
between any building wall containing openings for windows, light and air and any side lot
line except that any such building face or wall not exceeding 35 feet in length may
provide a minimum side yard setback of 10 feet.
B. Where a building wall contains no openings for windows, light or air, a minimum side
yard setback of 10 feet must be provided between such wall and the side lot line.
C. Where a multiple-family dwelling exceeding three stories in height is erected, the side
yard must be increased one foot for each two feet the structure exceeds three stories
but no side yard need exceed 50 feet as a result of this provision.
D. Where multiple-family dwellings exceed three stories in height, a rear yard setback
equal to one foot for each two feet in height is required, except that such rear yard
setback need not exceed 50 feet as a result of this provision, and except further that in
the MF-2 district, a rear yard setback exceeding 10 feet is not required where the rear
wall of a multiple-family residential structure contains no openings or windows for light
or air.
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.3. Specific Use Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-16
E. In the following zoning districts, the maximum building coverage for multiple-family
dwellings must conform to the following schedule. Open off-street parking or loading
areas may not be computed as area subject to building coverage standards.
District
Max. Building Coverage,
Principal Building (%)
Max. Building Coverage, Main
& Accessory Buildings (%)
MF-1 40 50
MF-2 40 50
MF-3 50 60
MU 65 75
O-2 50 60
CA 100 100
5.3.4 Patio Home
A patio home may be permitted in accordance with the use table in Sec. 5.1 provided that the
patio home observes a minimum rear yard setback of 10 feet.
5.3.5 Single-Family Attached Dwelling
A single-family attached dwelling may be permitted in accordance with the use table in Sec.
5.1 provided that a single-family attached dwelling observes a minimum rear yard setback of
five feet, with required parking spaces, whether covered or uncovered, to be contained
outside of the rear setback line.
5.3.6 Townhouse
A townhouse may be permitted in accordance with the use table in Sec. 5.1 subject to the
following standards.
A. A complex of townhouses may not exceed 300 feet in length.
B. A minimum side yard setback of five feet must be provided at the end of each complex
of townhouses so that the end of any two adjacent complexes are a minimum 10 feet
apart.
5.3.7 Zero Lot Line Dwelling
A zero lot line dwelling may be permitted in accordance with the use table in Sec. 5.1
provided that in the SFA-2 and MU zoning districts, the first house built on each block in the
subdivision determines the side on which the zero lot line may be utilized. The minimum side
yard setback on the street corner for a zero lot line dwelling in SFA-2 and MU is five feet.
5.3.8 Mini-Storage Warehouse
A mini-storage warehouse may be permitted in accordance with the use table in Sec. 5.1
provided that the size of each individual storage unit of a mini-storage warehouse is limited to
a maximum of 2,000 cubic feet.
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.3. Specific Use Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-17
5.3.9 Child Care Facility: Family Home or Group Day Care Home
A family home or group day care home child care facility may be permitted in accordance
with the use table in Sec. 5.1 subject to the following standards.
A. The residence or structure containing the family home or group day care child care
facility must contain a minimum of 150 square feet of gross floor area for each child.
This use excludes a foster home and group home.
B. For a family home childcare facility, a safe off-street loading and unloading location must
be provided. Off-street parking in addition to normally required parking for the
residence is not required.
C. For a group day care home child care facility, a paved off-street location, such as a circle
drive or another suitable location, must be provided for safe loading and unloading.
Maneuvering room must be provided on the property for parking and loading so as to
preclude the necessity of backing out into public streets.
D. The home occupation standards in Sec. 5.5.4 apply to a family home child care facility
and a group day care home that takes place in a residence.
E. In the LI and HI zoning districts, a group day care home child care facility may be
allowed only when provided in conjunction with service to employees of the principal
use.
5.3.10 Child Care Facility: Day Care Center
A day care center child care facility may be permitted in accordance with the use table in Sec.
5.1 subject to the following standards.
A. Location
Each facility must be located in an area that is free from conditions dangerous to the
physical and moral well-being of the children.
B. Construction Codes
The building is subject to all other applicable laws, ordinances and regulations of the City
including, but not limited to, building, electrical, fire and health requirements and is
subject to Chief Building Official enforcement.
C. Play Area
The play area must be separated and fenced from the vehicle circulation and parking
areas.
D. TDHS Standards
The fenced outdoor play area, the indoor play area and all other pertinent standards as
required must conform to Texas Department of Human Services standards, and the
applicant must document this conformity to the Chief Building Official.
E. Accessory Use
In the LI and HI zoning districts, a day care center child care facility may be permitted
only when provided in conjunction with service to employees of the principal use.
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.3. Specific Use Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-18
5.3.11 Pre-School
A pre-school may be permitted in accordance with the use table in Sec. 5.1 provided that
such use is permitted only when provided in conjunction with service to employees of the
principal use.
5.3.12 Transitional, Emergency, or Social Service Shelter
A. A transitional, emergency, or social service shelter may be permitted in accordance with
the use table in Sec. 5.1 subject to the following considerations.
1. The transitional, emergency, or social service shelter must be a minimum of 1,000
feet from the following uses:
a. Alcoholic beverage sales (on-premise or off-premise consumption);
b. All residential uses or zoning districts as specified in the zoning district table
in Sec. 4.1.1 and in the use table in Section 5.1.3;
c. Child care uses;
d. Elementary or secondary schools (public or private); and
e. Other transitional, emergency, or social service shelters.
The distance required above must be measured in a straight, direct line from the
property line of a use listed above to the property line of the transitional, emergency, or
social service shelter, and in a direct line across intersections.
B. A transitional, emergency, or social service shelter may be permitted in accordance with
the use table in Sec. 5.1 subject to the following standards.
1. Space must be provided inside the transitional, emergency, or social service
shelter so that prospective and current residents are not required to wait on
sidewalks or any other public right-of-way.
2. The transitional, emergency, or social service shelter must be equipped with a
functioning central heating, ventilation and air conditioning system.
3. The occupancy load and construction of the building must meet the most recent
version of the International Fire Code and Building Code adopted by the City,
including all Fire Safety requirements.
4. A minimum of one shelter staff member must be present per 25 clients onpremise
of the transitional or emergency shelter. A minimum of one shelter staff
member must be present at the shelter at all times.
5. Emergency shelters are facilities designed and operated in a manner that clients
are provided temporary housing for stays of up to thirty (30) consecutive days.
6. Transitional shelters are facilities designed and operated in a manner that clients
are provided temporary housing for periods up to one year.
7. Occasional, unplanned short term stays that exceed the thirty day or one year
normal stay by clients of emergency and transitional shelters shall not constitute a
violation of this ordinance.
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.3. Specific Use Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-19
[Ord. 2012-4505]
5.3.13 Compost Operation
A compost operation may be permitted in accordance with the use table in Sec. 5.1 subject to
the following standards.
A. Compost operations classified as Exempt, Notification or Registration facilities under
Title 30, Part I, Chapter 332, Composting, of the Texas Administrative Code are subject
to the requirements in Chapter 332 for Registration facilities.
B. The owner of a compost operation classified in Chapter 332 as Permit facilities must
present and maintain a current Texas Commission on Environment Quality (TCEQ)
permit.
C. Chapter 332, excluding Subchapter D—Operations Requiring a Permit and
Subchapter F—Household Hazardous Waste Collection, and the TCEQ current Quality
Assurance Program Plan are adopted by reference.
D. For purposes of the City’s administration of registration requirements, the following
definitions are substituted for terms defined in Title 30 Texas Administrative Code
§ 332.2, except where provisions refer to the Commission’s administration of Air
Quality, Water Quality, Solid Waste, and Consolidated authorizations, permits and
requirements:
1. Commission means the City of Temple.
2. Executive Director and Chief Clerk means the Director of Public Works.
3. Permit, when referring to City’s administration of Registration requirements,
means Conditional Use Permit.
5.3.14 Recycling Collection Location or Operation
A recycling operation inside a building, recycling operation outside a building and recycling
collection location may be permitted in accordance with the use table in Sec. 5.1 subject to
the following standards.
A. The buying and receiving area must be set back a minimum of 50 feet from the public
street right-of-way.
B. A minimum separation of 75 feet is required between any processing operation and the
property line of any adjacent property zoned for residential purposes.
C. The internal circulation area within a tract used for a recycling collection location must
consist of a non-permeable surface of either asphalt or concrete.
5.3.15 Alcoholic Beverage Sales for On-Premise Consumption
An establishment with alcoholic beverage sales for on-premise consumption may be
permitted in accordance with the use table in Sec. 5.1 subject to the following standards.
A. The following standards apply to all establishments with on-premise consumption of
alcoholic beverages.
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.3. Specific Use Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-20
1. The permittee must design and operate the establishment in such a manner that
the use of the premises does not substantially increase traffic congestion or create
overcrowding in the establishment or the immediately surrounding area.
2. The permittee must comply with applicable licensing and permit provisions of the
Alcoholic Beverage Code within six months from the date of the issuance of the
Conditional Use Permit, such limitation in time being subject to City review and
possible extension. Nothing in this Section herein permits the sale of alcoholic
beverages prior to the issuance of an applicable permit or license issued by the
Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission.
3. The permittee bears the burden of showing that the establishment does not
exceed the limitation on gross receipts from sales of alcoholic beverages applicable
to its Conditional Use Permit. The permittee must maintain accounting records of
the sources of its gross revenue and allow the City to inspect such records during
reasonable business hours.
4. The permittee must demonstrate that the granting of the permit would not be
detrimental to the public welfare of the citizens of the City.
5. The permittee must, at all times, provide an adequate number of employees for
security purposes to adequately control the establishment to prevent incidents of
drunkenness, disorderly conduct and raucous behavior. The permittee must
consult with the Chief of Police, who acts in an advisory capacity, to determine the
number of qualified employees necessary to meet such obligations.
6. The establishment must provide adequate parking spaces in accordance with the
standards in Sec. 7.5.
7. The permittee must operate the establishment in such a manner as to prevent
excessive noise, dirt, litter and odors in the establishment or in the surrounding
area and operate the establishment in such a manner as to minimize disturbance to
surrounding property owners.
8. The City Council may deny or revoke a Conditional Use Permit in accordance
with Sec. 3.5 if it affirmatively determines that the issuance of the permit is:
a. Incompatible with the surrounding uses of property; or
b. Detrimental or offensive to the neighborhood or contrary to the health,
safety and general welfare of the City and its inhabitants.
9. A Conditional Use Permit runs with the property and a change in the owner or
lessee of a permitted establishment does not affect the Conditional Use Permit.
10. All Conditional Use Permits must be further conditioned that the permit may be
canceled, suspended or revoked in accordance with the revocation clause set forth
in paragraph 8 above.
11. The use must comply with City of Temple Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4,
“Alcoholic Beverages.”
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.3. Specific Use Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-21
B. In addition to the standards in subsection A above, the following standards apply to all
establishments where the gross revenue from the sale of alcoholic beverages for onpremise
consumption is 75% or more of the total gross revenue of the establishment.
1. The establishment must not be within 300 feet of a public park or any residentially
zoned or developed lot.
2. The distance between the establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold and a
protected use listed in (B)(1) must be measured in a straight, direct line from the
property line of the establishment to the nearest property line of a property
where a protected use is located.
3. An establishment in a multi-storied building on other than the ground floor must
be treated as though it were on the ground floor for purpose of the measurement
between property lines.
[Ord. 2017-4830 Chapter 4 & Ord. 2017-4829]
5.3.16 Outdoor Shooting Range
An outdoor shooting range may be permitted in accordance with the use table in Sec. 5.1
subject to the following standards.
A. Only handguns (pistols and revolvers) are permitted to be used at the outdoor shooting
range. No shotguns, rifles or automatic weapons are permitted at the range.
B. No armor piercing or incendiary ammunition is allowed.
C. Ammunition larger than 0.460 caliber is not allowed.
D. No minimum lot area is required. The range, range site and uninhabited downrange
safety area must be under uniform control and ownership, so as to maintain its
permanency.
E. The range area includes the firing line; target line, backstops, side berms and walls; and
baffles and other safety barriers. No portion of a range area may be nearer than 100 feet
to any public street right-of-way or adjacent property line.
F. The firing of handguns is prohibited during the hours between seven p.m. and seven
a.m.
G. The range may be used only under the supervision of trained personnel.
H. Appropriate certifications must be obtained from the Texas Department of Public
Safety.
I. Adequate accident and liability insurance must cover operators in an amount of not less
than $1,000,000 per single occurrence and $2,000,000 aggregate per year (combined
single limit for personal injury, death or property damage).
J. Conditional use permit may be revoked at any time in accordance with Sec. 3.5.
K. The range must conform in all respects to TCEQ standards and regulations.
L. The range must be handicap accessible and provide required handicapped parking and
restrooms.
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.3. Specific Use Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-22
M. The range operator is responsible for proper disposition of spent casings and projectiles.
N. The range operator is responsible for ensuring no alcoholic beverages are present on
the entire range site.
O. Violation of any federal, state or local law is grounds for revoking the Conditional Use
Permit.
P. No portion of range may be located in a floodway.
Q. Projectiles must be contained within the berm or enclosure within the range site.
R. If berms or baffles consist of tires, tires must be covered with earthen material.
S. A fence designed in accordance with the standards in Sec. 7.7 must surround the range
site and downrange safety area. Such fence must be of suitable height and material to
exclude persons or livestock from unauthorized entry. Warning signs must be provided
along the perimeter of the fence. These signs must be placed at the applicant’s expense
and must specify a firing range is present and operational during daylight hours.
5.3.17 Alcoholic Beverage Sales for Off-Premise Consumption, Package Store
A package store may be permitted in accordance with the use table in Sec. 5.1 subject to the
following standards.
A. Such use must comply with Chapter 4, “Alcoholic Beverages,” of the City Code.
B. Outdoor lighting must comply with the standards in subsection 6.7.7J.
C. If applicable, a pick-up window must be visible from the public right-of-way, and may
not be placed in alleys.
D. The drive-through lane must provide a minimum of 60 feet of stacking space as
measured from the pick-up window.
E. An escape (bypass) lane must be provided parallel to the drive-through lane, if
applicable, from the beginning of the drive-through lane.
F. Parking (in any zoning district including in CA) must be provided on-site, not less than
one space for each 250 square feet of retail space (plus the number of parking spaces
required for non-retail space as specified in Sec. 7.5).
G. Window signs are prohibited.
H. Lighted signs must be turned off at closing time. This requirement does not apply to
multi-tenant signs that meet the requirements of Sec. 7.6.3 of this UDC.
[Ord. No. 2015-4707]
5.3.18 Cleaning, Pressing and Pick Up Shop
A cleaning, pressing and pick up shop may be permitted in accordance with the use table in
Sec. 5.1 provided that the shop must not exceed 2,500 square feet of gross floor area
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.3. Specific Use Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-23
5.3.19 Auto Sales, New or Used (Outdoor Lot)
New or used auto sales on an outdoor lot may be permitted in accordance with the use table
in Sec. 5.1 provided that a sales office must be limited to an area less than 10 percent of the
total sales lot.
5.3.20 Auto Sales Facility, New or Used
A new or used auto sales facility may be permitted in accordance with the use table in Sec. 5.1
provided that repairs or renovations may not exceed 90 days.
5.3.21 Fuel Sales
A fuel sales establishment may be permitted in accordance with the use table in Sec. 5.1
provided that pump islands must be set back a minimum of 12 feet from the front property
line. The outer edge of the canopy must be set back a minimum of 10 feet from the front
property line. On corner lots, both street exposures must be treated as front yards.
5.3.22 Major Vehicle Repair
A major vehicle repair facility may be permitted in accordance with the use table in Sec. 5.1
subject to the following standards.
A. Vehicle repair must be conducted within a building.
[Ord. 2012-4545]
B. All buildings must be set back a minimum of 20 feet from:
1. Residentially zoned or developed property; and
2. Public property such as a school or park.
C. Vehicle parts, wrecked vehicles, commodities, materials and equipment may be stored
behind a building in the rear area if screened from public view from any street,
residentially developed or zoned property, or adjacent or opposite public property such
as a school or park. Such storage may not occupy more than 10 percent of the lot or
tract. A solid wooden or masonry fence, a minimum of one foot higher than the stored
items, must screen such storage area.
D. There is no size limit for vehicles being repaired.
5.3.23 Minor Vehicle Servicing
A minor vehicle servicing establishment may be permitted in accordance with the use table in
Sec. 5.1 subject to the following standards.
A. Vehicle servicing must be conducted completely within an enclosed building.
B. Vehicles being serviced may not exceed one and one-half tons.
C. All buildings must be set back a minimum of 25 feet from:
1. The public street right-of-way;
2. Residentially zoned or developed property; and
3. Public property such as a school or park.
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.3. Specific Use Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-24
D. No outside storage or display of any kind is permitted.
E. No parking of damaged motor vehicles is permitted, except on a temporary basis not to
exceed 72 hours.
5.3.24 Wrecking or Salvage Yard
A wrecking or salvage yard may be permitted in accordance with the use table in Sec. 5.1
provided that the buying and receiving area is set back a minimum of 50 feet from the public
street right-of-way.
5.3.25 Kiosk
A kiosk is permitted in accordance with the use table in Sec. 5.1 subject to the following
standards:
A. All of the Dimensional and General Development Standards in Article 4 and Article 7 of
this UDC apply to a kiosk as if it were the principal use of the property.
B. Drive-through kiosks must provide 3, 8-ft by 22-ft. queuing spaces per kiosk service
window.
C. Wall signs on the wall of a kiosk itself are the only sign type allowed for advertising the
services of the kiosk. Wall signs on a kiosk are limited to a maximum of 25 percent of
the surface area of each wall. Wall signs are permitted only on the sides of a kiosk that
are visible from the public right-of-way.
D. Pedestrian access to the kiosk use must be included from all pedestrian facilities,
including but not limited to sidewalks.
Parking that serves as required parking for another use must not be used for either
p1lacement of the kiosk or for parking or vehicle maneuvering required by the kiosk unless
additional parking exists for the adjacent use and a shared parking agreement is agreed upon
by both property owners and submitted with the building permit application.
[Ord. 2012-4516]
5.3.26 Credit Access Business (see Sec. 11.2 for Definition)
A credit access business (commonly referred to as a “payday lender”) may be permitted in
accordance with the use table in Sec. 5.1 subject to the following standards:
A. A credit access business may not be located closer than:
1. Within 1000 feet of another credit access business; or
2. Within 200 feet of a residentially-zoned property (located within the UE, SF-1, SF-
2, SF-3, SFA-1, SFA-2, SFA-3, TH, 2F, MF-1, MF-2 or MF-3 zoning districts.
B. For purposes of this section, measurements are made in a straight line, without regard
to intervening structures or objects, from property line to property line.
C. A credit access business may not be located on property abutting a Major Arterial or an
Expressway, ad identified on the Thoroughfare Plan.
[Ord. 2015-4740]
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.3. Specific Use Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-25
5.3.27 Body Piercing Studio and Tattoo Studio
A Body Piercing Studio or Tattoo Studio is permitted in accordance with the use table in Sec.
5.1 subject to the following standards:
A. A Body Piercing Studio or Tattoo Studio may not be located within 1000 feet of another
Body Piercing Studio or Tattoo Studio.
B. A Body Piercing Studio or Tattoo Studio may not be located within 1000 feet of a
School, Public or Private, as that term is defined in this Code.
C. A Body Piercing Studio or Tattoo Studio may not be located within 1000 feet of a
church.
D. In the General Retail zoning district, a Body Piercing Studio or Tattoo Studio may not be
located within 200 feet of the following zoning districts: Urban Estates, Single-Family
Dwelling 1, 2, and 3, Single-Family Attached 1, 2, and 3, Two-Family Dwelling, and
Townhouse.
E. For purposes of this section, measurements are made in a straight line, without regard
to intervening structures or objects, from property line to property line.
F. A Body Piercing Studio or Tattoo Studio may not be located on property within the
Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay or any designated Strategic Investment Zone ("SIZ")
Grant Corridor.
G. A Body Piercing Studio or Tattoo Studio must be equipped with a handwashing sink that
is separate from restroom sinks.
[Ord. 2016-4768 & 2016-4769]
5.3.28 Two Family Dwelling with Single-Family Lot Width
A. Purpose. The intent of the following standards is to encourage residential infill
development on vacant lots while also ensuring that new Two-Family Dwellings are
compatible with surrounding single-family homes. These standards do not apply to 60-
foot or wider lots in a 2F district.
B. Applicability. The provisions in this Section apply to:
1. A Two-Family Dwelling in a Two-Family District when the dwelling is built on a lot
that is zoned 2F and platted before May 4, 2017, if the development meets the
standards established in this Section for compatibility with Single-Family Dwellings.
2. Vacant lots prior to May 4, 2017.
C. Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width is 50 feet.
D. Minimum front yard setback.
1. Dwellings with front parking areas.
i. The minimum front yard setback is the greater of 18 feet or 5 feet less
than the average of the estimated setbacks observed by dwelling on
each side of the Two-Family Dwelling.
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.3. Specific Use Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-26
2. Dwellings with side or rear parking areas.
i. The minimum front yard setback is the average of the estimated
setbacks observed by dwelling on each side of the Two-Family
Dwelling.
E. Maximum front yard setback. The maximum front yard setback is the greater of 18 feet
or 5 feet greater than the average of the estimated setbacks observed by dwellings on
each side of the Two-Family Dwelling.
F. Revisit standards within a year. The Planning Department is responsible for returning to
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council within a year of adoption of these
code amendments to evaluate their effectiveness and determine whether Sections H
through M below should be modified.
Example: If homes on either side of a proposed duplex have average front yard setbacks of 17 feet, a duplex with
parking in the front can have a front yard setback of 18 to 22 feet or a front yard setback of 17 to 22 feet with
parking along the side or rear.
G. Driveways. Driveways shall meet the standards in one of the categories listed as follows:
1. Concrete ribbon driveways
i. Maximum of two driveways, one for each dwelling unit
ii. 2-foot-wide, parallel, concrete strips
iii. 3-foot-wide strip of grass, groundcover, rock, brick, gravel or pavers
between strips
iv. No closer than 3 feet to a wall, fence or other structure
v. Concrete approach at least 14 feet in width
vi. Can be used for parking
2. Solid concrete or asphalt driveways
i. Maximum of two driveways, one for each dwelling unit
ii. Solid concrete or asphalt no wider than 10 feet
iii. Concrete approach that is at least 14 feet in width
iv. Can be used for parking
H. Two-family dwellings located between two single-family dwellings and if a majority of
the dwellings on the block (both sides) utilize parking on the rear or side must utilize
parking along the side or rear yards.
I. Dwellings with front parking areas. Parking is permitted only on driveways and on
optional concrete parking pads, if provided, limited to two 9 by 18-foot parking spaces
per dwelling unit. Development of a Two-Family Dwelling utilizing the front parking
option must include 4 of the 8 landscaping and architectural options listed below, one of
which may be waived in writing by the planning director on grounds that unique
conditions on the lot prevent compliance.
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.3. Specific Use Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-27
1. Architectural offsets in front wall
i. Two offset, attached and covered porches, or
ii. One attached and covered porch that is equal to or longer than 50
percent of the width of the front wall of the dwelling, or
iii. An offset at least 4 feet deep in front wall of dwelling
2. Building materials for front façade
i. Stone or brick masonry, or
ii. Cementitious siding—if more than half of the residential structures on
the street block (both sides of the street) have a form of siding as the
primary exterior material
3. Front-facing roof gable
i. Single gable, or
ii. Two gables with different sizes, or
iii. Two gables of the same size, if one is oriented to accentuate a front
porch
4. Trees planted in front yard
i. Minimum of 2 trees
ii. Medium or large canopy species from Approved Tree List in Sec.
7.4.5.B
iii. Minimum 2-inch diameter at breast height (DBH), which is 4’ 5”
iv. Preservation of tree(s) in the front yard listed in Sec. 7.4.5.B meets the
tree planting requirement
5. Landscape beds in front yard
i. One landscape bed along the entire front of each dwelling unit façade
or porches, with the exception of sidewalks
ii. Minimum of 3 feet in depth
iii. Covered with mulch or 2-inch (minimum) river rock and planted with
one or more types of plantings from the Approved Shrub List in Sec.
7.4.5.C or Approved Groundcover List in Sec. 7.4.5.D
6. Contiguous lawn grass front yard
i. Covering front yard from parking pad to front wall, porches and
landscape bed
ii. Minimum of 100 square feet
iii. With species from Approved Lawn Grass List in Sec. 7.4.5.E
7. Lawn grass in front and side yards
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.3. Specific Use Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-28
i. With species from Approved Lawn Grass List in Sec. 7.4.5.E
8. Landscaping between parking pads
i. With minimum width of 2 feet
ii. Planted with one or more types of plantings from the Approved Shrub
List in Sec. 7.4.5.C, Approved Groundcover List in Sec. 7.4.5.D, or
Approved Lawn Grass List in Sec. 7.4.5.E
J. Dwellings with side or rear parking areas. Development of a Two-Family Dwelling with
side or rear parking spaces must include 3 of the 7 landscaping and architectural options
listed below:.
1. Architectural offsets in front wall
i. Two offset, attached and covered porches that are offset, or
ii. One attached and covered porch that is equal to or longer than 50
percent of the width of the front wall of the dwelling, or
iii. An offset at least 4 feet deep in front wall of dwelling
2. Building materials for front façade
i. Stone or brick masonry, or
ii. Cementitious siding—if more than half of the residential structures on
the street block (both sides of the street) have a form of siding as the
primary exterior material
3. Front-facing roof gable
i. Single gable, or
ii. Two gables with different sizes, or
iii. Two gables of the same size, if one is oriented to accentuate a front
porch
4. Trees planted in front yard
i. Minimum of 2 trees
ii. Medium or large canopy species from Approved Tree List in Sec.
7.4.5.B.
iii. Minimum 2-inch diameter at breast height (DBH), which is 4’ 5”
iv. Preservation of tree(s) in the front yard listed in Sec. 7.4.5.B meets the
tree planting requirement
5. Landscape beds in front yard
i. One landscape bed along the entire front of each dwelling unit façade
or porches, with the exception of sidewalks
ii. Minimum of 3 feet in depth
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.3. Specific Use Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-29
iii. Covered with mulch or 2-inch river rock (minimum) and planted with
one or more types of plantings from the Approved Shrub List in Sec.
7.4.5.C or Approved Groundcover List in Sec. 7.4.5.D
6. Contiguous lawn grass front yard
i. Covering front yard from parking pad to front wall, porches and
landscape bed
ii. Minimum of 100 square feet
iii. May be bisected by a private sidewalk connecting the front doors to
the public street
iv. With species from Approved Lawn Grass List in Sec. 7.4.5.E
7. Lawn grass in front and side yards
i. With species from Approved Lawn Grass List in Sec. 7.4.5.E
K. Public sidewalks. Public sidewalks in adjoining right-of-way must be preserved or
replaced.
L. Private sidewalks. If side or rear parking spaces are utilized, and the majority of
properties on the block have a sidewalk connecting the front doors to the public street,
the builder must construct a single shared sidewalk for access from front doors to the
public street.
[Ord. 2017-4839]
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.4. Personal Wireless Service Facilities
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-30
Sec. 5.4. Personal Wireless Service Facilities
5.4.1 Purpose
These regulations for personal wireless service facilities are adopted for the general purposes
of this UDC and for the following specific purposes:
A. To enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such
services to the community safely, effectively and efficiently;
B. To encourage the users of support structures and antennas to collocate where possible,
and to locate all facilities, to the extent possible, in areas where adverse impact on the
community is minimal;
C. To identify standards in order to ensure equitable treatment of providers of functionally
equivalent telecommunications services; and
D. To minimize the visual impact of towers through design, screening and landscaping.
5.4.2 Prohibited Districts
Personal wireless service facilities are prohibited in the following zoning districts:
A. UE, Urban Estate;
B. SF-1 through SF-3, Single-Family Dwelling;
C. SFA through SFA-3, Single-Family Attached;
D. MH, Manufactured Home;
E. TH, Townhouse;
F. 2F, Two-Family Dwelling; and
G. MF-1 though MF-3, Multiple-Family Dwelling.
5.4.3 I-35 Interstate Corridor Overlay District Standards
A. Except as provided in this section, Freestanding Personal Wireless Service Facilities are
prohibited in the 135, Interstate Corridor Overlay.
B. Freestanding Stealth Personal Wireless Service Facilities may be considered in all I 35
Interstate Corridor Overlay Sub-Districts by the Director of Planning. The Director of
Planning will determine whether or not a proposed freestanding stealth facility is
sufficiently camouflaged based on the type, size, scale and appropriateness of the
structure that the stealth facility will resemble in relation to the architectural and land
use context in which the stealth facility is located.
C. In addition to Freestanding Stealth Personal Wireless Service Facilities, freestanding
monopoles are permitted in the Industrial Sub-District.
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.4. Personal Wireless Service Facilities
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-31
5.4.4 Chief Building Official Review and Final Action
The Chief Building Official may approve, approve with conditions or deny applications
proposing personal wireless service facilities that comply with the applicable design standards
in Sec. 5.4.6 below and with the following conditions:
Location Conditions
Freestanding Tower
HI or LI zoning districts
Tower height must not exceed 120 feet
Tower must not encroach into any restricted
airspace or zones
Tower must be located no closer than 1,000
feet to the boundary of any residential use or
district
Stealth Facilities
Atop the roof of any nonresidential building
not in the H, North Central Temple Historic
Overlay zoning district in any base zoning
district
Facilities must not increase overall height of
structure more than 15 feet
Facilities must not encroach into any
restricted airspace or zones
On the vertical exterior of any nonresidential
building not in the H, North Central Temple
Historic Overlay zoning district in any base
zoning district
Facilities may project a maximum of 24 inches
from the surface of the building to which it is
attached
Facilities must not increase overall height of
structure more than 15 feet and must be a
minimum of 15 feet above grade
Facilities must be textured and colored so as
to blend with the surrounding surface of the
building
5.4.5 Conditional Use Permit
A. A Conditional Use Permit reviewed in accordance with Sec. 3.5 is required for personal
wireless service facilities proposed to be located:
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.4. Personal Wireless Service Facilities
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-32
1. In the H, North Central Temple Historic Overlay zoning district; or
2. In a manner that is not eligible for administrative approval as set forth in Sec. 5.4.3
above.
B. Every application must be evaluated for compatibility of height with surrounding areas
and provision for collocation.
C. A personal wireless service facility must meet the design standards in Sec. 5.4.6 below.
D. The radius for mailed notice of a Zoning Map Amendment as described in Sec. 3.3.3
must be increased to 500 feet for an application for a Conditional Use Permit for
personal wireless service facilities. The procedure for notice to surrounding property
owners also applies to applications for administrative approval.
5.4.6 Design Standards
A. Boundary and Use Setbacks
1. A guy or guy anchor for a facility must not be closer than 20 feet to a bounding
property line.
2. The distance between the base of a self-supported tower and the property line of
any residential zoning district or use must not be less than 3 times the height of the
tower structure.
B. Security Screening Fence
1. A solid, wood or masonry fence, a minimum of eight feet in height, must
completely enclose the base of every tower.
2. In a residential zoning district or on property that abuts a residential zoning district
or use, a solid wood or masonry fence, a minimum of eight feet in height, must
complete enclose all mechanical equipment and accessory structures.
3. A security screening fence for a facility built or permitted after May 17th, 2001,
may not be less than 6 feet in height.
4. A security fence must be built to safely discourage unauthorized access to facilities
by climbing.
5. External and internal gates and doors that provide access to a facility must be
equipped with a self-locking or self-latching mechanism for purposes of preventing
unauthorized access.
6. Screening is not required for a facility located on a building that is not designed or
built primarily to support the facility, if the ancillary equipment, including but not
limited to the equipment enclosure, is not visible from an abutting property line or
public street right-of-way.
C. Screening
1. As much of the total facility as possible must be screened or located so as to not
be visible from prevalent views.
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.4. Personal Wireless Service Facilities
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-33
2. Landscaping must be continuously maintained in a healthy, growing condition and
be trimmed as necessary to comply with ordinances governing height of grass,
corner sight obstruction and street and sidewalk obstruction.
D. Collocation
A new freestanding tower is not permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the approving authority that existing, permitted or proposed alternative
support structures cannot accommodate the proposed facilities for the following
reasons:
1. Height is not sufficient to meet applicant’s engineering requirements;
2. Structural strength is not sufficient to support applicant’s proposed facilities and
cannot be reinforced in accordance with engineering requirements;
3. Other aspects of structure do not meet applicant’s technical design requirements;
4. Electromagnetic interference would result from collocation;
5. Fees or costs for sharing or adapting are unreasonable; any cost that is less than
the cost to construct and develop a new tower is presumed to be reasonable;
6. Owners of alternative structures are unwilling to accommodate the applicant’s
needs within 30 days after the date such owners received applicant's written
request; or
7. Other factors render alternative support structures unsuitable.
5.4.7 Abandonment of Tower
A. At such time as the facility is no longer utilized for service, the tower owner or operator
must submit written notification to the Chief Building Official within 30 days of non-use.
B. In the event the use of any facility has been discontinued for a period of 180 consecutive
days, the tower is deemed abandoned. The Chief Building Official is responsible for
making a determination of the date of abandonment. The Chief Building Official reserves
the right to request documentation or affidavits from the owner or operator regarding
the issue of tower usage.
C. Upon such abandonment, the owner or operator of the tower has 90 days to complete
either of the following:
1. Request to reactivate the use of the tower or transfer the tower to another owner
or operator with the use of the tower being identical to that approved for the
original applicant; or
2. Dismantle and remove the tower and associated facilities.
D. If a facility remains abandoned after the 90-day period, the City may require the removal
of the facility. All aspects of the facility, including but not limited to paving material,
support structures, wires, fencing and platforms must be removed from the site.
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.4. Personal Wireless Service Facilities
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-34
5.4.8 Removal After Revocation of Permit
The property owner must remove all components of personal wireless service facilities,
including but not limited to paving material, support structures, wires, fencing and platforms,
no later than the 90 days after the date that the Conditional Use Permit is revoked.
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.5. Accessory Uses and Structures
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-35
Sec. 5.5. Accessory Uses and Structures
5.5.1 Use Table for Accessory Uses
A. Residential Accessory Uses
B. Nonresidential Accessory Uses
P= Permitted by Right L = Permitted by Right Subject to Limitations
[blank cell] = Prohibited C= Conditional Use Permit
Specific Use
A
UE
SF-1
SF-2
SF-3
SFA-1
SFA-2
SFA-3
TH
2F
MF-1
MF-2
MF-3
O-1
O-2
NS
GR
C
CA
LI
HI
Standards
Accessory building
(nonresidential)
P P P P P P P P P P
Maintenance and
repair service for
building
P P P P
Off-street parking as
an expansion of a
nonresidential use
C C C C C C C C C C C C C C L L L L L L L Sec. 7.5
Temporary field or
construction office
See Section 5.6 Temporary Uses
[Ord. 2015-4701]
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.5. Accessory Uses and Structures
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-36
[This page intentionally left blank]
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.5. Accessory Uses and Structures
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-37
C. Residential Accessory Uses
P= Permitted by Right L = Permitted by Right Subject to Limitations
[blank cell] = Prohibited C= Conditional Use Permit
Specific Use
A
UE
SF-1
SF-2
SF-3
SFA-1
SFA-2
SFA-3
TH
2F
MF-1
MF-2
MF-3
O-1
O-2
NS
GR
C
CA
LI
HI
Standards
Accessory building
(residential)
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Accessory building
(agricultural)
P P P P P
Accessory dwelling
unit
L L L L L L L L 5.5.3
Backyard compost
operation
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Home occupation L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L 5.5.4
Stable, residential or
noncommercial
L C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C L C L L 5.5.5
Swimming pool,
private
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P City Code
Ch 34
[Ord. 2012-4516]
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.5. Accessory Uses and Structures
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-38
D. Nonresidential Accessory Uses
P= Permitted by Right L = Permitted by Right Subject to Limitations
[blank cell] = Prohibited C= Conditional Use Permit
Specific Use
A
UE
SF-1
SF-2
SF-3
SFA-1
SFA-2
SFA-3
TH
2F
MF-1
MF-2
MF-3
O-1
O-2
NS
GR
C
CA
LI
HI
Standards
Accessory building
(nonresidential)
P P P P P P P P P P
Maintenance
and repair service
for building
P P P P
Off-street parking as
an expansion of a
nonresidential use
C C C C C C C C C C C C C C L L L L L L L Sec. 7.5
Temporary field or
construction office
Subject to temporary permit issued by Chief Building Official
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.5. Accessory Uses and Structures
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-39
5.5.2 Minimum Setback Requirements
A. The following minimum setback requirements apply to accessory structures.
Residential Districts Nonresidential Districts
Minimum Yard
Detached Accessory
Structure
Attached Accessory
Structure
Attached or Detached
Accessory Structure
Front Must be located in the
rear half of the property
Same as for the principal building Side 3 ft. as set forth in Sec. 4.5
Side (corner) 10 ft.
Rear 3 ft.
B. Notwithstanding the standards in the table in subsection A above, the following
standards apply to residential accessory structures.
1. Where a one-hour fire wall is provided, a side yard setback on one side of a lot
only and a rear yard setback is not required for an accessory building.
2. Detached accessory buildings must be separated from the principle building by a
minimum distance of 10 feet
3. Where a garage or carport is designed and constructed to be side- or alley-loaded,
such garage or carport must be set back from the side street or alley a minimum
distance of 18 feet to facilitate access without interference to the use of the street
or alley by other vehicles or persons.
C. Except for a carport or fence for a dwelling in the MU zoning district, an accessory
building in a nonresidential zoning district must:
1. Be located in the rear half of the property;
2. Be separated from the principle building and any accessory building by a minimum
distance of 25 feet; and
3. Meet the requirements of Chapter 12, Fire Prevention and Protection, of the
Code of Ordinances, dependent upon the uses of the building, and meet the
general development standards of Article 7 as they relate to accessory buildings.
5.5.3 Accessory Dwelling Units in Nonresidential Districts
Accessory dwelling units must be located within the main structure. Detached accessory
dwelling units are prohibited in nonresidential districts.
A. All Nonresidential Districts Except for CA
The following provisions apply to accessory dwelling units in all nonresidential zoning
districts except for the CA, Central Area zoning district.
1. Only one accessory dwelling unit is permitted per lot.
2. An accessory dwelling unit may not occupy more than 49 percent of the total
gross floor area of the main structure.
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.5. Accessory Uses and Structures
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-40
3. An employee of the business occupying the main structure and that employee’s
family are the only persons who may occupy an accessory dwelling unit.
4. Parking is required for the accessory dwelling unit in accordance with Sec. 7.5.4.
B. CA District
The following provisions apply to accessory dwelling units in the CA, Central Area
zoning district.
1. More than one accessory dwelling unit is allowed per lot.
2. Parking is required for each accessory dwelling unit in accordance with Sec. 7.5.4.
5.5.4 Home Occupations
The following regulations apply to the conduct of home occupations in any zoning district.
A. General Standards
1. A home occupation must take place in the main structure only.
2. The use of a dwelling unit for a home occupation must be clearly incidental and
subordinate to its use for residential purposes, and must under no circumstances
change the residential character of the dwelling.
3. Additional persons from outside the family living at the home may not be
employed at the home occupation.
4. A sign advertising the home occupation is not permitted.
B. Prohibited Characteristics
A home occupation is not permitted that creates obnoxious noise, odor, increased
traffic or generation of light or smoke.
C. Prohibited Uses
Notwithstanding compliance with subsection A above, prohibited home occupations
include, but are not limited to the following uses:
1. Repair garage;
2. Beauty shop;
3. Barber shop; or
4. Sexually oriented business.
5.5.5 Stable, Residential or Noncommercial
A residential or noncommercial stable may be permitted in accordance with the use table in
Sec. 5.1 subject to the following standards.
A. The stable building must be set back from all adjacent property lines a minimum of 50
feet and a minimum of 100 feet from any adjacent residence.
B. The site must be a minimum of one acre in area.
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.6. Temporary Uses
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-41
Sec. 5.6. Temporary Uses
5.6.1 Permit Required
A. The following temporary uses require a Temporary Use Permit:
1. Seasonal Product Sales; and
2. Farmers’ market.
B. The following temporary uses require a Commercial Building Permit:
1. Asphalt or concrete batching plant (temporary); and
2. Temporary field or construction office.
C. The following uses or features are exempt from regulation under this section and do not
require a Temporary Use Permit or a Commercial Building Permit but must comply
with the general requirements set forth in Sec. 5.6.2 and any specific limitations or
conditions referenced in Sec. 5.6.3.
1. Temporary Real estate sales offices or model homes; and
2. Seasonal product sales in accordance with Sec. 7.7.7.
D. The Chief Building Official may suspend or revoke a Temporary Use Permit
immediately upon determination that general and specific conditions set forth in Sec. 5.6
have been violated.
5.6.2 General Requirements
A. If the property is developed, the temporary use must be located in an area that is not
actively used by an existing principal use and that would support the proposed
temporary use without encroaching or creating a negative impact on existing buffers,
landscaping, traffic movements, pedestrian circulation, emergency access, or required
parking space availability.
B. The temporary use must not endanger or be materially detrimental to the public health,
safety, or welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the immediate vicinity of
the temporary use, given the nature of the activity, its location on the site, and its
relationship to parking and access points.
C. The height and placement of any merchandise/seasonal products, tents, or temporary
structures must not encroach upon the intersection visibility triangle.
D. Off street parking must be adequate to accommodate the proposed temporary use.
This requirement does not apply to Temporary Real Estate Sales Offices or Model
Homes.
E. The temporary use must not cause undue traffic congestion increase accident potential.
F. Permanent changes to the site are prohibited. This requirement does not apply to
Temporary Real Estate Sales Offices or Model Homes.
G. No signs in connection with a temporary use are permitted except in accordance with
the provisions of Article 6 and Article 7 of this UDC.
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.6. Temporary Uses
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-42
H. No temporary uses may be located in the floodway.
5.6.3 Use Table for Temporary Uses
A. Unless otherwise stated, permitted temporary uses for Special Purpose and Overlay
Zoning Districts will comply with applicable use standards provided in Article 5.
B. The following temporary uses are permitted by right, permitted subject to limitations,
permitted subject to limitations, or require a Conditional Use Permit issued in
accordance with Sec. 3.5.
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.6. Temporary Uses
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-43
P= Permitted by Right L = Permitted by Right Subject to Limitations
[blank cell] = Prohibited C= Conditional Use Permit
Specific Use
A
UE
SF-1
SF-2
SF-3
SFA-1
SFA-2
SFA-3
TH
2F
MF-1
MF-2
MF-3
O-1
O-2
NS
GR
C
CA
LI
HI
Standards
Carnival or circus
(temporary)
P P P P P P
Seasonal Product
Sales
P
L L L L L L L L 5.6.4
Temporary Field or
Construction Office
L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L 5.6.5
Temporary Real
Estate Sales Office
or Model Home
L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L 5.6.6
Farmers’ Market L L L L L L 5.6.7
Temporary Asphalt
or Concrete
Batching Plant
C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C P P
All Other
Comparable
Temporary Uses as
Determined by the
Director
L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L L 5.6.2
5.6.4 Seasonal Product Sales
A. Seasonal product sales are limited to agricultural or horticultural products including but
not limited to pumpkins, Christmas trees, nursery stock or produce sales.
B. Seasonal product inventory must be located a minimum of 10 feet from the property
line.
C. Seasonal product sales may not be located in the public right-of-way.
D. Temporary use permits for a season product sales are limited to a single vendor.
E. Temporary use permits for seasonal product sales are valid for up to three consecutive
months.
F. Temporary use permits may be renewed once annually.
G. Applicants are limited to two temporary use permits per site per year.
H. A seasonal product vendor must obtain the written permission of the property owner.
5.6.5 Temporary Field Office or Construction Office
This use is limited to field or construction offices associated with ongoing construction
located within the same subdivision or construction site.
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.6. Temporary Uses
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-44
5.6.6 Temporary Real Estate Sales Office or Model Home
A temporary residential sales office or model home may be located within the
subdivision or development where the lots are being sold.
5.6.7 Farmers’ Market
A. A farmers’ market sponsor or organizer must obtain the written permission of the
property owner.
B. All tents, booths, tables, and other temporary structures used in the operation of an
outdoor farmers' market must be removed from the farmers' market site at the
conclusion of each day the market is in operation.
C. All trash, fruit or produce remnants, debris, and general litter must be removed from
the farmers' market site at the conclusion of each day the market is in operation. The
sponsoring committee or organization is responsible for ensuring the general cleanup of
the farmers' market area at the conclusion of each day of operation.
D. A farmers’ market is permitted use in the TMED zoning district and the I-35 Corridor
Overlay zoning district subject to all the general and specific requirements identified in
Sec. 5.6.
E. Temporary Use Permits for farmers’ markets are valid for a period of one year.
[Ord. 2015-4701]
Article 5: Use Standards
Sec. 5.6. Temporary Uses
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5-45
[This page intentionally left blank]

Article 6 – Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Table of Contents
Sec. 6.1. MH, Manufactured Home ................................................................................................ 6-1
Sec. 6.2. MU, Mixed Use ................................................................................................................ 6-4
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational ........................................................................ 6-9
Sec. 6.4. PD, Planned Development Overlay ............................................................................... 6-47
Sec. 6.5. H, North Central Temple Historic Overlay .................................................................. 6-48
Sec. 6.6. FP, Floodplain Overlay ................................................................................................... 6-49
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay ............................................................................. 6-51
Sec. 6.8. 1st and 3rd Overlay District......................................................................................... 6-101
[This page intentionally left blank]
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-1
Article 6 Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.1. MH, Manufactured Home
6.1.1 Applicability
The Manufactured Housing district is obsolete and may not be requested as a district for a zoning
amendment. Existing MH districts will remain on the Temple zoning map and are subject to the
development standards identified in this Section and in Section 5.3.2: HUD-Code Manufactured
Home Developments and Land Lease Communities.
[Ord. 2015-4707]
6.1.2 Use Table
The following uses are permitted by right, permitted subject to limitations, or require a
Conditional Use Permit in the MH, Manufactured Home zoning district.
Use
Permitted by Right or
Permitted Subject to
Limitations Conditional Use Standard
RESIDENTIAL USES
Convent or monastery ?
Family or group home ?
HUD-Code manufactured
home development ? 5.3.2
HUD-Code manufactured
home land lease community ? 5.3.2
Industrialized Housing ?
Recreational vehicle park ?
Single-family detached dwelling ?
NONRESIDENTIAL USES
Asphalt or concrete batching
plant (temporary) ? 5.6.2
Cemetery, mausoleum or
crematorium ?
Child care: group day care
home ? 5.3.9
Child care: family home ? 5.3.9
Community center ?
Electrical substation (high
voltage bulk power) ?
Electrical transmission line (high
voltage) ?
Fire Station ?
Gas line and regulating station ?
Institution religious – charitable –
philanthropic nature ?
Park or playground ?
Petroleum or gas well ?
Place of worship ?
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.1. MH, Manufactured Home
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-2
Use
Permitted by Right or
Permitted Subject to
Limitations Conditional Use Standard
Playfield or stadium ?
Pre-school ?
Railroad track or right–of-way or
team track ?
School, (elementary or
secondary), public or private ?
Sewage pumping station ?
Shop yard of local, state or
federal government ?
Telephone exchange-switchingrelay
or transmitting equipment ?
Temporary field or construction
office
Subject to temporary permit issued by Chief Building
Official
See Sec. 5.6.2 & 5.6.5
Utilities other than listed ?
Water stand pipe or elevated
storage ?
Water reservoir well or pumping
station ?
Water treatment plant ?
ACCESSORY USES
Accessory building (residential) ? Sec. 5.5
Backyard compost operation ? Sec. 5.5
Home occupation ? 5.5.4
Off-street parking as an
expansion of a nonresidential
use
?
Stable, residential or
noncommercial ? 5.5.5
Swimming pool, private ? City Code
Ch 34
[Ord. 2011-4499]
6.1.3 Prohibited Uses
Any use not listed in Sec. 6.1.1 is prohibited in the MH, Manufactured Home zoning district.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.1. MH, Manufactured Home
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-3
6.1.4 Dimensional Standards
The following dimensional standards apply to all development in the MH, Manufactured Home
zoning district.
Single-family
detached
dwelling
HUD-Code
manufactured
home land
lease
community
HUD-Code
manufactured
home subdivision
Industrialized
housing
Nonresidential
uses
Min. Site Area (ac.) NA 5 3 NA NA
Min. Lot or Pad
Area (sq. ft.) 6,000 3,500 4,000 6,000 NA
Max. Density
(d.u.s/gross ac.) NA 10 6 NA NA
Min. Lot Width (ft.) 50 35 40 50 NA
Min. Lot Depth (ft.) 100 80 100 100 NA
Min. yard (ft.)
Front
Side
Side (corner)
Rear
20
10% lot width
15
10
20
10
15
10
20
10
15
10
20
10
15
10
20
20
15
10
Min. Unit
Separation (ft.) NA 20 NA NA NA
NA = Use permitted but standard does not apply
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.2. MU, Mixed Use
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-4
Sec. 6.2. MU, Mixed Use
6.2.1 Use Table
The following uses are permitted by right, permitted subject to limitations, or require a
Conditional Use Permit in the MU, Mixed Use zoning district.
Use
Permitted by
Right or
Permitted
Subject to
Limitations Conditional Use
Conditional Use
if Abuts
Residential Use
or District Standard
RESIDENTIAL USES
Boarding or rooming
house ?
Family or group home ?
Home for the aged ?
Industrialized housing ?
Multiple-family dwelling
(apartment) ? 5.3.3
Patio home ? 5.3.4
Single-family attached
dwelling ? 5.3.5
Single-family detached
dwelling ?
Townhouse ? 5.3.6
Two-family dwelling
(duplex) ?
NONRESIDENTIAL USES
Alcoholic beverage sales
for on-premise
consumption:
a) beer and wine only
less than 75% revenue
from alcohol
? 5.3.15
b) all alcoholic
beverages 50% or less
revenue from alcohol
? 5.3.15
Alcohol beverage sales,
off-premise consumption,
beer and wine store
?
Amusement commercial
(indoor) ?
Art gallery or museum ?
Asphalt or concrete
batching plant
(temporary)
? 5.6.2
Auto parts sales (indoors) ?
Car wash ?
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.2. MU, Mixed Use
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-5
Use
Permitted by
Right or
Permitted
Subject to
Limitations Conditional Use
Conditional Use
if Abuts
Residential Use
or District Standard
Child care:
family home ? 5.3.9
Community center ?
Dance hall ?
Day camp for children ?
Electrical substation (high
voltage bulk power) ?
Electrical transmission line
(high voltage) ?
Exercise gym ?
Fire station ?
Fuel sales ? 5.3.21
Fraternal organization
lodge or union hall ?
Fraternity or sorority ?
Gas line and regulating
station ?
Greenhouse or nursery
(retail)
Halfway house ?
Hospital ?
Institution for alcoholic or
narcotic patients ?
Institution religious –
charitable - philanthropic ?
Laboratory, medical,
dental, scientific or
research
?
Lithographic or print shop ?
Park or playground ?
Personal wireless facility ? 5.4.3
Petroleum or gas well ?
Place of worship ?
Playfield or stadium ?
Pre-school ?
Railroad track or right–ofway
?
Retail Sales and Service
Uses listed in the use
table in Sec. 5.1 except
for: cleaning plant
(commercial), fuel sales,
package store,
?
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.2. MU, Mixed Use
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-6
Use
Permitted by
Right or
Permitted
Subject to
Limitations Conditional Use
Conditional Use
if Abuts
Residential Use
or District Standard
restaurant (drive-in), tool
rental (outside
equipment storage),
veterinarian office or
veterinarian hospital (2)
Restaurant (drive-in) ?
Rodeo grounds ?
Roller or ice rink ?
School, (elementary or
secondary), public or
private
?
School, business ?
Sewage pumping
station ?
Shop yard of local, state
or federal government ?
Swimming pool,
commercial ?
Telephone business office ?
Telephone exchange –
switching-relay or
transmitting equipment
?
Temporary field or
construction office
Subject to temporary permit issued by Chief Building Official
See Sec. 5.6.2 & 5.6.5
Theater or playhouse
(indoor) ?
Tool rental (outside
equipment storage) ?
Utilities other than listed ?
Veterinary office (no
animal hospital) ?
Veterinary hospital (no
kennels) ?
Water stand pipe or
elevated storage ?
Water reservoir well or
pumping station ?
Water treatment plant ?
ACCESSORY USES
Accessory building,
(nonresidential) ? ? Sec. 5.5
Accessory building,
residential ? Sec. 5.5
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.2. MU, Mixed Use
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-7
Use
Permitted by
Right or
Permitted
Subject to
Limitations Conditional Use
Conditional Use
if Abuts
Residential Use
or District Standard
Accessory dwelling unit ? Sec. 5.5
Home occupation ? 5.5.4
Off-street parking as an
expansion of
nonresidential use
? ?
Swimming pool, private ? City Code
Ch. 34
Tool rental (outside
equipment storage) ?
Upholstery shop ?
Veterinarian hospital
(inside pens only) ?
Veterinarian office only
(no animal hospital) ?
Warehouse office ?
6.2.2 Prohibited Uses
Any use not listed in Sec. 6.2.1 is prohibited in the MU, Mixed Use zoning district.
6.2.3 Dimensional Standards
The following dimensional standards apply to all development in the MU, Mixed Use zoning
district.
S-F
detached
dwelling
S-F
attached
dwelling Patio home
Two Family
Dwelling
Industrialized
housing
Multiple-
Family
Dwelling
Nonresidential
Uses
Min. Lot Area (sq.
ft.) 2,000 2,000 2,000 4,000 2,000 2,200/unit NA
Min. Lot Width (ft.) 30 25 25 25 30 40 40
Min. Lot Depth (ft.) 80 75 25 75 80 120 NA
Min. yard (ft.)*
Front
Side (corner)
Side
Rear
15
5
10
5
15
5/0
10
5
15
5
10
5
15
5
10
5
15
5
10
5
NA
15
10
15
5
NA
10
NA
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.2. MU, Mixed Use
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-8
S-F
detached
dwelling
S-F
attached
dwelling Patio home
Two Family
Dwelling
Industrialized
housing
Multiple-
Family
Dwelling
Nonresidential
Uses
Min. Building
Separation (ft.) 8 8 8 8 8 8 8
Max. Density
(d.u.s/ac.) NA NA NA NA NA 20 NA
Min. Gross Floor
Area (sq. ft.) NA 550 NA 550 NA NA NA
*= See paragraphs A. through C below NA = Use permitted but standard does not apply
A. Minimum Front Yard
The minimum front yard for a dwelling other than a multiple-family dwelling is the greater
of either 15 feet or the average of the front yards observed in the same block face as the
proposed building. The minimum front yard may not be required to be greater than 50 feet
from the front property line or 10 feet greater than the front yard observed on a
contiguous lot. For purposes of computing average front yard, the front yard of a vacant lot
is 15 feet.
B. Minimum Side Yard
A minimum side yard of five feet is required abutting a vacant lot.
C. Minimum Rear Yard
A minimum rear yard of five feet is required for residential uses other than multiple-family
dwellings. A rear yard of 15 feet is required for a nonresidential use that abuts a residential
use. A rear yard is not required for a nonresidential use that does not abut a residential use.
D. Minimum Building Separation
The side yard must be enlarged to the width necessary to maintain eight feet of separation
between structures. The side yard may be reduced to a minimum of three feet abutting a
side yard that is five feet wide or wider.
6.2.4 Nonresidential Uses
The following regulations apply to nonresidential uses in the MU, Mixed Use Overlay zoning
district.
A. A Conditional Use Permit approved in accordance with Sec. 3.5 is required for
nonresidential uses on property abutting a residential use or residential zoning district.
B. Hours of operation are limited to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
C. Exterior lighting must be arranged to reflect away from residentially used property.
D. Outdoor storage must be screened from the view of neighboring property and streets.
6.2.5 Accessory Uses
The minimum front yard setback for a non-enclosed residential carport is 10 feet.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-9
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
6.3.1 Purpose (see Sec. 4.3.24)
6.3.2 Boundary
The TMED zoning district is defined as shown in the map below.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-10
6.3.3 Transect Zones and Special Districts
The TMED zoning district includes Transect Zones (T) and Special Districts (SD) as defined
below.
A. T4 General Urban Zone
The T4 Transect Zone consists of a mixed use but primarily residential urban fabric. It may
have a wide range of building types: single, side yard and row houses. Setbacks and
landscaping are variable. Streets with curbs and sidewalks define medium-sized blocks.
B. T5-e Neighborhood Edge Zone
The T5-e Transect Zone consists of a mid-density mixed use but primarily commercial,
retail and office urban fabric. It typically has a single row of teaser parking located in front
of the principal building, with strong vehicular cross-connection among adjacent properties.
It primarily has attached buildings with wide sidewalks, rhythmic street tree planting and
buildings set close to the sidewalks.
C. T5-c Urban Center Zone
The T5-c Transect Zone consists of higher-density, mixed use buildings that accommodate
retail, offices, row houses and apartments. It has a tight network of streets with wide
sidewalks, rhythmic street tree planting and buildings set close to the sidewalks.
D. T-South (TMED South)
The T-South Transect Zone consists of medium to high density, mixed use buildings that
accommodate retail, office, single-family attached and detached, multi-family and medical
uses, while also compatibly integrating the historic agricultural character. It has a tight
network of streets with wide sidewalks, rhythmic street tree planting and buildings set
close to the sidewalks interspersed with common green and open space.
E. Special Districts
These districts consist of institutions with buildings that by their current function,
disposition or configuration cannot, or should not, conform to one or more of the transect
zones. The referencing to a particular institution in a Special District is as follows:
1. S&W Memorial Hospital and Texas A&M Health Science Center (SD-h)
2. The Central Texas Veterans Health Care System (SD-v)
3. Temple College (SD-c)
4. Temple Independent School District (SD-t)
6.3.4 Applicability
All of the standards from Sec. 6.3 apply to new construction, which is defined as 1) 50% or
more of the existing building footprint(s) on-site is/are proposed to be demolished or 2)
there are no existing buildings on-site.
A. Architectural Standards apply in proportion to the project scope for exterior building
modifications and expansion of building footprint. Thresholds for proportional compliance
apply as shown in the following table per Sec. 6.3.15 Architectural Standards:
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-11
*For homes converted to non-residential uses that are clad with siding or wood, compliance with the “Building
Materials” category may consist of 1) a combination of repair to the exterior, paint and a stone or brick
wainscot (minimum of 3 feet high on front and sides).
B. Sidewalk, landscape and bike rack requirements apply in proportion to the project scope
for exterior building modifications or expansion of building footprint per the table below.
The Director of Planning is authorized to approve adjustments to landscaping compliance
for a project where unique site characteristics constrain full compliance. The applicant’s
request and the Director’s decision must be made in writing. The Director may substitute
“Option 6: Curbing & Landscaping of Parking Lot “Deadspace” for one of the other
requirements as an appropriate choice only for sites that are too small to achieve Options
1-5.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-12
*TMED frontage regulations (Sec. 6.3.13) require the planting strip to be located between the curb and
sidewalk. Depending on right-of-way (ROW) width, sidewalk location may need to shift to BOC (back-of-curb)
and width adjusted to be completely within ROW with planting strip on private property behind the sidewalk.
**Applies to retail, office, personal service, and multi-family uses. The Planning Director can waive the
requirement for uses not conducive to bicycle mobility.
6.3.5 Design Review
The City, through the Director of Planning, must review and approve a site development plan
prior to construction for all developments within the TMED zoning district as required by this
Section.
A. Subdivision Plat Required
Prior to the Design Review Process and Building Permit approval, any property to be
developed in the TMED zoning district must undergo the subdivision review process
required in Article 3.
B. Design Review Process
1. This Section establishes a design review process to ensure that all development
within TMED meets requirements set forth in these design standards. The review
covers site planning, architecture, landscaping, exterior lighting and exterior signage,
as well as any changes, additions or renovations to any development on the site.
2. The design review process is divided into three steps:
a. Design Orientation;
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-13
b. Preliminary Design Review; and
c. Permitting.
3. The applicant must meet with relevant staff at the design orientation step of the
process, while the subsequent steps of the process may be addressed via electronic
submittals, if agreed to by staff and the applicant.
C. Submittal Requirements
The information required below may be combined to reduce the number of sheet
submittals, as long as all sheet detail is provided.
1. Design Orientation
A design orientation session is required between a representative of the City and the
property owner, design architect, landscape architect, engineer and/or contractor.
This session includes a discussion of the design concept and design standards for the
TMED District, the specific design standards for the particular site and the design
review process.
2. Preliminary Design Review
a. When the initial design for the project is prepared, a minimum of one electronic
set of plans must be submitted to the Planning Department for formal review.
This review covers preliminary site planning, architecture, landscape areas, and
sign location.
b. The purpose of this preliminary design review is to provide the owner and
designer with written assurance that the fundamental designs are acceptable,
before requiring plans suitable for City permitting. It also provides a clear list of
any issues to be resolved in the permitting step.
c. These plans must include, but are not limited to the following:
i. Preliminary Site Plan (scaled and dimensioned) showing:
(A) Building footprint(s)
(B) Landscaping locations and types
(C) Public Frontage elements (all that are applicable) to include:
(1) Sidewalk location and width
(2) Planting strip location, width and landscaping
(3) Pedestrian lighting location (if applicable)
(4) Bench and trash receptacle location (if applicable)
(5) Trail location, width and material (if applicable)
ii. Preliminary Street Framework and Land Use Plan showing:
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-14
(A) Street locations and classifications
(B) Proposed land uses with conceptual building footprints
(C) Type of public frontage for each street (Types A, B, C, D, E or F)
iii. Preliminary Building Elevations showing:
(A) Principal exterior elevations of all proposed buildings;
(B) Roof pitch, articulation and materials
(C) Horizontal articulation
(D) Transparency calculation
(E) Top floor articulation
(F) Primary entrance articulation
(G) Maximum building heights on each elevation drawing; and
(H) Conceptual finish materials (with percentages), colors and textures
under consideration.
iv. Fence and Wall Plan (if applicable) showing:
(A) Locations, materials, colors and heights in relation to on-site grades;
and
(B) Relationships to walls, fences and grades on adjacent parcels.
v. Sign Plan (if applicable) showing:
(A) Locations in relation to on-site grades; and
(B) Elevations and details of sign graphics with data table of permitted
and proposed signs.
3. Permitting
a. The final construction drawings and specifications for the project must be
submitted to the Planning Department for permitting. The submitted
documents must include all design necessary for construction, including site
development, architecture, signage, grading, driveways, parking, walkways,
terraces, patios, walls, fences, planter beds, fountains, trellises, utilities,
architecture, landscaping, walls, pools, mechanical equipment, plumbing,
electrical, exterior lighting and exterior signs.
D. There are two types of deviations from the requirements of the TMED zoning district
requirements: warrants and variances.
E. Whether a deviation requires a warrant or variance shall be determined by the Director of
Planning in accordance with the following standards:
1. Warrants
a. A warrant is a ruling that would permit a practice that is not consistent with a
specific provision of the TMED standards in Sec. 6.3 but is justified by the
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-15
purpose of the TMED zoning district. The Planning Director has the authority
to approve, approve with conditions or deny a request for a warrant after
getting input from the relevant members of the Development Review
Committee (DRC).
b. Warrant requests are permitted for the following:
i. Signage standards related to materials, dimensions or lighting.
ii. Public frontage amenities and specifications
iii. Cul-de-sac locations
iv. Maximum residential density;
v. Increase in maximum height;
vi. Alternative fence materials;
vii. Alternative materials for hike and bike trails
viii. Common area amenities; and
ix. Exterior building materials
2. Variances
a. Review of a Variance request must be in accordance with Sec. 3.15.
b. Variance requests are permitted for the following:
i. Minimum yard and setbacks;
ii. Minimum lot area;
iii. Maximum lot coverage;
iv. Secondary street frontage build out; and
v. Permitted encroachment into setbacks.
3. No Warrant or Variance Request Permitted
Warrants and variances may not be requested for the following:
a. Permitted uses in a district;
b. Maximum dimensions of traffic lanes; and
c. Required provision of rear alleys.
6.3.6 General Regulations
A. Applicability
The TMED general regulations in this Section apply to all Transect Zones and Special
Districts as they relate to lot dimensions, setbacks, structure configuration, and type
permitted.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-16
B. General Requirements
The tables below establish the general requirements for the TMED Transect Zones as they
relate to lot dimensions, setbacks, structure configuration, and type permitted.
Lot Dimensional
Standards T4 T5-e T5-c T-South
SD-c;
SD-t
SD-v;
SD-h
Min. Lot Area NA NA NA NA NA NA
Min. Lot Width (ft.)
18 18 18
18 (50 for all
detached singlefamily
without alley
access)
NA NA
Max. Lot Width (ft.) 120 700 700 700 NA NA
Min. Lot Depth (ft.) NA NA NA NA NA NA
Max. Lot Depth (ft.) NA NA NA NA NA NA
Max. Impervious Lot
Coverage – Res. Uses (%) 70 70 80 80 NA NA
Max. Impervious Lot
Coverage – Nonres. Uses
(%)
80 80 80 80 NA NA
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-17
Setback Dimensional
Standards T4 T5-e T5-c T-South
SD-c;
SD-t
SD-v;
SD-h
Min. Front Yard Setback
(ft.) 6 4 4 4 6 NA
Min. Front Yard Private
Landscape Area (see Table
11) (ft.)
6 4 4 4 6 NA
Max. Front Yard Setback
(ft.) 47* 47* 47* 47* 18 NA
Min. Side Yard Setback
(ft.)
Per
building
or fire
code
Per
building
or fire
code
Per
building
or fire
code
Per building
or fire code 12 NA
Min. Side Yard Setback at
Street (ft.)
Must meet visibility triangle requirements
Min. Side Yard Setback 10 10 10 10 12 NA
Min. Rear Yard Setback -
for garage or car-port
with alley access (ft.)**
6 6 6 6 6 6
*Allows a single row of teaser parking, a 2-way drive aisle and 5-foot landscape buffer for parking
lot screening.
**Parking in an alley is prohibited.
C. Permitted Encroachments Into Setbacks
1. The table below establishes encroachments that are permitted in required setbacks.
Encroachments must comply with all other standards of this and other applicable
Sections of this UDC.
Type of Encroachment
T4 & T-South T5 & SD
Front Side Rear Front Side Rear
Main Entry Stairways, singlefamily
(%) 50 100 -- 100 100 --
Main Entry Stairways, multifamily
(%) -- 100 -- -- 100 --
Balconies, 8’ ground
clearance required (%) 50 100 -- 100 100 --
Awnings, Arcades, Galleries,
8’ ground clearance
required (%)
50 100 -- 100 100 --
Covered Porches (%) 50 100 -- 100 100 --
Bay Windows (%) 50 100 50 100 100 50
Fire Escapes (%) -- 100 -- -- 100 --
Dining Areas, nonresidential
(%)
100
outside of
required
front yard
private
landscape
area
100 --
100
outside of
required
front yard
private
landscape
area
100 --
-- = Encroachment not permitted
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-18
2. Buildings are not permitted to overlap property lines.
D. Building Configuration
The table below establishes the building configuration requirements for the TMED zoning
district. In the TMED zoning district, height is measured as the distance from finished floor
to the top plate.
Setback Dimensional
Standards T4 T5-e T5-c T-South
SD-c;
SD-t
SD-v;
SD-h
Max. Building Height 3 stories 3 stories 5 stories 5 stories NA NA
Maximum Density
(residential units per
acre)
14 units
per acre
24 units
per acre
40 units
per acre 40 units per acre NA NA
Maximum Density by
Warrant (residential units
per acre)
24 units
per acre
30 units
per acre
60 units
per acre NA NA NA
Maximum Residential
Units Per Attached
Structure
6 10 10 NA NA NA
Maximum Accessory
Structure
1 per
residential
lot
1 per
residential
lot
1 per
residential
lot
1 per
residential lot
-- = Not permitted
6.3.7 Use Standards
A. Applicability
The TMED use standards in this Section apply to all Transect Zones and Special Districts,
as set forth below.
B. Prohibited Uses
In addition to those uses prohibited in Sec. 5.1.1, the following uses are prohibited in the
TMED zoning district:
1. Auto parts sales;
2. Credit Access Business;
3. Commercial Uses as listed in the use table in Sec.5.1.3;
4. Industrial Uses as listed in the use table in Sec. 5.1.3;
5. Kiosk;
6. Natural Resource Storage and Extraction Uses as listed in the use table in Sec. 5.1.3;
7. Package Store (liquor but not including wine and beer);
8. Pawn Shop;
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-19
9. Sexually Oriented Business;
10. Tattoo Studio;
11. Body Piercing Studio;
12. Two-family dwelling (Duplex);
13. Vape Shop; and
14. Vehicle Sales and Service Uses as listed in the use table in Sec. 5.1.3.
C. Legend for Interpreting Use Table
The table below establishes the meaning of the symbols used in the use table in subsection
D.
Symbol Meaning
P Permitted by right in district indicated
L Permitted by right subject to limitations in district indicated
C Requires Conditional Use Permit in district indicated
[blank cell] Prohibited in district indicated
D. Use Table
The following principal uses are permitted by right, permitted subject to limitations, or
permitted with a Conditional Use Permit in accordance with Sec. 3.5.
USES T4 T5-e T5-c
TSouth
SD-t SD-h SD-v SD-c Standards
RESIDENTIAL USES
Multiple-family dwelling P P P L P
See Specific
Use
Standards
#s1 and 6
Live/work unit L L L L 16
Single-family attached dwelling,
Row house or Townhouse (3 or
more attached units)
P P P L P 3
Single-family detached dwelling P P L 2
Accessory dwelling unit L L L L 4, 9
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-20
T4 T5-e T5-c
TSouth
SD-t SD-h SD-v SD-c
Standards
NONRESIDENTIAL USES
Educational & Institutional
Uses
Artisan brewery, brewpub, or
winery L L L L 15, 17
Artisan craft production and
retail L L L L 15, 18
Assisted living/Nursing home P P L L L 15
Barber shop or beauty shop P P P L
Bus shelter P P P P P P P P 15
Childcare: family home L L L P 11, 15
Childcare: group day care
center L L L L L L L L 11, 15
Childcare: group day care home L L L L 11, 15
Cleaning, pressing, and pick up
shop P P P L 15
College P P P P P P P 15
Commercial surface parking lot L L L 8, 15
Convention, conference or
exhibition center P P L P P P P 15
Drug store or pharmacy (drivethrough
permitted) P P P L P P 5, 12, 15
Exercise gym P P P L 15
Fountain or public art P P P P P P P P
Governmental use P P P P P P P P 15
Hospital P L P P 15
Library P P P P P P P 15
Medical clinic P P P L P P P 15
Medical office or lab P P P L P P P 15
Museum P P P L P P P P 15
Park, playground, open space P P P P P P P P
Parking structure P P P L L L L L 10, 14, 15
Place of worship P P P P P P P P 15
Pre-school P P P P L L L L 15
Public or private education
facility P P P P P P P P 15
Research facility P P L P P P P 15
Studio; decorator, artist,
photographer, music, dance, or
drama
P P P L 15
Trade or vocational school P P L P P P P 15
Veterinary hospital (no kennels) P P P L 15
Veterinary hospital (kennels) C C C C 15
Entertainment &
Recreation, Office and
Retail Sales & Service
Alcoholic beverage sales for onpremise
consumption – Less
than 50% revenue
P P P L 11, 15
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-21
T4 T5-e T5-c
TSouth
SD-t SD-h SD-v SD-c
Standards
Alcoholic beverage sales for onpremise
consumption – Less
than 75% revenue
C C C C 11, 15
Amusement, commercial
(indoor) P P P L 15
Bar - Alcoholic beverage sales
for on-premise consumption –
More than 75% revenue
C C C C 11, 15
Drug store or pharmacy (drivethrough
permitted) L L L L P P 5, 12, 15
Financial institution (drivethrough
permitted) L L L L L L L 5, 12, 15
Fuel sales L L 13, 15
Grocery store P P P L 15
Live Theatre (indoor) P P L P P P P 15
Live Theatre (outdoor) P P L P P P P 15
Movie Theatre P L P P P P 15
Office P P P L P P P P 15
Outdoor Auditorium/Stadium P L P P P P 15
Restaurant or Coffee Shop (no
drive-through permitted) P P P L P P P P 15
Restaurant or Coffee Shop
(drive-through permitted) L L L L L L L L 5, 12, 15
Retail Sales not listed above (no
drive-through permitted) P P P L P P P 15
USES T4 T5-e T5-c
TSouth
SD-t SD-h SD-v SD-c
Standards
Overnight Accommodations
Hotel L L L L L L L 7, 15
Bed and breakfast (max. 5
sleeping rooms) P P P L P P P 15
School dormitory P L P P P P 15
E. Specific Use Standards
The following specific limitations apply as set forth in the use table above.
1. Multiple-family dwellings in T-South are permitted to front only on streets classified
as either an arterial or collector street, except that multiple-family dwellings may not
abut or front South 5th Street.
2. Single-family detached dwellings in T-South are permitted only to front on streets
classified as either a local street or a collector street with alley access. Single-family
detached dwellings in T-South may not directly back up to South 1st Street.
3. Single-family attached dwellings in T-South are permitted only to front on streets
classified as either an arterial or collector street. Single-family attached dwellings in TSouth
must be accessed by an alley.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-22
4. Accessory dwelling units are only allowed above non-residential as part of a vertical
mixed-use building or as a small unit accessory to a single-family detached dwelling, in
which case the small unit accessory must front on an alley.
5. In addition to vehicle space in front of a drive-through window, three spaces are
required for stacking in the drive-through. The drive-through is only permitted to the
rear or side of the principal building.
6. Multiple-family dwellings are permitted only if they are part of a mixed use
development which may be vertical or horizontal mixed use.
7. Hotels are permitted in accordance with the following provisions:
a. External balconies and walkways must be set back 200 feet from any residential
zoning district.
b. Hotel staff must be present on-site 24 hours a day.
c. All rooms must be accessed through an internal hallway, lobby or courtyard.
Exterior entrances to individual rooms are prohibited.
d. The hotel site must contain a minimum of three amenities from the list below:
i. Indoor/outdoor pool;
ii. Spa/sauna;
iii. Weight room/fitness center;
iv. Playground;
v. Sports court;
vi. Plaza/atrium;
vii. Game room;
viii. Conference room (1,000 square foot minimum); or
ix. Full service restaurant (minimum seating capacity of 35).
8. All commercial surface parking lots must adhere to screening requirements in
subsection 6.3.11E12E.
9. Accessory dwelling units are only permitted on lots with single-family detached
structures. Accessory dwelling units are only permitted in a required garage if located
on a second floor above the parking area. Accessory dwelling units must comply with
all setback and coverage requirements. Accessory dwelling units count toward the
maximum of one accessory structure per lot.
10. Parking structures must integrate commercial uses on the first floor on primary and
secondary frontages. Parking structures must be treated the same as nonresidential
structures for the application of TMED standards.
11. The Specific Use Standards in Sec. 5.3 apply to use these uses.
12. The drive-through is only permitted to the rear or side of the principal building and
must be screened in accordance with parking lot screening requirements in
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-23
subsection 6.3.11E and must be located at an end cap of the building, which must
include a minimum of two other businesses.
13. Fuel pumps must be screened in accordance with parking lot screening requirements
in subsection 6.3.11E. The number of pumps is limited to eight fueling stations.
14. All structured parking on public frontages in Special Districts must adhere to
screening requirements in subsection 6.3.11E. In addition to screening requirements,
one additional ornamental tree must be planted every 25 feet along the public
frontages.
15. All nonresidential uses in T-South are permitted to front only on streets classified as
an arterial, collector or private street.
16. Home occupations are only permitted in multi-story attached single-family or multifamily
dwelling units with ground floor access to a public sidewalk. Office, art and
photography uses are the only permitted home occupations.
17. Maximum of a 10,000 square foot floor area.
18. Craft production limited to a maximum of 3,500 square feet (excepting retail sales
space).
F. Uses Not Addressed
Uses not specifically addressed in the use table above are prohibited unless the Director of
Planning determines the use to fall into a permitted category.
G. Outdoor Storage
Outdoor storage is not permitted in TMED. Prohibited outdoor storage includes open
storage, portable containers, portable buildings or any other structure not fixed onto a
permanent slab and that adheres to the architectural standards defined in Sec. 6.3.145.
H. Outdoor Retail Display
Only temporary outdoor displays for a sidewalk are permitted as long as the display does
not extend more than five feet from a front façade and reserves at least five feet of
sidewalk or walkway for pedestrian use. Such sale must be an allowed use.
I. Home Occupations
Home Occupations are permitted in accordance with the standards in Sec. 5.5.4.
6.3.8 Circulation Standards
A. Applicability
The TMED circulation standards in this Section apply to all Transect Zones unless
otherwise stated.
B. Thoroughfare Standards
1. Cul-de-sacs are prohibited in the TMED zoning district with the exception of
property abutting a railroad or if approved by warrant.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-24
2. New thoroughfares must comply with the TMED Design Guidelines, a copy of which
may be obtained from the City’s Planning Department.
C. Block Perimeter
The table below establishes maximum block perimeter requirements for all newly
constructed streets in the TMED zoning district.
T4 T5-e T5-c T-South SD
Maximum Block
Perimeter 2,500 2,500 2,000 2,500 NA
D. Access and Connectivity
1. General
a. Access and Connectivity standards do not apply to Special Districts.
b. Nonresidential driveway connections to adjacent property must be provided.
c. All driveway connections must be constructed and stubbed or connected to any
existing stub.
d. Driveway spacing must be based on the TMED Design Guidelines and the
appropriate alignment with any existing or proposed median breaks as
approved by the City Engineer.
e. The requirement for a driveway connection may be waived by the Director of
Planning when unusual topography or site conditions would make such a
driveway useless to adjoining properties.
2. First Street
In order to reduce the number of pedestrian and vehicular conflicts at sidewalk and
driveway intersections, driveway cuts on First Street are limited to a maximum of
two per block face, regardless of currently allotted driveway cuts. This restriction
applies only in T5-e.
6.3.9 Parking and Loading Standards
A. Applicability
This Section applies to all Transect Zones and Special Districts unless otherwise stated.
B. Required Parking Ratios
1. Required Parking Ratios do not apply to Special Districts.
2. The standards in Sec. 7.5.4 except that the minimum requirements for all
nonresidential uses and multiple-family uses are reduced by 25 percent.
C. Parking Space Dimensions
The standards in Sec. 7.5.5 apply to parking space dimension.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-25
D. Parking Requirements for New or Unlisted Uses
The standards in Sec. 7.5.4 apply for uses that are determined to be permitted by the
Director of Planning.
E. Off-Street Loading Regulations
The standards in Sec. 7.5.6 apply with the following exceptions:
1. Common or shared loading and delivery entrances must be provided between
adjacent buildings or developments;
2. Off-street loading areas and truck staging areas must be located in the rear yard and
must not be visible from the public right-of-way.
F. Shared Parking
The total amount of parking required may
be adjusted according to the shared parking
factor established in the table to the right to
determine the effective parking. The shared
parking factor is available for any two uses
within any pair of adjacent property.
G. Parking Location
1. General
All surface parking shall be constructed on-site in accordance with the following
standards:
a. Surface parking areas must be screened from all public rights of way by a
building or screen in accordance with Section 6.3.12E; and
b. Surface parking areas must be constructed with curb and gutter.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-26
2. Single-Family Detached or Attached Dwelling, Townhouses, Row
Houses and Live/Work Units
a. All parking areas and garages must be located to the rear of the principal
structure and must be accessed by rear alleys, unless the lot is at least 50 feet in
width or the dwelling unit directly abuts a park to the rear. A minimum of 20
percent of single-family attached or detached lots within a development (as
depicted in the preliminary or final plat) must utilize alley access.
3. Mixed Use, Multiple-family and Nonresidential Uses
a. Mixed use, multiple-family and nonresidential driveways must be no wider than
24 feet in the first layer.
b. Parking areas and garages located either to the side or rear, will qualify for a
reduction in overall site landscaping requirements. If all parking is to the rear, a
10% reduction of overall site landscaping requirements will be applied. If all
parking is to the side, a 5% reduction of overall site landscaping requirements
will be applied.
H. On-Street Parking
1. On-street parking spaces may be located on streets as identified in the table in
subsection Sec. 6.3.12.B.5.
2. On-street parking may be used to satisfy 50 percent of the off-street parking
standards for nonresidential uses excluding multiple-family dwellings.
3. On-street parking may only be achieved through parallel parking.
6.3.10 Bicycle Facility Standards
A. Applicability
This Section applies to all Transect Zones and Special District as set forth below.
B. Bicycle Facilities
1. The table below establishes minimum required bicycle rack spaces for multiplefamily,
office, community center, educational, and retail uses.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-27
Transect Zone Min Required Bicycle Rack Spaces
T4 1 per 8 nonresidential spaces
T5-e 1 per 15 required parking spaces
T5-c 1 per 10 required parking spaces
T-South 1 per 10 required parking spaces
SD 1 per 10 required parking spaces
2. Bicycle facilities must be placed in clearly designated, safe and convenient locations,
so that no tenant entrance is greater than 200 feet from a bicycle facility.
3. Bicycle facilities must be separated from motor vehicle parking in order to protect
both bicycles and vehicles from accidental damage. Facilities must be separated from
the building or other walls, landscaping, and other features by a minimum of three
feet.
4. Refer to the TMED Design Guidelines for the specific bicycle facility models and styles
that are permitted in the TMED zoning district. The Planning Director may consider
and approve alternate designs if they are determined to be consistent in quality and
compatible in design with the Design Guideline options.
5. All collector or arterial streets must include a minimum of a five-foot wide bike lane
in both directions or a shared use path for both bicycles and pedestrians that
complies with American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials
(AASHTO) standards.
6.3.11 Private Property Landscape Standards
A. Applicability
This Section applies to all Transect Zones and Special Districts as set forth below.
B. General Site Landscape
1. A minimum percentage of the total area of the private property on which
development, construction or reconstruction is proposed must be dedicated to
landscape area including trees, shrubs, groundcover, sod or other living plant
material.
2. The table below establishes minimum site landscape requirements for the TMED
Transect Zones.
Minimum Trees and Shrubs Per Lot
Transect
Zone
Minimum
Landscape
Area (%)
with
Parking in
rear
Minimum
Landscape
Area (%)
with
Parking on
side
Minimum
Landscape
Area (%) with
Parking in
front
Single-Family
Detached or
Attached Dwelling,
Row House,
Townhouse
Multiple-family,
Mixed Use and Nonresidential
uses
T4 (singlefamily
attached
20 25 30
2 trees per lot
2 shrubs per 10’ front
foundation
NA
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-28
and
detached)
T4 (multifamily
and
nonresidential)
10 15 20 NA 1 tree and 4 shrubs per
500 sq ft landscape area
T5-e 10 15 20
2 trees per lot
2 shrubs per 10’ front
foundation
1 tree and 4 shrubs per
600 sq ft landscape area
T5-c 10 15 20
2 trees per lot
2 shrubs per 10’ front
foundation
1 tree and 4 shrubs per
600 sq ft landscape area
T-South 10 15 20
2 trees per lot
2 shrubs per 10’ front
foundation
1 tree and 4 shrubs per
600 sq ft landscape area
SD
NA NA
1 tree and 4 shrubs per
1,000 sq ft landscape
area
C. Tree Mix
1. Private property trees must be selected from the table in Section 7.4.5.B of this
UDC. Requests to plant trees not listed in Sec. 7.4.5.B. may be made in writing and
approved by either the Planning Director or City Arborist.
2. A minimum of 50 percent of required trees must be selected from the medium or
large size tree list.
D. Parking Lot Landscaping
1. Landscaped parking islands are required in all parking lots.
2. One landscaped island must be provided for every 10 parking spaces. Islands may be
located throughout the parking lot except all parking rows must begin and terminate
in a curbed landscape island.
3. Islands must be a minimum of 170 square feet in area and eight feet in width back-ofcurb
to back-of-curb. One small, medium, or large tree from the approved planting
list is required in each island (either 2-inch diameter at breast height, which is defined
as 4 feet 6 inches above grade/dbh or 65-gallon in size). For parking to the rear on
lots of one-half acre or less, parking islands are not required as long as the perimeter
of the parking areas abutting a street (public or private) are screened with shrubs and
trees (2-inch dbh or 65-gallon).
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-29
4. All islands must be raised at least six inches, curbed and planted with approved
landscaping materials.
5. Parking islands shrubs, trees and landscape area may be counted towards the general
site landscaping requirements established in Sec. 6.3.11.B.
6. The Planning Director may approve landscaping consolidated into a combination of
individual buffer yard, median islands and terminal islands provided that the equivalent
landscaped area is accomplished.
E. Parking Lot Screen
This subsection applies to nonresidential and multiple-family development and uses in
TMED.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-30
1. All parking must be screened from public rights-of-way a minimum 36 inches in
height, through one of the following methods:
a. Planting screen of evergreen shrubs;
b. Masonry wall;
c. Combination of evergreen shrubs and berm; and
d. Combination of evergreen shrubs and wall.
2. Planted screening must be capable of providing a solid, opaque 36-inch screen within
two years, and must be planted in a prepared bed that is at least three feet in width.
3. Parking lot screening shrubs and landscape area may be counted towards the general
site landscaping requirements established in Sec. 6.3.11.B.
4. In addition to required parking lot screen shrubs, four small canopy street trees are
required in accordance with the TMED Design Guidelines on First Street at all
intersections.
F. Screening of Mechanical Equipment
This subsection applies to all nonresidential and multiple-family development and uses in
TMED.
1. All roof, ground and wall-mounted mechanical equipment (e.g., air handling
equipment, compressors, duct work, transformers and elevator equipment) must be
screened from view or isolated so as not to be visible from any residential districts or
uses, streets, rights-of-way or public park areas within 150 feet of the property line of
the subject lot or tract, measured from a point five feet above grade in accordance
with this Section.
2. Roof-mounted mechanical equipment must be shielded from view on all sides using
parapet walls.
3. Wall or ground-mounted equipment screening must be constructed of:
a. Vegetative screens; or
b. brick, stone, architecturally finished concrete, or other similar masonry
materials; and
c. All fence or wall posts must be concrete-based masonry or concrete pillars.
4. Exposed conduit, ladders, utility boxes and drain spouts must be painted to match the
color of the building.
5. Mechanical equipment screening shrubs and landscape area may be counted towards
the general site landscaping requirements established in Sec. 6.3.112.
G. Screening and Location of Waste Containers
This subsection applies to all nonresidential and multiple-family development and uses in
TMED.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-31
1. Waste containers must be located to the rear of the building and screened from
public view to minimize visibility. If the property has two public frontages the waste
container must be placed on the side of the structure.
2. Waste containers must be located a minimum of 50 feet away from any residential
use or district’s property lines with the exception of multiple-family unless separated
by an alley that is used for solid waste service.
3. Waste containers must be screened on all four sides, using an enclosure that screens
the waste container from view at the property line.
4. Screening must be at least as tall as the waste container(s) and comprised of materials
and color schemes that are visually and aesthetically compatible with the overall
project that incorporate the following:
a. Brick;
b. Stone;
c. Stucco;Architecturally finished concrete; or
d. Other similar masonry materials.
5. Waste containers with fence posts must be rust-protected metal, concrete based,
masonry or concrete pillars; and waste containers must have six-inch concrete filled
steel pipes (bollards) that are located to protect the enclosure from truck operations
and not obstruct operations associated with the waste container.
6. Waste container enclosures must have steel gates with spring-loaded hinges or the
equivalent and fasteners to keep them closed. When in use, tie-backs must be used to
secure the steel gates in the open position.
7. Waste container screening must be maintained by the owner at all times.
8. The ingress, egress, and approach to all waste container pads must conform to fire
lane requirements.
9. Waste container pad and aprons requirements must be constructed in accordance
with theTMED Design Guidelines.
10. Waste container screening shrubs and landscape area may be counted towards the
general site landscaping requirements established in Sec. 6.3.112.
H. Screening of Loading Docks
This subsection applies to all nonresidential development and uses in TMED.
1. Loading and service areas must be located at the rear of the building and screened
from public view to minimize visibility.
2. Loading areas must not be located closer than 50 feet to any single-family lot, unless
the loading area is separated by an alley that is used for solid waste service or is
wholly within an enclosed building.
3. Off-street loading areas must be screened from view from any street or adjacent
property of differing land use.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-32
4. All loading areas must be enclosed on three sides by a wall or other screening device
a minimum of eight feet in height.
5. Loading areas that are visible from any public right-of-way must also include a
combination of evergreen trees and shrubs that will result in solid opaque vegetative
screening a minimum of eight feet in height within two years of planting. The planting
area must be a prepared bed that is at least three feet in width.
6. Loading dock screening shrubs and landscape area may be counted towards the
general site landscaping requirements established in Sec. 6.3.112.
I. Fence and Wall Standards for All Uses
This subsection applies to all development and uses in TMED.
1. Fences and walls within the front building setback are allowed a maximum height of
three feet.
2. Fences and walls to the side or rear of the site are allowed a maximum height of six
feet, unless they are required for loading dock screening.
3. Fencing and walls must not be placed within the required line of sight as determined
by the sight triangle established in Sec. 4.4.8.
4. Chain link, barbed wire, razor wire, and metal or corrugated panels are prohibited.
J. Nonresidential and Multiple-Family Uses
This subsection is applicable to all nonresidential and multiple-family development and uses
in TMED.
1. Fences and walls must be constructed of decorative blocks, brick, stone, vinyl,
woodcrete, or wrought iron. Alternative materials may be approved by Warrant.
2. Breaks in the fence or wall must be made to provide for required pedestrian
connections to the perimeter of the site and to adjacent developments.
K. Single-Family Uses
This subsection is applicable to all single-family detached or attached dwellings, row house
and townhouse uses in TMED.
1. Fences and walls must be constructed of decorative blocks, brick, stone, vinyl, wood,
woodcrete, or wrought iron.
2. Alternative materials may be approved by Warrant.
6.3.12 Public Frontage Standards
A. Applicability
The TMED public frontage standards in this Section apply to all Transect Zones and Special
Districts as set forth below.
B. Public Frontage
Public frontage is the space between the existing or proposed back-of-curb and the
property line.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-33
1. The developer, property owner, home owner association, or property owner
association is responsible for the maintenance of all public frontage elements unless
stated otherwise in this Code or in a City Council approved agreement with the City
of Temple.
2. Total public frontage depth is measured from back-of-curb. If existing right-of-way
does not accommodate all requirements, private property must be used to account
for the additional required depth.
3. Refer to the TMED Design Guidelines for examples of Public Frontage requirements.
4. Curb and gutter installation is required.
The table below establishes five public frontage types and assigns standards to each public
frontage type.
Public Frontage
Type
On-Street
Parking
Permitted
Total Public
Frontage Depth
(ft.)
Street Yard
Planting Strip
(ft.)
Sidewalk Width
(ft.)
Type A (Arterial) No 20 10 10
Type B (Urban 1) No 12 6 6
Type C(Urban 2) Yes 14 6 8
Type D (Urban 3) No 14 6 8
Type E
(Collector/ Local) Yes 12 6 6
Type F (Local) Yes 10 6 4
C. Public Frontage Implementation
The table below assigns specific streets in the TMED zoning district with a public frontage
type.
Street Name Type A Type B Type C Type D Type E
New Streets in T4 ? ?
New Streets in T5-c ?
New Streets in SD ? ? ?
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-34
Street Name Type A Type B Type C Type D Type E
1st Street ?
5th Street from Friar’s
Creek to Avenue V
?
5th Street North of
Avenue V ?
25th Street ?
S 31st Street (trail on
west side) ?
13th Street ?
17th Street ?
West Avenue R (trail
on north side) ?
West Avenue M ?
New detached singlefamily
residential
streets in T-South
(local)
?
All others ?
D. Public Frontage Landscape Standards
1. Street Trees
a. One 2-inch dbh or 65-gallon large or medium canopy tree must be planted
every 35 feet of linear street frontage. Trees must be selected from the list
found in Sec. 7.4.5.B, except that live oaks, bur oaks, and pecan trees are not
allowed. Trees must be planted in a regularly spaced pattern. The spacing of
trees may be offset to allow for a view corridor into the primary entry of a
nonresidential use.
b. Public frontage trees may be a single species or two alternating species.
c. Public frontage trees must be planted within the required street yard planting
strip adjacent to the back-of-curb.
i. Type A Public Frontage
Trees must be planted eight and one-half feet from back-of-curb in the
required planting strip.
[Ord. 2012-4505]
ii. Type B, C, D, E, and F Public Frontage
Trees must be planted a minimum three feet from back-of-curb in the
required planting strip.
d. Small canopy trees must be planted if overhead utilities are not present.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-35
2. Planting Area
a. Type A, B, C and D Public Frontage
At street intersections and for a minimum length of 15 feet, the street yard
planting strip must be entirely filled, at the specified spacing, with approved
types of vegetation, selecting from the variations described below:
i. A single species of evergreen groundcover from the approved
groundcover list in Sec. 7.4.5.D., of 4” pot size, spaced every 15” on
center. The groundcover must be cultivated so that 70% of the required
planting area is covered within 2 years from the time of planting. A
complete covering of the planting strip with mulch a minimum of 3” deep,
consisting of fine-ground shredded hardwood bark (double ground) is
required; or
ii. A minimum of 2 shrub species, which may be only Dwarf Yaupon Holly,
Red Yucca, or Mexican Feather Grass, of 3-gallon container size, spaced
every 30” on center. The shrubs must be cultivated so that they reach a
height of 24 inches within 2 years from time of planting.
In addition, for variations outlined in Sections (ii) and (iii), a complete covering
of mulch a minimum of 3” deep, consisting of fine-ground shredded hardwood
bark (double ground), decomposed granite, or a combination of those materials
are required. Café River Rock, 1-3” or 3-5” in size, may also be used for mulch,
but may not cover more than 40% of the planting area and must be used in
combination with either fine-ground shredded hardwood bark or decomposed
granite, but not both.
The remaining mid-block sections of the planting strip must contain, at a
minimum, grass and trees.
b. Types E and F Public Frontage
The street yard planting strip must be planted in living grass or evergreen
groundcover as shown on the approved groundcover list (Subsection 6.3.12C)
at a rate of 4” container spaced every 15” on center or approved sod material
as listed in General Planting Criteria. If evergreen groundcover is used, a
complete covering of the planting strip with mulch a minimum of 3” deep,
consisting of fine-ground shredded hardwood bark (double ground) is required.
[Ord. No. 2014-4631]
E. Public Frontage Sidewalk Standards
a. Sidewalks must extend the entire length of the development’s frontage on a
public street and must be constructed in accordance with the TMED Design
Guidelines and related provisions in this UDC.
b. Sidewalks must be constructed before the Chief Building Official issues a
Certificate of Occupancy.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-36
c. Sidewalks must connect to existing adjacent sidewalks, or be designed and
placed to allow connection to future adjacent sidewalks.
d. Sidewalks of different widths must be transitioned within a length of sidewalk by
two expansion joints not less than six feet apart as required by Texas
Accessibility Standards.
e. Sidewalks must connect to parking within the lot and to primary entrances of
each nonresidential building.
f. Pedestrian walkways must also connect the principal building entrances to all
associated outdoor amenities, such as courtyards and other outdoor gathering
places.
g. Residential sidewalks must be installed from the primary entrance of the
residence to the perimeter street sidewalk system.
F. Public Frontage Amenities
In addition to required landscaping and sidewalks, pedestrian amenities are required as
follows:
1. Benches must be provided at all intersections within the public ROW surrounding the
development. Refer to the TMED Design Guidelines for the specific bench models
and styles that are permitted in the TMED zoning district. Alternate locations can be
approved by Warrant. The City of Temple is responsible for the maintenance of all
benches in the public ROW.
2. Trash receptacles must be placed next to required seating areas. Refer to the TMED
Design Guidelines for the specific trash receptacle models and styles that are
permitted in the TMED zoning district. The City of Temple is responsible for the
maintenance, including emptying, of any trash receptacles in the public ROW.
3. Pedestrian-scale lighting must be provided at all intersections and at 100' intervals
along all public and private roadways for all new attached single-family, multi-family,
non-residential or mixed-use development with frontage exceeding 200 feet in
length. Refer to the TMED Design Guidelines for the specific pedestrian-scale lighting
models and styles that are permitted in the TMED zoning district. The developer or
property owner is responsible for the installation and connection of pedestrian-scale
lighting to electricity, while the City of Temple is responsible for the maintenance and
operation costs.
G. Public Frontage Hike and Bike Trail Implementation
Hike and bike trail dedication is required in locations identified on the Citywide Trails
Master Plan.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-37
6.3.13 General Planting Criteria
A. Applicability
The TMED general planting criteria in this Section apply to all Transect Zones.
B. Approved Tree List – Article 7: General Development Standards: Section
7.4 Landscaping; Subsection 7.4.5. General Planting Criteria: B Approved
Tree List.
C. Approved Groundcover - Article 7: General Development Standards:
Section 7.4.5.D.
D. Approved Shrubs – Article 7: General Development Standards; Section
7.4 Landscaping; Subsection 7.4.5. General Planting Criteria; C Approved
Shrub List.
E. Approved Lawn Grass – Article 7; General Development Standards;
Section 7.4 Landscaping; Subsection 7.4.5. General Planting Criteria; E
Approved Lawn Grass.
F. Landscape Installation – Applicable to TMED
1. Trees
a. All required large, medium, or small trees must be a minimum of two inches in
diameter at breast height or 65-gallon container size at planting. Non-irrigated
trees planted as part of a renovation to existing buildings project require slow
release watering bags for a minimum of 1 year after planting.
2. Shrubs
All required shrubs must be a minimum three-gallon container size at planting.
3. Groundcover
All required groundcover must be a minimum one-gallon container size at planting.
4. Lawn Grass
a. Grass areas must be planted with drought resistant species normally grown as
permanent lawns, such as Bermuda, Zoysia or Buffalo.
b. Grass areas must be sodded, plugged, sprigged, or seeded. However, solid sod
must be used in swales, berms or other areas subject to erosion.
5. Stone and Mulch
Up to 1/3 of the total required landscaping (total percentage) may consist of any
of the following as long as it abuts grass (in buffers) and/or includes trees (such
as in parking islands):
i. A minimum of two-inch river rock (with weed barrier installed
underneath)
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-38
ii. Decomposed granite
iii. Stone pavers
iv. Stone blocks or boulders
v. Mulch
6. Landscape Maintenance
a. All new plant material must be planted and maintained in accordance with the
latest edition of the American National Standards Institute requirements for
Tree, Shrub, and Other Woody Plant Maintenance.
b. All required public frontage and private frontage landscaping must be
maintained in good condition after installation. The owner must replace any
plant material that ever becomes diseased, deteriorates or dies within 30 days
of death of the plant material.
7. Irrigation
Permanent irrigation is required for all landscape associated with new construction and is
encouraged for all new landscaping. City Code Chapter 7, Buildings, Article 7, Landscape
Irrigation Standards, applies in its entirety for projects related to a renovation of existing
buildings that includes the requirement to have access to a hose connection within 100 feet
of all landscaping.
[Ord. No. 2013-4580]
6.3.14 Architectural Standards
A. Applicability
The TMED architectural standards in this Section apply to all Transect Zones unless
otherwise stated in individual subsections.
B. Materials Required
Primary Materials (Max. 80%, Min. 70%
excluding window %)
Accent Materials (Max. 30%, Min. 20%
excluding window %)
Residential* Non-Residential* Residential* Non-Residential*
Brick Brick Architectural metal
Architecturally finished
concrete block
Cementitious siding (smooth
finish) Painted Tilt Wall Brick Brick
Stone Stone Cast stone
Cementitious siding
(smooth finish)
Stucco Stucco
Cementitious siding (smooth
finish) Granite
Glass block Marble
Stone Stone
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-39
Stucco Stucco (or EIFS)
Wood
Textured or patterned
concrete
Tile
Other materials approved by
warrant
Other materials approved
by warrant
Other materials approved by
warrant
Other materials approved
by warrant
*Vertical mixed-use buildings may use any of the eligible materials from either the "Residential" or "Non-Residential"
categories
A minimum of two distinct materials are required on all façades. Materials may be
combined on each façade only horizontally, with the heavier below the lighter.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-40
C. Building Design
Building design standards do not apply to Special Districts. The table below establishes
building design requirements based on the type of use in the T4, T5, and T-South Transect
Zones.
Design Element
Single-Family
Detached
Single-Family
Attached, Row
House,
Townhouse
Multiple-Family
and Mixed Use
Structures
Nonresidential
Structures
Roof Pitch
Flat roof – require parapet screening minimum of 42 inches high, or as required to conceal
mechanical equipment
Permitted Roof
Materials
30-year asphalt shingles
Standing seam metal
Tile
Other materials as approved by the Director of Planning
Roof Articulation
(does not apply to
flat roofs)
1 Elements from the following:
• 2 roof materials:
• Masonry chimneys
• Dormers along public façade (1/20’)
• Eaves that overhang a minimum of 24” with a minimum fascia depth of 8” or with
exposed rafter tails
Horizontal
Articulation
No more than 30 linear feet (horizontally) without one of the following:
- A minimum 2’ deep x 10’ long offset
- Porches or patios (covered or uncovered)
- Stoops
- Balconies
- Structural window awnings or canopies (regularly spaced)
- Roof dormers
- Masonry chimneys
- Projecting bay or box windows
- Arcades or porte cocheres
Transparency
(windows and
doors)
Minimum 15% of all street-facing façades must be doors and windows
Burglar bars or other exterior coverings are prohibited
Window and Door
Treatment
Minimum 4” trim required on all windows and doors appropriate to
style of structure
NA
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-41
Design Element
Single-Family
Detached
Single-Family
Attached, Row
House,
Townhouse
Multiple-Family
and Mixed Use
Structures
Nonresidential
Structures
Façade Repetition
No elevation may be
repeated on the
same side of the
street and block
All units on the
same side of the
street and block
must be designed to
have distinct
characteristics
NA
Top Floor
Articulation
Shall contain a distinctive finish, consisting of cornice, banding or other architectural
termination
Building Orientation All buildings must be oriented towards the public right of way or public open space
Primary Entry
Location
Main entrances must be from a public sidewalk or common open space (if not adjacent to
Public ROW)
Entry Articulation
Entry must include 1) an inset or offset from the front building plane by at least four feet
with display/storefront or bay windows; or 2) a parapet or vertical architectural element at
least 3-feet taller than the roof line, display/storefront windows and a metal window
canopy or awning; or 3) a covered porch or stoop.
Building Access –
Ground Floor
Residential Units
50% of residential
entrances must be
raised from the
finished ground floor
level of the sidewalk a
minimum of 15”
50% of all ground
floor units adjacent
to a public ROW
must have exterior
entrances from a
public sidewalk or
common open
space. Entrances
must be raised from
the finished ground
floor level of the
sidewalk a minimum
of 15”
NA
Building Access –
Above Ground
Floor Residential
Units
NA
Multi-family uses
above the ground
floor shall have
interior unit
entrances from a
centralized corridor
except:
Exterior stairs are
permitted for access
to second and third
floor units only if
they are oriented
towards a central
courtyard not visible
from any street
NA
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-42
6.3.15 Parking and Garage Standards
The table below establishes parking and garage standards. Parking and garage standards do
not apply to Special Districts.
Design Element
Single-Family
Detached
Single-Family Attached,
Row House or
Townhouse Multiple-Family
Required Enclosed
Garages
1 (20’ x 20’) space per
unit with a front-facing
garage
Not required; (20’ x 20’
spaces for all garages)
1 garage or carport
required per 3 units
Minimum Driveway
Width
10’ (ribbon drives are
allowed)
10’ (ribbon drives are
allowed) NA
Garage and Carport
Location general
Garages and carports
must be located to the
rear with alley access for
lots less than 50’ wide;
may front onto public
ROW if the lot backs up
to a park
Garages and carports must
be located to the rear with
alley access
NA
Garage and Carport
Materials
Same materials and mix as primary structures (for carports, that means posts must be
clad in same primary material as residential unit)
6.3.16 Private Property Common Area Standards
A. Private property common area requirements do not apply to Special Districts or singlefamily
detached and single-family attached residential uses in T4, T5, and T-South.
B. Common area requirements are in addition to required public and private landscaping.
C. Multiple open space areas may be created; however all open space areas must contain a
minimum of 100 sq ft.
D. Common areas must have defined edges, either through grade change, perimeter edging or
the integration of buildings as perimeter edging.
E. The table below establishes minimum private property common area standards for the
TMED zoning district.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-43
Design Element Non-Residential
Minimum Common Area
Size for non-residential
uses
Minimum of 5% of the gross floor area of buildings is required; to encourage shared common areas
among multiple buildings, the required common area would be a minimum of 4% of the gross floor area
of buildings if shared by multiple buildings; Up to 50% of required common area can consist of irrigated
landscaping
Common Area Amenities
Non-residential common areas must include one of the following:
- A water feature with seating;
- A stone, brick or decoratively paved patio with a seating area (4 seat minimum);
- A pavilion, gazebo or other covered outdoor space; or
Tree-lined trails/sidewalks surrounding an irrigated open green/park space with outdoor seating or
picnic areas
Design Element Multi-Family
Common Area Amenities
One of the following is required for every 50 units:
- Resident Clubhouse
- Community Garden Area
- Swimming Pool
- Tennis Court
- Basketball Court
- Volleyball Court
- Billiards Room
- Amphitheatre
- Gazebo or other covered shelter
- Exercise Facility
- Office Center
- Media Room – Theatre
- Sauna
- Irrigated park with trees and trails (minimum of ¼ acre)
- Racquetball Court
- Other amenity as approved by Director of Planning
6.3.17 Sign Standards
A. Applicability
The TMED sign standards in this Section apply to all Special Districts and Transect Zones
with the exception of SD-v.
B. Permitted Sign Types
The table below establishes the sign types that are permitted in the TMED zoning district.
• Sandwich Board
• Projecting
• Wall
• Monument
• Multi-tenant
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-44
• Directional
C. Specific Sign Type Standards
1. Sandwich Board Sign
One sandwich board sign may be used during normal operating hours for each
business. The sign must be placed on private property and not interfere with
pedestrian access. Sandwich board signs may not exceed a total of six square feet.
2. Projecting Sign
Projecting signs are permitted as long as they have a:
- Minimum clearance of 8 feet above the ground
- Maximum square footage of 32 square feet
3. Wall Sign
Wall signs must:
• Have a minimum clearance of 8 feet above the sidewalk or walkway
• Not extend past the top of the structure
• Be a maximum area 100 square feet
• Be either externally illuminated or be raceway mounted with channel letters
• A maximum length of 50 percent of each tenant's façade, excluding doors,
canopies/awning, windows and vertical architectural elements above the roofline,
may be utilized for a wall sign
4. Freestanding Signs
a. Freestanding signs must not interrupt the required tree planting and spacing or
be located within three feet of a hike and bike trail.
b. Single-tenant freestanding signs are subject to the following restrictions:
- Maximum height of 10 feet;
- Maximum area of 50 square feet per sign face;
- Limited to a masonry clad 2-legged base or
- A monument sign with masonry as the primary material; and
- Limited to 1 per front and 1 per driveway access if driveways are to the side
or rear (choice between a single-tenant or multi-tenant freestanding sign at
each location, not both).
c. Multi-tenant freestanding signs are subject to the following restrictions:
- Maximum height of 20 feet;
- Limited to a masonry clad 2-legged base or a monument sign with masonry
to match the building;
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-45
- Limited to 1 per front and 1 per driveway access if driveways are to the side
or rear (choice between a single-tenant or multi-tenant freestanding sign at
each location, not both); and
- Maximum area of 32 square feet per sign face.
d. Such signs must not interrupt the required tree planting and spacing or be
located within 3 feet of a Hike and Bike Trail.
e. Other materials must be approved by warrant if architecturally compatible.
5. Banners are subject to the following restrictions:
a. Must be affixed flush to a façade or attached flush to a fence or wall
b. Maximum Size: 50 square feet
c. Permit required
d. Temporary sign limited to 30 days to advertise grand openings, sales or special
events
e. Limited to two per year
6. Window signs are subject to the following restrictions:
a. Limited to 25% of window area
b. 2 per tenant or building
c. Permit required
7. Prohibited signs
a. Pole
(1) Existing pole signs can remain, but stone, stucco or brick must
be applied to a rectangular frame or box on the pole(s) for either
a minimum of 20 feet in height or the entire pole height when a
sign face is replaced.
b. Inflatable devices (excluding standard helium balloons but does include hot air
balloons used for advertising)
c. Message boards
d. Pole banners
e. Streamers
f. Searchlight
g. Commercial signs on any residential unit other than a "live work" unit
h. All other signage regulated per Sec. 7.6 of the UDC
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.3. TMED, Temple Medical and Educational
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-46
6.3.18 Street Light Standards
A. Applicability
The TMED lighting standards in this Section apply to all TMED Transect Zones.
B. Street Light Policy
Street light design and installation must comply with the City’s Street Light Policy.
6.3.19 Utility Standards
A. Applicability
The TMED utility standards in this Section apply to all Transect Zones.
B. Underground Utilities Required
All proposed new electric, telephone and cable television wires along the public street
right-of-way must be located underground.
6.3.20 Definitions
A. Artisan brewery, brewpub, or winery: An establishment which holds a permit from the
Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission (TABC) for the manufacture, blending,
fermentation, processing and packaging of alcoholic beverages with a floor area of 10,000
square feet or less that takes place wholly inside a building. A tasting or retail sales area
with or without food service and/or outdoor seating is allowed. A facility that only provides
tasting or retail sale of alcoholic beverages is not included in this definition.
B. Artisan craft production and retail: Any business which produces on the premises
articles for sale of artisan quality or effect or handmade workmanship. Examples include,
but are not limited to: candle making, soap making, glass blowing, woodworking,
printmaking, sculpture, artwork, metal work, ceramic art, and jewelry. Craft production
area excepting retail sales space shall be limited to 3,500 square feet.
C. Vape shop: A business establishment that allows for the mixing, display, retail sale of
electronic cigarette and/or use of electronic cigarette devices, nicotine-enriched solutions
and/or liquid products that are manufactured for the use with electronic cigarettes.
[Ord. 2010-4415]; [Ord. 2011-4438]; [Ord. 2018-4896]
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.4. PD, Planned Development Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-47
Sec. 6.4. PD, Planned Development Overlay
6.4.1 Permitted Uses
Permitted uses are those listed in the use table in Sec. 5.1 for the base zoning district applied to
the Planned Development. In addition, a Planned Development may be established where the
principal purpose is to serve as a transitional area, or as an extension of an existing district
whereby the provision of off-street parking, screening walls, fences, open space or planting
would create a protective transition between a lesser and more restrictive district. In approving a
Planned Development, additional uses may be permitted, and specific permitted uses may be
prohibited from the base district.
6.4.2 Dimensional Standards and Design Elements
Dimensional standards required in the base zoning district apply in a Planned Development
Overlay zoning district. Standards in Article 4 through Article 8 may be varied in adoption of the
Planned Development.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.5. H, North Central Temple Historic Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-48
Sec. 6.5. H, North Central Temple Historic Overlay
6.5.1 Zoning District Map Amendments
Adjustments to the boundary of the North Central Temple Historic Overlay zoning district,
creation of other historic districts, recognition of landmark properties or structures, and
preservation of subsurface historical or archeological locations must be reviewed in accordance
with the Zoning District Map Amendment process as set forth in Sec. 3.3.
6.5.2 Modification of Base Zoning District
In making the North Central Temple Historic Overlay zoning district designation, the Planning
and Zoning Commission may recommend and the City Council may authorize modifications to
the allowed uses and to the height, yard, area, coverage, parking and any other development
standards of the base zoning district if such action is determined necessary for the preservation
or protection of the designated property.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.6. FP, Floodplain Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-49
Sec. 6.6. FP, Floodplain Overlay
6.6.1 FP Designation
In accordance with the Zoning District Map Amendment procedure in Sec. 3.3 and upon final
determination that a property has no established history of periodic flooding but is subject to
flood hazard and is not part of the FP Overlay zoning district the City Council may designate the
subject property with a FP Overlay zoning district designation. Upon final approval of any Zoning
District Map Amendment or subdivision of a property in the FP Floodplain Overlay zoning
district such property must be identified with an "FP" on the final plat. The "FP" designation on
the Final Plat constitutes notice and warning to any person or entity thereafter purchasing,
mortgaging, leasing, building upon or otherwise dealing with the property that the land may be
subject to flooding.
6.6.2 Permitted Uses
Notwithstanding such uses being permitted in the underlying base zoning district according to
the use table in Sec. 5.1, only the following uses are permitted in the FP, Floodplain Overlay
zoning district. Where a Conditional Use Permit is required in the base zoning district, the
following uses require a Conditional Use Permit approved in accordance with Sec. 3.5.
A. Agricultural Uses as listed in the Use Table in Sec. 5.1;
B. Off-street parking incidental to principal uses permitted in the district;
C. Utility Uses as listed in the Use Table in Sec. 5.1;
D. Public or private park or playground, community center, or public golf course;
E. Natural Resource Storage and Extraction Uses as listed in the Use Table in Sec. 5.1 with
Flood Plain Administrator approval in writing before such operation is begun;
F. Recreational and Entertainment Uses as listed in the Use Table in Sec. 5.1 that take place
outdoors if approved by Conditional Use Permit in accordance with Sec. 3.5; and
G. Heliport if approved by Conditional Use Permit in accordance with Sec. 3.5.
6.6.3 Flood Plain Administrator Review and Final Action
A structure may not be erected in the FP Overlay zoning district until and unless the Flood Plain
Administrator approves such structure. The City Engineer must ascertain whether such structure
is subject to flood damage and would not constitute an encroachment hazard or obstacle to the
movement of flood waters and that such construction would not endanger the value and safety
of other property or the public health and welfare.
6.6.4 Removal From Overlay
A. An area may be removed from the flood plain "FP" prefix designation when by the provision
of drainage works, grading, flood protection or specific drainage study, the City Engineer
determines that the flood hazard has been alleviated. Removal of the flood plain "FP" prefix
may be accomplished in accordance with Sec. 3.3 after written notification from the City
Engineer advising of the removal of the flood hazard.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.6. FP, Floodplain Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-50
B. The fact that land is, or is not, within a district having a flood plain "FP" prefix may not be
interpreted as assurance that such land or area is, or is not, subject to periodic local
flooding.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-51
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
6.7.1 Purpose Statement (see Sec. 4.3.28)
6.7.2 Boundary
The I-35 Corridor Overlay zoning district applies to the entire length of the Interstate within the
City limits. The I-35 Corridor Overlay zoning district is defined as the land including:
A. Tracts of land that abut I-35;
B. Tracts of land that are developed used, managed, or marketed as a group that includes a
tract of land that abuts I-35; or
COMMENTARY: The interior portion of a shopping center with pad sites is an
example of land that lies within I-35 without abutting the highway.
C. Tracts of land that share parking space with a tract of land that abuts I-35.
6.7.3 Sub-Districts
The I-35 Corridor Overlay zoning district is divided into four sub-districts: Convention, Retail,
Industrial, and Gateway, which are denoted by a separate zoning prefix, for example I-35-
Gateway GR (General Retail) or I-35-Industrial LI (Light Industrial). If a property falls within more
than one sub-district, the more restrictive sub-district standards apply, regardless of how much
Convention District
Retail District
Gateway District
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-52
land area is in the less restrictive sub-district. Each sub-district must comply with the general
requirements listed in this Section and the sub-district requirements. Where the Overlay zoning
district requirements conflict with the base zoning requirements, the I-35 Overlay District
standards apply. See the I-35 Corridor Overlay zoning district map. Those sub-districts are:
A. Convention Sub-District (prefix of “I-35-Convention”)
The boundary extends from the south side of Bellaire North Drive and approximately
1,000 south to the north side of Bellaire North 2nd Addition.
B. Industrial Sub-District (prefix of “I-35-Industrial”)
The boundary extends from the northern city limits, approximately 1,100 feet south of
Enterprise Road on the west of I-35 and 560 feet north of Nugent Avenue on the east. It is
interrupted by city entry sub-districts, with stricter standards, at the north outer loop and
NE H.K. Dodgen Loop.
C. Retail Sub-District (prefix of “I-35-Retail”)
The boundary extends from south of Enterprise Avenue to the Leon River, the south City
limits. It is interrupted by City Entry sub-districts at Adams Avenue, H.K. Dodgen Loop and
the proposed South Outer Loop.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-53
D. Gateway Sub-District (prefix of “I-35-Gateway”)
There are five Gateway sub-districts located at major street locations that access industrial
areas, the Central Area, the hospital areas, shopping centers and future retail nodes.
[Ord. 2017-4849]
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-54
6.7.4 Applicability
The provisions of I-35 Corridor Overlay zoning district apply to development types in the table
below. The table provides a menu of architecture and landscaping requirements that are
proportional to the project scope for exterior building renovations or building expansions.
The General Design Requirements and the regulations for Sub-Districts apply to
new construction and to site modifications that affect tree preservation, parking,
fencing, screening, landscape, signs, lighting and utilities.
A. Architectural Design requirements apply in proportion to the project scope for exterior
building modifications and expansion of building footprint. Thresholds for proportional
compliance apply as shown in the following table:
PROJECT SCOPE Building
Materials
Primary
Entrance
Architectural
Elements
Exterior Building
Modifications
Cost equal to 10% - 24% of the assessed
value of improvements per the current tax
roll
N/A N/A N/A
Cost equal to 25% - 49% of the assessed
value of improvements per the current tax
roll
Applies N/A N/A
Cost equal to or greater than 50% of the
assessed value of improvements per the
current tax roll
Applies N/A N/A
Increase in
Gross Floor Area
10% - 24% increase in GFA Applies N/A N/A
25% - 49% increase in GFA Applies Applies N/A
50% or greater increase in GFA Applies Applies Applies
B. Landscape design requirements apply in proportion to the project scope for exterior
building modifications and expansion of building footprint. The Director of Planning is
authorized to approve adjustments to landscaping compliance for a project where unique
site characteristics constrain full compliance. The applicant’s request and the Director’s
decision must be made in writing. The Director may substitute one or more inapplicable
requirements for one or more applicable requirements, guided by order of priority
established in the table below. Options 5 and 6 are appropriate choices only for sites that
are too small to achieve Options 1-4.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-55
[Ord. 2017-4849]
PROJECT SCOPE OPTIONS IN ORDER OF PRIORITY
Exterior Building
Modifications
Excluding Painting
1
Front
landscape
buffer*
2
Side
landscape
buffers*
3
Parking
Islands with
Trees
4
Front
Foundation
Plantings
5
Curbing &
Landscaping of
Parking Lot
Deadspace
6
ROW
Landscaping**
Exterior Modifications
Cost equal to 10% - 24%
of the assessed value of
improvements per the
current tax roll
Applies
Cost equal to 25% - 49%
of the assessed value of
improvements per the
current tax roll
Applies Applies
Cost equal to or greater
than 50% of the assessed
value of improvements per
the current tax roll
Applies Applies Applies
Increase in
Gross Floor
Area
10% - 24% increase in GFA Applies Applies
25% - 49% increase in GFA Applies Applies Applies
50% or greater increase in
GFA Applies Applies Applies Applies
*Options 1 and 2 include parking screening when parking screening applies to the type of development.
**Approval by TxDOT is required for landscaping along General Bruce Drive frontage.
[Ord. 2017-4849]
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-56
6.7.5 Appeal Process
An appeal to any of the development standards requires Planning and Zoning Commission
review and City Council approval per Sec. 3.1.3.
6.7.6 Design Review
The City must review and approve a site development plan prior to construction for all
developments within the I-35 Corridor Overlay zoning district as required by this Section.
A. Design Review Process
1. This Section establishes a design review process to ensure that all development
within the I-35 Corridor Overlay District meets requirements set forth in these
design standards. The review covers site planning, architecture, landscaping, exterior
lighting and exterior signage, as well as any changes, additions or renovations to any
development on the site.
2. The design review process is divided into three steps:
a. Design Orientation;
b. Preliminary Design Review; and
c. Permitting.
3. It is preferred that the applicant meet with relevant staff at the design orientation step
of the process, while the subsequent steps of the process can potentially be
addressed via electronic submittals.
4. Questions, meetings and informal and partial submittals are encouraged to promote
early communication and resolution of issues. Verbal responses are unofficial and are
subject to change in written response. Only written approvals from the City are
official.
B. Submittal Requirements
Any and all of the information on the plans required below may be combined to reduce the
number of sheet submittals, as long as all sheet detail is provided.
1. Design Orientation
Before any design begins, an optional design orientation session is recommended
between a representative of the City and the property owner, design architect,
landscape architect, engineer and/or contractor. This session includes a discussion of
the design concept and design standards for the I-35 Corridor Overlay zoning district,
the specific design standards for the particular site and the design review process.
This orientation provides valuable information to assist the owner and designers in
expediting design review.
2. Preliminary Design
a. When the initial design for the project is prepared, a minimum of one electronic
set of plans should be submitted to the Planning Department for formal review.
This review covers conceptual site planning, architecture, landscape areas, and
sign location.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-57
b. The purpose of this conceptual design review is to provide the owner and
designer with written assurance that the fundamental designs are acceptable,
before requiring plans suitable for City permitting. It also provides a clear list of
any issues to be resolved in the Construction Documents Submittal step.
c. These plans must include, but are not limited to the following:
i. Preliminary Site Plan
(A) All property lines, easements, setbacks and buildable area limits;
(B) Location of water, sewer and electrical connections and conceptual
distribution layout;
(C) All buildings, walls, driveways, parking, walks, pools, patios, terraces,
signs and any other above grade development;
(D) Dimensions between existing and proposed construction and
between proposed construction and nearest property lines;
(E) Building height reference elevation; and
(F) Vicinity map showing relationships of this site to the rest of the I-35
Corridor Overlay zoning district.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-58
ii. Preliminary Grading
(A) Existing and proposed ground level contour concepts; and
(B) Slope treatment and drainage concepts.
iii. Preliminary Roof Plan
(A) Any unusual conditions or construction requirements; and
(B) All roof mounted equipment and required screening.
iv. Preliminary Building Elevations
(A) Principal exterior elevations of all proposed buildings (in color);
(B) Maximum building heights on each elevation drawing; and
(C) Conceptual finish materials, colors and textures under consideration.
v. Preliminary Building Sections
Grade and building height elevations for slopes greater than seven and
one-half percent.
vi. Preliminary Landscape Plan
(A) Planting concept, including locations and types of all plant materials;
and
(B) Demonstration that plant and wall design along the street frontage
meets the streetscape design guideline requirements for the I-35
Corridor Overlay District.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-59
vii. Fence and Wall Plan (if applicable)
(A) Locations, materials, colors and heights in relation to on-site grades;
and
(B) Relationships to walls, fences and grades on adjacent parcels.
viii. Sign Plan (if applicable)
(A) Locations in relation to on-site grades; and
(B) Elevations and details of sign graphics with data table of permitted
and proposed.
ix. Tree Survey (if applicable)
Location of trees identified in Sec. 7.4.5.B of the Unified Development
Code (approved tree list) measuring six inches or greater in diameter,
measured at breast height.
3. Permitting
a. When the preliminary design is further refined and the final construction
drawings and specifications for the project have been prepared, they must be
submitted to the Planning Department for permitting. This review covers all
design necessary for construction, including site development, architecture,
signage, grading, driveways, parking, walkways, terraces, patios, walls, fences,
planter beds, fountains, trellises, utilities, architecture, landscaping, walls, pools,
mechanical equipment, plumbing, electrical, exterior lighting and exterior signs.
[Ord. 2017-4849]
6.7.7 General Design Requirements
This Section establishes the general design requirements for tree preservation, parking,
screening, landscaping, signs, lighting and utilities. All development within the I-35 Corridor
Overlay zoning district must comply with these regulations, which supersede all other
regulations. Additional standards and requirements apply for each of the sub-districts.
A. Tree Preservation
The purpose for these tree preservation standards is to protect the natural beauty of the
city, decrease soil erosion, prevent clear cutting and preserve many existing hardwood and
canopy trees. Efforts should be made to protect trees on site. All trees over eight inches in
diameter at breast height (DBH) located within the floodplain plus the area within 300 feet
of the floodplain must be protected. A $100 per caliper-inch fee payable to the Parks
Department may be made for trees that cannot be accommodated on-site after the
required landscape elements are added. Tree mitigation requirements and fees only apply
to trees listed in Sec. 7.4.5.B. The tree mitigation requirements within the floodplain do not
count toward required landscaping. However, tree preservation in areas outside the
floodplain can count towards landscaping requirements. Tree mitigation requirements are
as follows:
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-60
1. A tree survey and preservation plan is required with the preliminary site plan
submittal. The tree survey must be signed and sealed by a licensed landscape
architect, arborist, engineer or land surveyor.
2. The location, diameter, height and common name of all trees with more than an
eight-inch DBH must be shown on the plan.
3. The removal of protected trees must be replaced on the property by planting new
trees, found in the Plant List in subsection E below, that are equal to the total caliperinches
of the removed trees.
B. Parking
Parking presents one of the greatest challenges in creating an appealing image for public
and private property. Parking may be provided in surface lots, parking structures, beneath
buildings or below grade, by any combination that meets the needs for spaces required in
Sec. 7.5.
1. Curb and gutter six inches in height are required around the perimeter of the parking
area and all landscaped parking islands.
2. Parking to the side and rear of buildings is encouraged and preferred.
3. Parking areas must be planned so that vehicles are not required to back out of
parking spaces directly into a public or private street.
4. Parking lots must be designed to preserve the maximum amount of existing trees on
site as possible.
5. Parking spaces that face and are adjacent to a building must utilize wheel stops.
6. Wheel stops are required adjacent to all landscaped areas.
7. Wheel stops are required adjacent to all sidewalks, except for raised sidewalks at
least 6 feet in width (8 feet if parking spaces front both sides).
8. All parking must be landscaped and screened per the standards set forth in subsection
D.12 below.
9. No parking is allowed in the landscape buffer.
C. Screening and Wall Standards
1. Storage in connexes, shipping containers and semitrailers
is not permitted. Portable buildings may not be
made into permanent structures in any form.
2. All garage and service bays, including but not limited to
off-street loading bays and service bays used for vehicle
repair and servicing, must be located to the rear of the
principal building or on the side of the building that is
not visible to the traffic flow on the abutting side of I-
35. Such bays may be located on the on-coming traffic
flow side of the building at the approval of the Director of Planning, but must be
screened by a masonry wall matching the architectural style and color of the building
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-61
or an opaque landscape screen containing two-inch DBH caliper hardwood canopy
trees, and five-gallon shrubs, as described in the Plant List in subsection E below.
3. No outside storage and display, sales, leasing or operation of merchandise outside of
sales areas for dealerships for trucks, cars, recreational vehicles, boats and
motorcycles, are permitted unless such activity is visually screened with a continuous
solid screening device from all streets and adjacent property lines of residentially
zoned properties or areas shown as a residential use on the Future Land Use and
Character Map.
4. Any public utility stations, such as lift stations and electric sub-stations, must be
screened from public view with a masonry wall matching the architectural style and
color of the building.
5. A masonry wall matching the architectural style and color of the building must be
located between properties when a multiple-family or nonresidential use abuts a
residential use or zoning district. Such wall must not be less than six feet or more
than eight feet in height, and constructed at grade along the abutting property line.
The screening wall is not required if a comparable screening wall in satisfactory
condition already exists on the abutting property.
6. Except as provided below, the following site elements must not be clearly visible at
eye level from any public street right-of-way or any adjoining residential use or
located within 100 feet of any public street right-of-way, unless adequately screened
according to the standards below.
a. Vehicle Loading and Unloading Zones and Service Areas
Screening for vehicle loading and unloading zones must consist of a continuous
solid masonry wall to match the color and style of the building, earthen berms
or evergreen opaque landscaping a minimum of six feet in height. Landscape
screening must be solid and reach a minimum height of six feet within two years
of the issue date of the Certificate of Occupancy for the building or change of
use.
b. Refuse Storage and Compactors
Refuse storage and compactors must be enclosed on three sides by a solid
masonry wall to match the color and style of the building and be a minimum of
one foot taller than the equipment being screened. The enclosure must have a
minimum eight-foot self-closing gate. The enclosure must be designed to
contain all refuse generated on-site between solid waste collections. The refuse
storage and compactors may not be located in required setbacks.
c. Mechanical and Utility Equipment
i. All ground mounted service equipment such as air conditioners,
transformers, trash collection equipment, and other service functions
must be located at the rear of buildings, and integrated into the building
envelope or enclosed service areas, unless the rear of the building faces I-
35, in which case such equipment must be located on the side least visible
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-62
from a public street right-of-way. Reduce pressure zones are allowed in
front of the building if properly landscaped.
ii. If such equipment is visible from a public street right-of-way, the screening
materials must be 100 percent opaque. Screens must incorporate
shrubbery with year-round foliage, or a wall, fence, or architectural
element of the adjacent building, and be a minimum of one foot taller than
the equipment being screened.
iii. All roof-mounted equipment must be screened from a vantage point that
is six feet above finished street grade with materials that are 100 percent
opaque. In all cases, screening must be compatible with building color and
materials.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-63
D. Landscape
Each site within the I-35 Corridor Overlay must provide a minimum of the following
landscape elements per the Applicability Table in Sec. 6.7.4.B. All required trees, shrubs
and groundcovers must be of a species permitted in the Plant List in subsection E below
unless approved by the Planning Director or City Arborist. Landscape plans must be
developed by a landscape contractor, designer or a landscape architect.
1. A total of 15 percent of the total site area must be landscaped with living approved
trees, shrubs and groundcovers (except for the Industrial sub-district, which requires
10 percent). Such landscape areas must include irrigation covering 100 percent of the
required landscaped area for new construction or confirmation of the existence of a
hose bib located within 200 feet for projects associated with the renovation of
existing buildings.
2. All required landscaping must be maintained in living condition after installation. The
owner must replace any plant material that becomes diseased, deteriorated or dies.
The replacement of landscaping must be done within 30 days unless approved by the
Planning Director to allow deferral of planting to a more optimal planting season.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-64
3. Areas not covered by building or pavement must be landscaped.
4. Drainage facilities are allowed within the landscape area. Drainage facilities include
detention ponds, water quality ponds, rain gardens, bioswales, outlet structures,
drainage berms or other improvements associated with the drainage improvements.
Such drainage facilities must have a natural look with minimum slopes and
landscaping.
5. Foundation plantings are required within a planting area a minimum of six feet in
width along 50 percent of the length of any façade visible to the public with the
exception of restaurant façades containing a drive-through, garage and service bays
and exterior walls adjacent to outdoor patios, which should include perimeter
planting. Foundation planting may count toward the required minimum site landscape
area required in paragraph 1 above.
6. All landscape and turf areas must be maintained on a regularly scheduled basis.
7. The preservation of existing trees referenced in the City’s Approved Tree List Sec.
7.4.5.B can count towards tree planting requirements at a one-to-one ratio of caliper
inches preserved to caliper inches required for planting (for example, the
preservation of an existing 6-inch DBH (diameter-at-breast-height or measured at 4
feet 5 inches above the ground) live oak tree can be substituted for three two-inch
DBH canopy trees).
8. A landscape buffer is required adjacent to any public street right-of-way based on the
sub-district’s Area Regulations and as follows.
a. One minimum two-inch DBH canopy tree, as set forth in the City’s Approved
Tree List found in Sec. 7.4.5.B., must be planted for each 30 feet of frontage
along public street rights-of-way as measured along the lot lines.
b. Required trees can be clustered.
c. Up to 1/3 of total required landscaping may consist of any of the following as
long as it abuts grass (in buffers) or includes trees (such as in parking islands):
i. A minimum of two-inch river rock
(A) Non-irrigated trees require slow release watering bags for 1st year
ii. Decomposed granite
iii. Stone pavers
iv. Stone blocks or boulders
v. Mulch
d. Substituting four ornamental trees per one canopy tree is allowed under power
lines.
e. A mix of evergreens with year-round foliage and deciduous trees are
encouraged.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-65
f. Berms not less than 24 inches nor more than 48 inches in height at no more
than a four to one slope are encouraged in the landscape buffer, covering a
minimum of 50 percent of the buffer area and shall result in exemption from
parking island requirements adjacent to the berm.
9. Any of the following must be screened by a continuous hedge or shrubs, earthen
berms, or retaining walls that are two and one-half to four feet in height:
a. Parking lot or vehicle use area;
b. Fuel pumps visible from the direction of traffic flow; or
c. Vehicle drive-through window facing the street or traffic flow.
10. Sidewalks a minimum of five feet in width are required in accordance with City
standards within the landscape buffer the entire length of the street frontage in the
following locations.
a. Along any street in the Convention Sub-District; and
b. Along any street that intersects or runs immediately parallel with I-35, if the
Trails Master Plan recommends a sidewalk adjacent to the property;
c. Connecting pad retail or office sites to other adjacent retail or office sites; and
d. All retail centers that are developed, used, managed or marketed as a group
must provide sidewalk connections between retail or office pad sites and
adjacent multi-family.
e. Crosswalks from internal sidewalks should be delineated by paint, texture, stain
or by a change of material.
11. The width and composition of a sidewalk required in subsection 10 above must be in
accordance with the following standards.
a. A sidewalk that is a minimum of 10 feet in width is required where the Trails
Master Plan shows a Citywide Spine Trail adjacent to the property.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-66
b. A sidewalk that is a minimum of eight feet in width is required where the Trails
Master Plan shows a Community-Wide Connector Trail adjacent to the
property.
c. A sidewalk that is a minimum of six feet in width is required where the Trails
Master Plan shows a Local Connector Trail adjacent to the property.
[Ord. 2012-4505]
12. Landscaped parking islands are required as follows in all parking lots, but are not
required adjacent to industrial truck docks. Parking islands may count toward the
required minimum landscape area set forth in the sub-district Area Regulations.
a. Interior Islands
A curbed landscape island must be provided for every 10 parking spaces. Each
island must be a minimum of 170 square feet in area and 10 feet in width backof-
curb to back-of-curb and may include a 2foot wide strip of additional
concrete, stone or pavers adjacent to parking spaces for safely stepping out of a
vehicle. A minimum two-inch caliper tree is required in each island.
b. Terminal Islands
All parking rows must terminate in a curbed landscape island. Each terminal
island must be a minimum of 360 square feet in area and contain two minimum
two-inch caliper trees.
c. Median Islands
A curbed median island a minimum of 10 feet in width back-of-curb to back-ofcurb
must be located after every third parking bay and along primary internal
access drives. Each median island requires a 4-foot sidewalk that connects to
the business (trees only required on the Terminal and Interior Islands).
13. Native plants and drought tolerant species from Sec. 7.4 are preferable to reduce
water requirements. Other drought-tolerant or native grass, shrubs and trees can be
approved by the Planning Director or by the City Arborist.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-67
[Ord. 2017-4849]
E. Approved Tree List – See Article 7; General Development Standards;
Section 7.4 Landscaping; Subsection 7.4.5. General Planting Criteria; B
Approved Tree List.
F. Approved Groundcover List – See Article 7; General Development
Standards; Section 7.4 Landscaping; Subsection 7.4.5. General Planting
Criteria; C Approved Shrub List.
G. Approved Shrubs – See Article 7; General Development Standards;
Section 7.4 Landscaping; Subsection 7.4.5. General Planting Criteria; D
Approved Groundcover List.
H. Approved Lawn Grass – See Article 7; General Development Standards;
Section 7.4 Landscaping; Subsection 7.4.5. General Planting Criteria; E
Approved Lawn Grass.
[Ord. No. 2013-4580]
I. Signs
The sign standards in this Section apply to all Sub-Districts in the I-35 Corridor Overlay.
1. Permitted Sign Types
The table below establishes the sign types and standards that are permitted.
Use Sign Type
Max.
Number of
Signs
Faces
Max.
Height
Max. Area
(per sign
face)
Min.
Setback
(from
property
line)
Min.
Spacing
Between
Signs
All
Permitted
Uses
Wall Sign
1 per public
street-facing
façade for
façades up
to 300 feet
in length per
business;
maximum of
2 for
façades
exceeding
300 feet in
length
NA (no
projection
above
building)
10% of
façade face
or 300 sq ft
max
(whichever
is greater)
NA NA
All
Permitted
Uses
Window
Sign NA NA 20% of
window area NA NA
All
Permitted
Monument
Sign
1 per private
or public 8’ 50 sq ft 0’ 25’
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-68
Use Sign Type
Max.
Number of
Signs
Faces
Max.
Height
Max. Area
(per sign
face)
Min.
Setback
(from
property
line)
Min.
Spacing
Between
Signs
Uses access
driveway
All
Permitted
Uses
Pylon Sign
1 per public
access
driveway
25’ to 35’ 200 sq ft
0’
(*1 foot
height
increase for
each foot of
setback-max
of 35’ tall)
50’
Multi-Tenant
Site
Monument
Sign
1 per private
or public
access
driveway
10’ 65 sq ft 0’ 25’
Multi-Tenant
Site Pylon Sign
1 per private
or public
access
driveway
35’ to 45’* 400 sq ft
0’
(*1 foot
height
increase for
each foot of
setback-max
of 45’ tall)
300’
2. Maximum Signs per Site
All sites are permitted one freestanding sign (monument or pylon, single-tenant or
multi-tenant) per private or public access driveway.
3. Multi-Tenant Sign Provisions
a. Developments containing three or more businesses, whether in single or
multiple buildings, must share freestanding sign structures for advertisement of
multiple businesses within the development. This provision applies to businesses
located on the same lot upon which the sign is located as well as to businesses
located on different lots within the development.
b. Multi-tenant sites are permitted to have one multi-tenant freestanding sign
(monument or pylon) per access driveway (or one single-tenant freestanding
sign per access driveway, not both). Signs must also comply with the following:
i. One monument sign is permitted per individual business advertised on
multi-tenant signs.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-69
4. Freestanding Sign Materials
Freestanding sign bases must be clad in either the same masonry material found on
the primary building exterior, brick or stone. If a building has been approved to use
ACM (Aluminum Composite Material) as the primary exterior or as an accent
material, freestanding signs on the site may be clad with ACM to match the building.
5. Pylon Sign Provisions
All pylon signs in the I-35 Overlay Corridor must have either 1) a minimum height to
width ratio of 1 to 0.15 for the masonry or ACM support structure or base or 2)
consist of a 2-legged sign clad with masonry that incorporates the following standards:
a. Brick or stone must extend at least 1/3 of the way up a metal pole
i. Stucco or ACM to match the building can be used where applicable and
b. The metal pole must consist of either:
i. A minimum of an 8-inch x 8-inch square pole with a minimum of a ½-inch
wall; or
ii. A round metal pole with a minimum of a 10-inch diameter; or
iii. Architectural metal approval by the Planning Director.
c. Planter boxes incorporated into the base of the pylon sign with droughttolerant
landscaping are encouraged and:
i. Count towards overall landscaping requirements and
ii. Do not require permanent irrigation
d. Existing pole signs can remain, but the pole(s) must be clad in stone, stucco or
brick the lesser of 20 feet in height or the entire pole height when a sign face is
replaced. The masonry must be applied to a flat surface, which would require a
rectangular framing for an existing round pole.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-70
6. Banner
a. Must be affixed flush to a façade or attached flush to a fence or wall
b. Maximum Size: 100 square feet
c. A sign permit is required in the I-35 Corridor Overlay
d. Temporary sign limited to 30 days to advertise grand openings, sales or special
events
e. Limited to two per year
7. Pole Banner
a. Permitted at car dealerships
8. Roof Sign
a. Permitted only on sites that are 15,000 sf or less to provide needed visibility for
smaller businesses
b. No freestanding sign is permitted on sites with a roof sign
c. No wall sign is permitted on wall closest to roof sign
9. Prohibited Sign Types
The following sign types are prohibited in the I-35 Corridor Overlay.
a. Fence Sign;
b. Inflatable Device (excluding standard helium balloons but does include hot air
balloons used for advertising);
c. Message Board; and
d. Pole Sign (excludes light pole gas station signs).
[Ord. 2012-4507]
J. On Premises Lighting
The purpose of these lighting regulations is to permit reasonable uses of outdoor lighting
for nighttime safety, utility, security and enjoyment while preserving the ambiance of the
night. By minimizing glare and obtrusive light that is misdirected, excessive or unnecessary,
energy and resources are conserved and the natural environment is protected from the
damaging effects of night lighting.
1. Directional Control
a. All luminaires must be full-cutoff as installed. Floodlights must be aimed no
higher than 45 degrees below horizontal. This can be accomplished by the use
of full-cutoff fixture design, shielding, visors, louvers or other devices.
b. Exterior lighting must have soft, indirect illumination concealed behind
landscaping or placed in outdoor lighting fixtures that do not produce direct
glare. Lighting must be focused and provide the minimum amount of
illumination required for safety.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-71
c. On-site lighting design must be used to identify and illuminate entries, walks and
parking areas. Site lighting used for building illumination must be down wall
washing only.
d. Security lighting must be designed to avoid glare, and must direct light toward
the building or storage area instead of away.
2. Reasonableness of Intensity
a. Exterior lighting must have soft, indirect illumination concealed behind
landscaping or placed in outdoor lighting fixtures that do not produce direct
glare.
b. Lighting must be focused and provide the minimum amount of illumination
required for safety.
c. Outdoor lighting fixtures must be a maximum of 30 feet in height. All light
fixtures located within 50 feet of any residential use must not exceed 15 feet in
height.
d. Lighting that flashes, blinks or moves in any way is not allowed.
e. Mercury vapor lighting is not allowed.
3. Light Trespass
a. No line of sight to a bulb is permitted five feet or more beyond a residential
property line or public street right-of-way by an observer viewing from a
position that is level with or higher than the ground below the fixture.
Compliance is achieved with full cutoff fixtures, fixture shielding, directional
control designed into the fixture, fixture location, fixture height, fixture aim or a
combination of these factors.
4. Sign Lighting
All illuminated signs must be lighted internally or lighted by top-mounted lights
pointed downward. A sign may not be illuminated with fixtures that are unshielded
from upward transmission of light. Lights that flash, pulse, rotate, move or simulate
motion are not permitted.
5. Temporary Lighting
The temporary use of low wattage or low voltage lighting for public festivals,
celebrations and the observance of holidays are exempt from regulation except
where they create a hazard or nuisance from glare. Light trespass requirements
remain in effect. Permits are required for commercial activities such as carnivals and
are valid for up to seven consecutive days. Where possible lighting should be fullcutoff.
6. Lighting Exemptions
The following uses or features are exempt from the standards of this Section unless
otherwise noted:
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-72
a. Swimming pools and other water features, monuments, historic structures, or
flags;
b. Stairs and ramps, as required by the Building Code;
c. Signs must meet the requirements in Sec. 7.6.3 of this UDC, but all signs are
recommended to be fully shielded;
d. Holiday and temporary lighting must meet the requirements in Sec. 7.6.8 of this
UDC; and
e. Low voltage landscape lighting, but such lighting should be shielded in such a
way as to eliminate glare and light trespass.
K. Utilities
For new construction, all electric, telephone and cable television wires and cables from the
property line to all structures being served on the site must be located underground.
6.7.8 Dimensional Illustration
The following illustration depicts the typical setbacks, landscape buffer, lot depth and lot width
that each sub-district requires in this overlay zoning district.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-73
6.7.9 Convention Sub-District
The Convention Sub-District provides a location for important buildings and services that are
essentially noncommercial or non-profit in nature and that often serve as community landmarks,
gathering places and settings for social interaction. This sub-district is meant to be a destination
for events, performances, festivals and other activities related to civic and cultural arts.
A. Permitted and Conditional Uses
The following use table establishes uses allowed by right or by Conditional Use Permit in
accordance with Sec. 3.5 in the Convention Sub-District. Unless otherwise regulated in the
standards for this overlay zoning district, permitted uses are governed by the standards of
this UDC for the underlying base zoning district. Uses not listed are prohibited.
Use
Permitted by Right
or Permitted
Subject to
Limitations Conditional Use Standards
Residential
Convent or monastery ?
Single-family attached dwelling ? 5.3.5
Single-family detached dwelling ?
Multiple-family dwelling
(apartment) ?
Nonresidential
Art gallery or museum ?
Accessory building ?
Child care facility ?
Day camp for children ?
Community center ?
Hotel ?
Mortuary or funeral home ?
Park or playground ?
Place of worship ?
Pre-school ? 5.3.11
Restaurant (not drive-in) ?
Retail shop, gift, apparel,
accessory and similar items ?
School, elementary or secondary
(public or private) ?
Swimming pool (private) ?
[Ord. 2015-4707] [Ord. 2017-4849]
B. Dimensional Standards
Dimensional standards for the base zoning districts as found in Sec. 4.5 of this UDC apply
except that the following regulations supersede such requirements for properties in the
Convention Sub-District. Nonconforming lots of record that are smaller than the minimum
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-74
required lot area may be developed but all requirements of the I-35 Corridor Overlay
District apply.
Regulation Measurement
Min. Lot Area 12,500 sf.
Min. Lot Width 80 ft.
Min. Lot Depth 80 ft.
Min. Front Yard Setback 25 ft.
Min. Side Yard Setback 10 ft.
Min. Side Yard Setback at Street 25 ft.
Min. Rear Yard Setback 10 ft. (20 ft. adjacent to residential)
Min. Landscape 15% of lot area (for new construction…see
Table 6.7.4 for existing buildings)
Min. Landscape Buffer
Front
1. 5 feet average (for 15,000 sf sites or less)
2. 10 feet average (15,001 sf -1 acre sites)
3. 15 feet average (1.01-2 acres)
4. 20 feet average (2.01-3 acres)
5. 25 feet average (3+ acres)
Sides and Rear 1. 5 feet average (2 acres or less)
2. 10 feet average (2+ acres)
(20 ft. adjacent to residential)
Max. Building Coverage 60%
C. Additional Landscaping
The following landscape requirements are required in addition to those requirements
described in Sec.6.7.7.D., Landscape, above.
1. In addition to those trees already required ornamental trees must be used in the
landscape buffer. One, minimum two-inch caliper, ornamental tree must be planted
for each 30 feet of frontage along public street rights-of-way as measured along the
lot lines.
D. Architectural Design
1. Site Development
a. Development must be sited as to maximize street presence.
b. The location and placement of buildings on individual sites must reflect
consideration for roadway access, the preservation of major existing natural
vegetation, visual impact and the relationship to surrounding developments.
c. In order to preserve privacy of residential properties when located adjacent to
nonresidential uses in a non-mixed use setting, the building must fit within a 2:1
slope from the residential property line, regardless if distance is greater than
that listed in the Dimensions Standards table above.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-75
2. Exterior Appearance of Buildings and Structures
a. All buildings in the Convention sub-district must be architecturally finished on
the front and side façades with same materials, detailing and features. As long as
the rear façade is not visible from a public street or residential property and is
painted to match the rest of the building, it is exempt from these architectural
requirements.
b. As an alternative for façades that are not visible from a public street, a single
row of trees may be planted along the building or in the landscape buffer on
offset 30-foot centers in a minimum 10-foot
landscape edge, where 50 percent of the trees
are canopy evergreen trees. In this case, the
architectural finish must match the remainder of
the building in color only.
c. Primary building (excluding accessory building)
entrances must be articulated and defined to
present a strong entry presence. Such entries
must include either 1) an inset or offset from the
front building plane by at least four feet; or 2) a
parapet or vertical architectural element at least
3-feet taller than the roof line or
display/storefront windows and a metal window
canopy or awning.
d. All buildings must be designed to incorporate no less than three of the following
architectural elements. Buildings over 50,000 square feet must include a
minimum of five of the following elements. Buildings over 100,000 square feet
must include a minimum of seven of the following elements:
i. Window canopies, window awnings, balconies, porches, stoops or
porticos;
ii. Minimum of 3-foot roof overhangs;
iii. Building wall plane recesses or projections (minimum of 2-feet deep and
10-feet long);
iv. Arcades;
v. Peaked roof forms;
vi. Arches;
vii. Outdoor patios;
viii. Display/storefront or transom windows;
ix. Architectural details (such as tile work or moldings) integrated into
building façade;
x. Articulated ground floor levels or base, such as a masonry wainscot;
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-76
xi. Articulated cornice line;
xii. Integrated planters or wing walls that incorporate landscape and sitting
areas;
xiii. Accent materials (minimum 10 percent of exterior façade).
xiv. Dormer windows
xv. Projecting bay or box windows
xvi. Parapets
All buildings must be designed and constructed in tri-partite architecture to express a
base, midsection and top. The heaviest building material must be used as the base. All
façades must include:
xvii. Articulated ground floor levels, such as with a masonry wainscot;
xviii. A midsection that can be defined by storefront/display windows and
window canopies or awnings; and
xix. A top that can be defined by articulated cornice lines, a change in material,
parapet, etc.
• Two-story tripartite example
• No more than 3 exterior wall materials
• Use of deep roof overhangs and eaves, articulated cornice lines, a masonry
wainscot, a metal canopy and storefront windows
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-77
e. No uninterrupted length of façade may exceed 50 feet in length without a
design element listed in Sec. 2.D.
f. Windows must comprise a minimum of 15 percent of the front and side
elevations. Vegetative screening can be substituted for side elevation window
requirements.
g. All drive-through restaurants must have an outdoor seating area with a 150 sf
minimum.
3. Building Materials and Colors
a. Conceptual façade elevations and color palette must be submitted to staff for
preliminary review.
b. The color of all structures must be generally earth-tone in hue. The Director of
Planning may approve accent colors that are not earth tone, but may not
approve a façade that displays more than 10 percent of non-earth tone colors.
No façade may display neon or florescent colors.
c. The designer may select a variety of exterior materials for use as the dominant
material on the façades of a building, but the number of materials on a single
building must be limited to no more than three materials in order to achieve a
clean design style.
d. Windows must not be glazed or re-glazed with mirrored or reflective glass.
e. Maintenance and durability of materials must be considered as important
qualities for every element of the design. Special care must be taken to specify
the use of vandal resistant building components.
f. The following is a list of approved building materials and accent materials per
façade (not to exceed 20 percent of materials used). The Director of Planning
may approve materials not listed below.
Primary Materials:
Max. 90%, Min. 70% (excluding
window %)
Accent Materials:
Max. 30%, Min. 10% (excluding window
%)
Architectural metal
Brick
Cast stone
Color integrated split face block
Stone
Stucco (or EIFS with a minimum of
a 3-foot high stone or brick
wainscot)
Smooth insulated wall panel
Textured painted tilt wall
Cast Stone
Cementitious siding
Glass block
Granite
Marble
Textured or patterned concrete
Tile
Wood
All primary materials (other than material
used to achieve the min. 80%)
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-78
[Ord. 2017-4849]
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-79
6.7.10 Industrial Sub-District
The industry component of Temple’s economy has been and should continue to be a major
factor in the City’s growth and employment. These Industrial Sub-District standards will keep the
City’s industrial base strong and growing while protecting the City’s image and enhancing the I-
35 Corridor.
A. Permitted Uses
Permitted uses are governed by the uses permitted in the use table in Sec. 5.1 of this UDC
for the underlying zoning district. Unless otherwise regulated in the standards for this
overlay district, permitted uses are governed by the standards of this Zoning Ordinance for
the underlying base zoning district.
B. Prohibited and Conditional Uses
Notwithstanding such uses being permitted in the underlying base zoning district according
to the use table in Sec. 5.1, the following uses are prohibited or require a Conditional Use
Permit in accordance with Sec. 3.5.
Use Prohibited Use Conditional Use Standards
Residential
All Residential Uses listed in
the use table in Sec. 5.1
except as follows:
? 5.3.1through 5.3.7
Multiple-family dwelling
(apartment) ? 5.3.3
Recreational vehicle park ?
Nonresidential
Animal feed lot ?
Animal shelter (public or
private) ?
Auto storage or auto
auction ?
Boat sales or repair ?
Body Piercing Studio ? 5.3.27
Bottling works ?
Building material sales ?
Car wash ?
Child care facility ?
Contractor storage and
equipment yard ?
Correctional facility ?
Day camp for children ?
Drag strip or commercial
racing ?
Flea market (outdoors) ?
Greenhouse or nursery
(retail) ?
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-80
Use Prohibited Use Conditional Use Standards
Hatchery, fish or shrimp, fish
farm ?
Hatchery, poultry ?
Heavy machinery sales,
storage and repair ?
Industrial Uses listed in the
use table in Sec. 5.1 ?
Kennel ?
Livestock auction ?
Major vehicle repair ? 5.3.22
Milk depot, dairy or ice
cream plant ?
Minor vehicle servicing ? 5.3.23
Motorcycle or scooter sales
and repair ?
Open storage of furniture,
appliances or machinery ?
Paint shop ?
Sexually oriented business ?
Shooting range (outdoor) ?
Stable, residential or
noncommercial ?
Tattoo Studio ? 5.3.27
Trailer, recreational vehicle,
portable building or HUDCode
manufactured home
sales or rental
?
Transitional or emergency
shelter ?
Upholstery shop ?
Veterinarian hospital
(kennels) ?
Wrecking or salvage yard ? 5.3.24
[Ord. 2012-4505]
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-81
C. Dimensional Standards
Dimensional standards for the base zoning districts as found in Sec. 4.5 of this UDC apply
except that the following regulations supersede such requirements for properties in the
Industrial Sub-District. Nonconforming lots of record that are smaller than the minimum
required lot area may be developed but all requirements of the I-35 Corridor Overlay
District apply.
Regulation Measurement
Min. Lot Area 1 acre
Min. Lot Width 160 ft.
Min. Lot Depth 160 ft.
Min. Front Yard Setback 50 ft.
Min. Side Yard Setback 20 ft.
Min. Side Yard Setback at Street 50 ft.
Min. Rear Yard Setback 20 ft. (30 ft. adjacent to residential)
Min. Landscape 10% of lot area (for new construction…see
Table 6.7.4 for existing buildings)
Min. Landscape Buffer
Front
1. 5 feet average (for 15,000 sf sites or less)
2. 10 feet average (15,001sf -1 acre sites)
3. 15 feet average (1.01-2 acres)
4. 20 feet average (2.01-3 acres)
5. 25 feet average (3.01+ acres)
Sides and Rear
1. 5 feet average (2 acres or less)
2. 10 feet average (2+ acres)
(20 ft. adjacent to residential)
Max. Building Coverage 50%
Max. FAR 1 to 1
Max. Building Height 50 ft. including mechanical and roof (does
not apply to a hotel or multi-family use)
[Ord. 2017-4849]
D. Architectural Design
1. Site Development
a. The location and placement of buildings on individual sites must reflect
consideration for roadway access, the preservation of major existing natural
vegetation, visual impact and the relationship to surrounding developments.
b. In order to preserve privacy of residential properties when located adjacent to
nonresidential uses in a non-mixed use setting, the building must fit within a 2:1
slope from the residential property line, regardless if distance is greater than
that listed in the Dimensions Standards table above.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-82
2. Exterior Appearance of Buildings and Structures
a. All buildings in the Industrial sub-district must be architecturally finished on the
front and side façades with same materials, detailing and features. As long as the
rear façade is not visible from a public street or residential property and is
painted to match the rest of the building, it is exempt from these architectural
requirements.
b. Primary building (excluding accessory building) entrances must be articulated
and defined to present a strong entry presence. Such entries must include either
1) an inset or offset from the front building plane by at least four feet; or 2) a
parapet, vertical architectural element at least 3-feet taller than the roof line or
display/storefront windows and a metal window canopy or awning.
c. All buildings must be designed to incorporate no less than three of the following
architectural elements. Buildings over 50,000 square feet must include a
minimum of five of the following elements. Buildings over 100,000 square feet
must include a minimum of seven of the following elements:
i. Window canopies, window awnings, balconies, porches, stoops or
porticos;
ii. Minimum of 3-foot roof overhangs;
iii. Building wall plane recesses or projections (minimum of 2-feet deep and
10-feet long);
iv. Arcades;
v. Peaked roof forms;
vi. Arches;
vii. Outdoor patios;
viii. Display/storefront or transom windows;
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-83
ix. Architectural details (such as tile work or moldings) integrated into
building façade;
x. Articulated ground floor levels or base, such as a masonry wainscot;
xi. Articulated cornice line;
xii. Integrated planters or wing walls that incorporate landscape and sitting
areas;
xiii. Accent materials (minimum 10 percent of exterior façade).
xiv. Dormer windows
xv. Projecting bay or box windows
xvi. Parapets
d. No uninterrupted length of façade may exceed 100 feet in length without a
design element listed in Sec. 2.C.
e. All drive-through restaurants must have an outdoor seating area with a 150
square foot minimum. Shared common areas are encouraged.
3. Building Materials and Colors
a. Conceptual façade elevations and color palette must be submitted to staff for
preliminary review.
b. The color of all structures must be generally earth-tone in hue. The Director of
Planning may approve accent colors that are not earth tone, but may not
approve a façade that displays more than 10 percent of non-earth tone colors.
No façade may display neon or florescent colors.
c. The designer may select a variety of exterior materials for use as the dominant
material on the façades of a building, but the number of materials on a single
building must be limited to no more than three materials in order to achieve a
clean design style.
d. Windows must not be glazed or re-glazed with mirrored or reflective glass.
e. Maintenance and durability of materials must be considered as important
qualities for every element of the design. Special care must be taken to specify
the use of vandal resistant building components.
f. The following is a list of approved building materials and accent materials per
façade (not to exceed 20 percent of materials used). The Director of Planning
may approve materials not listed below.
Primary Materials:
Max. 90%, Min. 70% (excluding
window %)
Accent Materials:
Max. 30%, Min. 10% (excluding window %)
Architectural metal
Stone
Cast stone
Wood
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-84
Primary Materials:
Max. 90%, Min. 70% (excluding
window %)
Accent Materials:
Max. 30%, Min. 10% (excluding window %)
Brick
Cast stone
Stucco (or EIFS with a minimum
of a 3-foot high stone or brick
wainscot)
Color integrated split face
block
Painted tilt wall
Smooth insulated wall panel
Glass block
Tile
Granite
Marble
Textured or patterned Cementitious siding
All primary materials (other than material
used to achieve the min. 80%)
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-85
6.7.11 Retail Sub-District
The retail locations in Temple have been and should continue to be a major factor in the City’s
growth and employment efforts. These standards will continue to attract new retail activity to
the City and enhance the City’s image as a desirable place to live, work and shop on the I-35
Corridor.
A. Permitted Uses
Permitted uses are governed by the uses permitted in the use table in Sec. 5.1 of this UDC
for the underlying zoning district. Unless otherwise regulated in the standards for this
overlay district, permitted uses are governed by the standards of this Zoning Ordinance for
the underlying base zoning district.
B. Prohibited and Conditional Uses
Notwithstanding such uses being permitted in the underlying base zoning district according
to the use table in Sec. 5.1, the following uses are prohibited or require a Conditional Use
Permit in accordance with Sec. 3.5.
Use Prohibited Use Conditional
Use
Standards
Residential
All Residential Uses listed in the
use table in Sec. 5.1 except as
follows:
?
Multiple-family dwelling
(apartment) ? 5.3.3
Recreational vehicle park ?
Nonresidential
Animal feed lot ?
Animal shelter (public or private) ?
Auto storage or auto auction ?
Boat sales or repair ?
Body Piercing Studio ? 5.3.27
Bottling works ?
Building material sales ?
Car wash ?
Child care facility ? 5.3.9 and 5.3.10
Contractor storage and
equipment yard ?
Correctional facility ?
Day camp for children ?
Drag strip or commercial racing ?
Flea market (outdoors) ?
Greenhouse or nursery (retail) ?
Hatchery, fish or shrimp, fish farm ?
Hatchery, poultry ?
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-86
Use Prohibited Use Conditional
Use
Standards
Heavy machinery sales, storage
and repair ?
Industrial Uses listed in the use
table in Sec. 5.1 ?
Kennel ?
Livestock auction ?
Major vehicle repair ? 5.3.22
Milk depot, dairy or ice cream
plant ?
Minor vehicle servicing ? 5.3.23
Open storage of furniture,
appliances or machinery ?
Paint shop ?
Sexually oriented business ?
Shooting range (outdoor) ?
Stable, residential or
noncommercial ?
Tattoo Studio ? 5.3.27
Trailer, recreational vehicle,
portable building or HUD-Code
manufactured home sales or
rental
?
Transitional or emergency shelter ?
Upholstery shop ?
Veterinarian hospital (kennels) ?
Wrecking or salvage yard ? 5.3.24
[Ord. 2012-4505]
C. Dimensional Standards
Dimensional standards for the base zoning districts as found in Sec. 4.5 of this UDC apply
except that the following regulations supersede such requirements for properties in the
Freeway Retail / Commercial Sub-District. Nonconforming lots of record that are smaller
than the minimum required lot area may be developed but all requirements of the I-35
Corridor Overlay District apply.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-87
Regulation Measurement
Min. Lot Area 12,500 sf.
Min. Lot Width 80 ft.
Min. Lot Depth 80 ft.
Min. Front Yard Setback 25 ft.
Min. Side Yard Setback 20 ft.
Min. Side Yard Setback at Street 25 ft.
Min. Rear Yard Setback 10 ft. (20 ft. adjacent to residential)
Min. Landscape 15% of lot area
Min. Landscape Buffer
Front
1. 5 feet average (for 15,000 sf sites or less)
2. 10 feet average (15,001 sf – 1 acre sites)
3. 15 feet average (1.01-2 acres)
4. 20 feet average (2.01-3 acres)
5. 25 feet average (3+ acres)
Sides and Rear 1. 5 feet average (2 acres or less)
2. 10 feet average
20 ft adjacent to residential
Max. Building Coverage 50%
Max. FAR 4 to 1
Max. Building Height 6 stories or 100 ft. including mechanical and
roof structure
D. Architectural Design
1. Site Development
a. Development must be sited as to maximize street presence.
b. The location and placement of buildings on individual sites must reflect
consideration for roadway access, the preservation of major existing natural
vegetation, visual impact and the relationship to surrounding developments.
c. In order to preserve privacy of residential properties when located adjacent to
nonresidential uses in a non-mixed use setting, the building must fit within a 2:1
slope from the residential property line, regardless if distance is greater than
that listed in the Dimensional Standards table above.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-88
2. Exterior Appearance of Buildings and Structures
a. All buildings, including accessory buildings, must be architecturally finished on all
sides with the same materials, detailing and features, with a higher level of finish
on the primary façades.
b. As an alternative for façades that are not visible from a public street, a single
row of trees may be planted along the building or in the landscape buffer on
offset 30-foot centers in a minimum 10-
foot landscape edge, where 50 percent of
the trees are canopy evergreen trees. In
this case, the architectural finish must
match the remainder of the building in
color only.
c. Primary building (excluding accessory
building) entrances must be articulated and
defined to present a strong entry
presence. Such entries must include either
1) an inset or offset from the front building
plane by at least six feet; or 2) a parapet,
vertical architectural element at least 3-
feet taller than the roof line or
display/storefront windows and a metal
window canopy or awning.
d. All buildings must be designed to incorporate no less than three of the following
architectural elements. Buildings over 50,000 square feet must include a
minimum of five of the following elements. Buildings over 100,000 square feet
must include a minimum of seven of the following elements:
i. Window canopies, window awnings, balconies, porches, stoops or
porticos;
ii. Minimum of 3-foot roof overhangs;
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-89
iii. Building wall plane or projections (minimum of 2-feet deep and 10-feet
long;
iv. Arcades;
v. Peaked roof forms;
vi. Arches;
vii. Outdoor patios;
viii. Display/storefront or transcom windows;
ix. Architectural details (such as tile work or moldings) integrated into
building façade;
x. Articulated ground floor levels or base, such as a masonry wainscot;
xi. Articulated cornice line;
xii. Integrated planters or wing walls that incorporate landscape and sitting
areas;
xiii. Accent materials (minimum 10 percent of exterior façade);
xiv. Dormer windows;
xv. Projecting bay or box windows; or
xvi. Parapets.
e. All buildings must be designed and constructed in tri-partite architecture to
express a base, midsection and top. The heaviest building material must be used
as the base. All façades must include:
i. Articulated ground floor levels, such as with a masonry wainscot;
ii. A midsection that can be defined by storefront/display windows and
window canopies or awnings; and
iii. A top that can be defined by articulated cornice lines, a change in material,
parapet, etc.
• Two-story tripartite example
• No more than 3 exterior wall materials
• Use of deep roof overhangs and eaves, articulated cornice lines, a masonry
wainscot, a metal canopy and storefront windows
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-90
f. No uninterrupted length of façade may exceed 50 feet in length without a
design element listed in Sec. 2.D.
g. Windows must comprise a minimum of 15 percent of the front and side
elevations. Vegetative screening can be substituted for side elevation window
requirements.
h. All drive-through restaurants must have an outdoor seating area with a 150
square foot minimum.
i. Shared common areas are encouraged.
[Ord. 2014-4631] [Ord. 2017-4849]
3. Building Materials and Colors
a. Conceptual façade elevations and color palette must be submitted to staff for
preliminary review.
b. The color of all structures must be generally earth-tone in hue. The Director of
Planning may approve accent colors that are not earth tone, but may not
approve a façade that displays more than 10 percent of non-earth tone colors.
No façade may display neon or florescent colors.
c. The designer may select a variety of exterior materials for use as the dominant
material on the façades of a building, but the number of materials on a single
building must be limited to no more than three materials in order to achieve a
clean design style.
d. No single building material may cover more than 80 percent of the front of any
building, with the exception of on-site utility or service structures.
e. Windows must not be glazed or re-glazed with mirrored or reflective glass.
f. Maintenance and durability of materials must be considered as important
qualities for every element of the design. Special care must be taken to specify
the use of vandal resistant building components.
g. The following is a list of approved building materials and accent materials per
façade (not to exceed 20 percent of materials used). The Director of Planning
may approve materials not listed below.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-91
Primary Materials:
Max. 90%, Min. 70% (excluding
window %)
Accent Materials:
Max. 30%, Min. 10% (excluding window
%)
Stone
Architectural metal
Cast stone
Brick
Stucco (or EIFS with a minimum
of a 3-foot high stone or brick
wainscot)
Granite
Marble
Painted Tilt Wall
Cast stone
Wood
Glass block
Tile
Granite
Marble
Textured or patterned concrete
Cementitious siding
All primary materials (other than
material used to achieve the min.
80%)
E. Vehicle Sales
Where sales inventory aisles exist for an automobile, truck, motorcycle, recreational
vehicle or boat sales, heavy machinery sales, leasing or rental establishment, the following
standards apply as exceptions to the general landscape provisions in Sec.6.7.7D.
1. Parking lot islands must be located at the end of the inventory aisle, span the width of
such aisle and have a minimum depth of 10 feet; and
2. Drought-tolerant shrubs per Sec. 7.4.C. a minimum of five gallons in size must
completely fill the island area.
3. Four ornamental trees can be substituted for one canopy tree in landscape buffers
abutting vehicle or boat inventory at strategic locations to allow for greater visibility
and protection of the inventory from falling leaves and branches.
F. Vehicle Sales in Portion of Sub-district
Where an automobile, motorcycle, or truck sales, leasing or rental establishment is located
between North General Bruce Drive and North 31st Street, north of Jack White Boulevard
up to 265 feet north of the northern boundary of the public street right-of-way of Bray
Street, the following standards apply, as exceptions to the corresponding general and
freeway retail commercial standards:
1. Inventory Parking Lot Islands
a. Parking lot islands must be located at the end of the inventory aisle, span the
width of such aisle and have a minimum depth of 10 feet.
b. Evergreen shrubs a minimum of five gallons in size must completely fill the
island area.
2. Landscape Buffer
a. A landscape buffer a minimum of 10 feet wide is required adjacent to Jack
White Boulevard.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-92
b. A landscape buffer a minimum of five feet wide is required adjacent to North
31st Street.
3. Garage and Service Bays
a. Garage and service bays, including but not limited to off-street loading bays and
service bays used for vehicle repair and servicing, must face Jack White
Boulevard and Bray Street.
b. A wing wall or opaque landscaping is not required to screen garage and service
bays as required in Sec. 6.7.7C, if landscaping along north General Bruce Drive
and Jack White Boulevard is designed to screen such garages and bays.
6.7.12 Gateway Sub-District
This sub-district is the gateway into the city core, hospitals, neighborhoods, shopping, airport and
industrial parks. Development should enhance the image of the City and entice people to stop,
shop and visit the City. These entries need to create attractive portals to the City.
A. Permitted Uses
Permitted uses are governed by the uses permitted in the use table in Sec. 5.1 of this UDC
for the underlying zoning district. Unless otherwise regulated in the standards for this
overlay district, permitted uses are governed by the standards of this Zoning Ordinance for
the underlying base zoning district.
B. Prohibited and Conditional Uses
Notwithstanding such uses being permitted in the underlying base zoning district according
to Sec. 5.1, the following uses are prohibited or require a Conditional Use Permit in
accordance with Sec. 3.5.
Use Prohibited Use Conditional
Use
Standards
Residential
All Residential Uses listed in the use
table in Sec. 5.1 except as follows: ?
Multiple-family dwelling
(apartment) ? 5.3.3
Recreational vehicle park ?
Nonresidential
Animal feed lot ?
Animal shelter (public or private) ?
Auto storage or auto auction ?
Boat sales or repair ?
Body Piercing Studio ? 5.3.27
Bottling works ?
Building material sales ?
Car wash ?
Child care facility ? 5.3.9 and 5.3.10
Contractor storage and
equipment yard ?
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-93
Use Prohibited Use Conditional
Use
Standards
Correctional facility ?
Credit Access Business ? 5.3.26
Day camp for children ?
Drag strip or commercial racing ?
Flea market (outdoors) ?
Greenhouse or nursery (retail) ?
Hatchery, fish or shrimp, fish farm ?
Hatchery, poultry ?
Heavy machinery sales, storage
and repair ?
Industrial Uses listed in the use
table in Sec. 5.1 ?
Kennel ?
Livestock auction ?
Major vehicle repair ?
Milk depot, dairy or ice cream
plant ?
Minor vehicle servicing ? 5.3.23
Motorcycle or scooter sales and
repair ?
Open storage of furniture,
appliances or machinery ?
Paint shop ?
Sexually oriented business ?
Shooting range (outdoor) ?
Stable, residential or
noncommercial ?
Tattoo Studio ? 5.3.27
Trailer, recreational vehicle,
portable building or HUD-Code
manufactured home sales or
rental sales or rental
?
Transitional or emergency shelter ?
Upholstery shop ?
Veterinarian hospital (kennels) ?
Wrecking or salvage yard ?
[Ord. 2012-4505] [Ord. 2017-4849]
C. Dimensional Standards
Dimensional standards for the base zoning districts as found in Sec. 4.5 of this UDC apply
except that the following regulations supersede such requirements for properties in the
Gateway Sub-District. Nonconforming lots of record that are smaller than the minimum
required lot area may be developed but all requirements of the I-35 Corridor Overlay
District apply.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-94
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-95
Regulation Measurement
Min. Lot Area 12,500 sf.
Min. Lot Width 80 ft.
Min. Lot Depth 80 ft.
Min. Front Yard Setback 25 ft.
Min. Side Yard Setback 20 ft.
Min. Side Yard Setback at Street 25 ft.
Min. Rear Yard Setback 10 ft. (20 ft. adjacent to residential)
Min. Landscape 15% of lot area (for new construction…see Table 6.7.4
for existing buildings)
Min. Landscape Buffer
Front
1. 5 feet average (for 15,000 sf sites or less)
2. 10 feet average (15,001 sf -1 acre sites)
3. 15 feet average (1.01-2 acre sites)
4. 20 feet average (2.01-3 acres)
5. 25 feet average (3+ acres)
Sides and Rear
1. 5 feet average (2 acres or less)
2. 10 feet average (2+ acres)
(20 feet adjacent to residential)
Max. Building Coverage 60%
Max. FAR 4 to 1
Max. Building Height 6 stories or 100 ft. including mechanical and roof
structure except for hotels and multi-family
[Ord. 2017-4849]
D. Architectural Design
1. Site Development
a. Development must be sited as to maximize street presence.
b. The location and placement of buildings on individual sites must reflect
consideration for roadway access, the preservation of major existing natural
vegetation, visual impact and the relationship to surrounding developments.
c. In order to preserve privacy of residential properties when located adjacent to
nonresidential uses in a non-mixed use setting, the building must fit within a 2:1
slope from the residential property line, regardless if distance is greater than
that listed in the Dimensional Standards table above.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-96
2. Exterior Appearance of Buildings and Structures
a. All buildings, including accessory buildings, must be architecturally finished on all
sides with same materials, detailing and features, with a higher level of finish on
the primary façades.
b. For façades that are not visible from the public streets, a single row of trees can
be planted along the building or in the landscape buffer on offset 25-foot
centers in a minimum 10-foot landscape edge, where 50 percent of the trees
are canopy evergreen trees. In this case, the architectural finish must match the
remainder of the building in color only.
c. Principal building entrances (excluding
accessory buildings) must be articulated
and defined to present a strong entry
presence. Such entries must be inset or
offset from the front building plane by at
least four feet and must include a
parapet, a vertical architectural element
that is at least 3 feet taller than the roof
line, or display/storefront windows and a
metal window canopy or awning.
d. All buildings must be designed to
incorporate no less than three of the
following architectural elements.
Buildings over 50,000 square feet must
include a minimum of five of the following elements. Buildings over 100,000
square feet must include a minimum of seven of the following elements.
i. Window canopies, window awnings, balconies, porches, stoops or
porticos;
ii. Minimum of 3-foot roof overhangs;
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-97
iii. Building wall plane recesses or projections (minimum of 2-feet deep and
10-feet long);
iv. Arcades;
v. Peaked roof forms;
vi. Arches;
vii. Outdoor patios;
viii. Display/storefront or transom windows;
ix. Architectural details (such as tile work or moldings) integrated into
building façade;
x. Articulated ground floor levels or base, such as a masonry wainscot;
xi. Articulated cornice line;
xii. Integrated planters or wing walls that incorporate landscape and sitting
areas;
xiii. Accent materials (minimum 10 percent of exterior façade).
xiv. Dormer windows
xv. Projecting bay or box windows
xvi. Parapets
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-98
e. All buildings must be designed and constructed in tri-partite architecture to
express a base, midsection and top. The heaviest building material must be used
as the base. All façades must include:
i. Articulated ground floor levels, such as with a masonry wainscot;
ii. A mid-section that can be defined by storefront/display windows and
window canopies or awnings; and
iii. A top that can be defined by articulated cornice lines, a change in material,
parapet, etc.
f. No uninterrupted length of façade may exceed 50 feet in length without a
design element listed in Sec. 2.D.
g. Windows must comprise a minimum of 15 percent of the front and side
elevations. Vegetative screening can be substituted for side elevation window
requirements.
• Two-story tripartite example
• No more than 3 exterior wall materials
• Use of deep roof overhangs and eaves, articulated cornice lines, a masonry
wainscot, a metal canopy and storefront windows
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-99
h. All drive-through restaurants must have an outdoor seating area with a 150 sf
minimum.
i. Shared common areas are encouraged.
[Ord. No. 2014-4631] [Ord. No. 2017-4849]
3. Building Materials and Colors
a. Conceptual façade elevations and color palettes and sample boards must be
submitted to staff for preliminary review.
b. The color of all structures must be generally earth-tone in hue. The Director of
Planning may approve accent colors that are not earth tone, but may not
approve a façade that displays more than 10 percent of non-earth tone colors.
No façade may display neon or florescent colors.
c. The designer may select a variety of exterior materials for use as the dominant
material on the façades of a building, but the number of materials on a single
building must be limited to no more than three materials in order to achieve a
clean design style.
d. No single building material may cover more than 80 percent of the front of any
building, with the exception of on-site utility or service structures.
e. Windows must not be glazed or re-glazed with mirrored or reflective glass.
f. Maintenance and durability of materials must be considered as important
qualities for every element of the design. Special care must be taken to specify
the use of vandal resistant building components.
g. The following is a list of approved building materials and accent materials per
façade (not to exceed 20 percent of materials used). The Director of Planning
may approve materials not listed below.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.7. I-35, Interstate 35 Corridor Overlay
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-100
Primary Materials:
Max. 90%, Min. 70%
(excluding window %)
Accent Materials:
Max. 30%, Min. 10% (excluding window
%)
Stone
Brick
Painted Tilt Wall
• Wood
• Cast Stone
• Glass Block
• Architectural Metal
• Tile
• Granite
• Marble
• Textured or Patterned Concrete
• Cementitious siding
• All Primary Materials (other than
material used to achieve the min.
70%)
E. Additional Landscaping
The following landscape requirements are required in addition to those requirements
described in Sec. 6.7.7D, Landscape.
1. A minimum of 15 percent of the total site area must be landscaped.
2. All driveways into the site must have enhanced paving of stone, brick or patterned
and stained concrete for a minimum of 50 percent of the driveway throat.
3. In addition to those trees already required, small canopy trees must be used in the
landscape buffer. One minimum two-inch caliper small canopy tree must be planted
for each 30 feet of frontage along public street rights-of-way as measured along the
lot lines.
4. One minimum three-inch caliper large or medium canopy tree must be planted for
each 25 feet of frontage along public street rights-of-way as measured along the lot
lines.
[Ord. No. 2017-4849]
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.8. 1st and 3rd Overlay District
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-101
Sec. 6.8. 1st and 3rd Overlay District
6.8.1 Boundary
The 1st and 3rd Overlay District is defined as tracts of land that abut or adjoin South 1st Street
from the north intersection of West Avenue M to the intersection of West Avenue E and from
the intersection of West Avenue E and South 3rd Street to the intersection of South 3rd Street
and West Avenue D, generally following the curve where South 1st and South 3rd join and tracts
of land that abut or adjoin North 3rd Street from the intersection of Adams Avenue to the
intersection of West Bellaire North and North 3rd Street.
Any property that is consolidated into property that meets the above criteria must also conform
to the Overlay Standards.
The 1st and 3rd Overlay District is more specifically shown in the map below, which is adopted
by reference and declared a part of this UDC.
[Ord. No. 2014-4631]
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.8. 1st and 3rd Overlay District
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-102
North Section: South Section
[Ord. No. 2014-4631]
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.8. 1st and 3rd Overlay District
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-103
6.8.2 Applicability
A. The provisions of 1st and 3rd Overlay District apply to development types in the table
below.
B. Improvements to existing buildings are cumulative within a 15-year period when
determining which of the following standards apply. Costs of interior improvements count
toward the cumulative improvement thresholds, but standards are not triggered until
exterior building improvements or site modifications occur.
C. When more than one threshold is reached, the most stringent standards apply.
D. All other provisions of the UDC apply unless otherwise stated.
Nonresidential and Multiple-Family
Development Type
General Standards
Circulation Standards
Private Property
Landscaping Standards
and General Planting
Criteria
Screening Standards
Public Frontage
Standards
Sign Standards
Utility Standards
New construction (Non-residential and Multiple-
Family) ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
Site modifications and improvements including:
installation and/or expansion of parking lot or
irrigation system or sidewalks
? ? ? ? ?
Change in use from single-family residential to
multiple-family and nonresidential use (See City
Code 12-16 Business Registration)
? ? ? ? ? ?
Increase in gross floor area of 50% or more or
modifications with a cost equal to or greater than
50% of the assessed value of improvements per
the current tax roll
? ? ? ? ? ?
Increase in gross floor area of 25%-49% or
modifications with a cost equal to 25%-49% of the
assessed value of improvements per the current
tax roll
? ? ?
Increase in gross floor area of 10%-24% or
modifications with a cost equal to 10%-24% of the
assessed value of improvements per the current
tax roll
?
Interior or exterior maintenance of existing
structure with like or similar materials with no
increase in gross floor area
Interior modifications or improvements
(remodeling) only
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.8. 1st and 3rd Overlay District
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-104
Nonresidential and Multiple-Family
Development Type
General Standards
Circulation Standards
Private Property
Landscaping Standards
and General Planting
Criteria
Screening Standards
Public Frontage
Standards
Sign Standards
Utility Standards
New Sign ?
Single-Family Development Type
General Standards
Public Frontage
Standards and General
Planting Criteria
New construction (Single-family attached and detached) ? ?
6.8.3 1st and 3rd Overlay District Site Plan Review Process
All redevelopment and new development in the 1st and 3rd Overlay District must follow the
TMED site plan review process as described in Article 3.
6.8.4 General Standards
A. Article 4, Zoning Districts, applies in its entirety with the addition of the
following:
1. Maximum impervious lot coverage for residential uses is 50%.
2. Maximum impervious lot coverage for non-residential uses is 70%.
B. Article 5, Use Standards, applies in its entirety.
C. Article 7, General Development Standards, Section 7.1 Performance
Standards applies in its entirety.
6.8.5 Access and Circulation Standards
A. Applicability
The 1st and 3rd Overlay District circulation standards in this Section apply to all zoning
districts and uses unless otherwise stated.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.8. 1st and 3rd Overlay District
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-105
B. Article 7, General Development Standards, Section 7.2 Access and
Circulation does not apply.
C. Thoroughfare Standards
1. Cul-de-sacs are prohibited in the 1st and 3rd Overlay District.
2. Flag lots are prohibited in the 1st and 3rd Overlay District.
D. Access and Connectivity
1. General
a. All driveway connections must be constructed and stubbed or connected to any
existing stub.
b. Driveway spacing must be based on the appropriate alignment with any existing
or proposed median breaks as approved by the City Engineer and TxDOT.
c. Each business is permitted one 24’ wide curb cut per street frontage.
d. If a site has greater than 300’ of frontage on South 1st or greater than 400’ of
frontage on North 3rd, it may have two 24’ wide curb cuts for that street
frontage.
6.8.6 Public Frontage Standards
A. Applicability
The 1st and 3rd Overlay District public frontage standards in this Section apply to all zoning
districts and uses.
B. Public Frontage
1. Public frontage is generally the space between the existing or proposed back-of-curb
and the property line.
2. Total public frontage depth is measured from back-of-curb. If existing right-of-way
does not accommodate all requirements, private property must be used to account
for the additional required depth.
3. Raised curb and gutter installation is required.
4. The table below establishes public frontage type and assigns standards to each public
frontage type.
Public
Frontage
Type Location
On-Street
Parking
Permitted
Typical Public
Frontage
Depth (ft.)
Sidewalk
Width (ft.)
Planting Strip and
Buffer Zone
(ft.) Behind Sidewalk
A
South 1st Street
from Avenue M to
Avenue E and South
3rd Street from
Avenue E to
Avenue D and from
No 12’ 8’ Sidewalk
Back of Curb 4’
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.8. 1st and 3rd Overlay District
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-106
Adams Avenue to
Houston Avenue
B
North 3rd Street
Houston to South
Intersection with
Munroe Avenue
No 15’
5’ Sidewalk
8’ From back of
Curb
2’ or greater
C
North 3rd Street
North Intersection
with Munroe to
West Bellaire
North
No 14’ 8’ Sidewalk
Back of Curb 4’ or greater
[Ord. No. 2014-4631]
C. Public Frontage Landscape Standards
1. Street Trees
a. One tree per 25’ linear street frontage is required. Trees must be planted in a
regularly spaced pattern. Spacing of trees may be offset to allow a view corridor
into the primary entry of a nonresidential use.
b. Trees must be a single species selected from the table in Section 6.8.9.
c. Trees must be planted within the required planting strip and buffer zone
adjacent to the back of sidewalk based on public frontage type.
d. Large canopy trees must be planted if overhead utilities are not present.
Medium canopy trees must be planted if overhead utilities are present.
e. Public Frontage Type A - Trees must be planted a minimum 10’ from back-ofcurb
in the required planting strip.
f. Public Frontage Type B - Trees must be planted a minimum thirteen feet from
back-of-curb in the required planting strip. If TxDOT right-of-way is greater
than 13’, the required street trees must be located 1’ away from TxDOT rightof-
way. The planting strip and buffer zone must be increased 1’ for every 1’ of
additional TxDOT controlled right-of-way.
g. Public Frontage Type C - Trees must be planted a minimum twelve feet from
back-of-curb in the required planting strip. If TxDOT right-of-way is greater
than 12’, the required street trees must be located 1’ away from TxDOT rightof-
way. The Planting strip and buffer zone must be increased 1’ for every 1’ of
additional TxDOT controlled right-of-way.
2. Planting Area
a. Public Frontage Planting Strip Type A – must be planted with approved shrubs
in accordance with Section 6.8.9 at a rate of one one-gallon container per 3
linear feet of street yard planting area and filled with river rock.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.8. 1st and 3rd Overlay District
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-107
b. Public Frontage Planting Strip Type B – must be planted in sod or evergreen
groundcover in accordance with Section 6.8.9.
c. Public Frontage Planting Strip Type C – must be planted in sod or evergreen
groundcover in accordance with Section 6.8.9.
D. Parking Lot Screen
This subsection applies only to non-residential and multiple-family development and
uses in the 1st and 3rd Overlay District. Additional parking lot screening is not
required for Type A public frontage sections.
1. All parking must be screened from public rights-of-way a minimum 36” in height,
through one of the following methods:
a. Planting screen of evergreen shrubs;
b. Masonry wall;
c. Combination of evergreen shrubs and wall.
2. Planted screening must be capable of providing a solid, opaque 36” screen within two
years, and must be planted in the public frontage planting strip and buffer zone.
3. Parking lot screening shrubs and landscape area count towards the general site
landscaping requirements established in Section 6.8.8 but not towards public frontage
planting area.
E. Public Frontage Sidewalk Standards
1. Sidewalks must extend the entire length of the development’s frontage on a public
street and must be constructed in accordance with the Design and Development
Standards Manual and related provisions in this UDC.
2. Sidewalks must be constructed before the Chief Building Official issues a Certificate
of Occupancy.
3. Sidewalks must be constructed at the back of curb.
4. Sidewalks must connect to existing adjacent sidewalks, or be designed and placed to
allow connection to future adjacent sidewalks.
5. Sidewalks of different widths must be transitioned within a length of sidewalk by two
expansion joints not less than six feet apart as required by state and federal
accessibility standards.
6. Sidewalks must connect to parking within the lot and to primary entrances of each
nonresidential building.
7. Pedestrian walkways must connect the principal building entrances to all associated
outdoor amenities, such as courtyards and other outdoor gathering places.
8. Residential sidewalks must be installed from the primary entrance of the residence to
the perimeter street sidewalk system.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.8. 1st and 3rd Overlay District
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-108
6.8.7 Public Frontage Lighting
A. Applicability
1. This subsection applies only to City initiated projects in the 1st and 3rd Overlay
District.
2. Pedestrian-scale lighting must be provided at all intersections and at 100’ intervals
along all public and private roadways within the development. Refer to the TMED
Design Criteria Manual for the specific pedestrian-scale lighting models and styles that
are permitted in the 1st and 3rd Overlay District.
6.8.8 Private Property Landscape Standards
A. Applicability
The private property landscape standards in this Section apply to all non-residential and
multiple-family zoning districts and uses in the 1st and 3rd Overlay District.
B. Article 7, General Development Standards, Section 7.3 Landscaping does
not apply.
C. General Site Landscape
1. A minimum percentage of the total area of the private property on which
development, construction or reconstruction is proposed must be dedicated to
landscape area including trees, shrubs, groundcover, sod or other living plant
material.
2. The table below establishes minimum site landscape requirements for the 1st and 3rd
Overlay District.
Development Type
Minimum
Landscape
Area (%)
Trees and Shrubs per Lot
Multiple-family 40% 2 trees and 8 shrubs per 1,000 sq ft
landscape area
Non-residential 30% 1 tree and 4 shrubs per 600 sq ft
landscape area
D. Foundation Planting
1. Foundation plantings are required within a planting area a minimum of four feet in
depth along 50% of the length of any façade visible to the public.
2. Foundation planting shrubs and landscape area count towards the general site
landscaping requirements established in Section 6.8.8.
E. Tree Mix
1. Private property trees must be selected from the table in Section 6.8.9.
2. A minimum of 50 percent of required trees must be selected from the medium or
large size tree list.
3. A minimum of 40 percent of required trees must be evergreen species.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.8. 1st and 3rd Overlay District
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-109
6.8.9 General Planting Criteria
A. Applicability
The 1st and 3rd Overlay District general planting criteria in this Section apply to all zoning
districts and uses.
B. Approved Tree List – Article 7: General Development Standards; Section
7.4 Landscaping; Subsection 7.4.5. General Planting Criteria; B Approved
Tree List.
C. Approved Shrubs - Article 7: General Development Standards; Section
7.4 Landscaping; Subsection 7.4.5. General Planting Criteria; C Approved
Shrub List.
D. Approved Groundcover List
The table below lists the groundcover species that are eligible to fulfill the groundcover
planting requirements in the 1st and 3rd Overlay District.
Groundcover
Common Name Scientific Name Type
Asian Jasmine Trachelospermum asiaticum Evergreen
English Ivy Hedera helix Evergreen
Liriope Liriope muscari Evergreen
Monkey Grass (Mondo Grass) Ophiopogon japonicus Evergreen
E. Approved Lawn Grass - Article 7: General Development Standards;
Section 7.4 Landscaping; Subsection 7.4.5. General Planting Criteria; E
Approved Lawn Grass.
F. Landscape Installation – Applicable to 1st and 3rd Street Overlay
[Ord. No. 2013-4580]
1. Trees
a. All required large trees must be a minimum of three inches in diameter (single
trunk) at breast height or 65-gallon container size at planting.
b. All required medium trees must be a minimum of two and one-half inches in
diameter (single trunk) at breast height at planting.
c. All required small trees must be a minimum of two inches in diameter (single
trunk) at breast height at planting at planting.
2. Shrubs
All required shrubs must be a minimum three-gallon container size at planting.
3. Groundcover
All required groundcover must be a minimum one-gallon container size at
planting.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.8. 1st and 3rd Overlay District
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-110
4. Lawn Grass
Grass areas must be sodded, plugged, sprigged, or seeded. However, solid sod
must be used in swales, berms or other areas subject to erosion.
5. Landscape Maintenance
a. All new plant material must be planted and maintained in accordance with the
latest edition of the American National Standards Institute requirements for
Tree, Shrub, and Other Woody Plant Maintenance (ANSI A300 Parts 1 through
6).
b. All required public frontage and private frontage landscaping must be
maintained in good condition after installation.
c. The owner must replace, within 30 days, any plant material that is diseased,
deteriorated or dead. The Director of Planning may issue up to a 90-day
extension of time for replacement during drought or summer months.
6. Irrigation
Permanent irrigation is required for all landscape. City Code Chapter 7,
Buildings, Article 7, Landscape Irrigation Standards, applies in its entirety.
6.8.10 Off-Street Parking and Loading
A. Article 7, General Development Standards, Section 7.4 Off-street Parking
and Loading applies in its entirety with the following additions.
1. General
Surface parking shall be constructed on-site in accordance with the following
standards:
a. Surface parking areas must be constructed with raised curb and gutter.
6.8.11 Signs
A. Article 7, General Development Standards, Section 7.5 Signs applies in
its entirety with the following additions and exceptions.
1. Lighting
All signs must be internally illuminated.
2. Prohibited Signs
Pole signs and roof signs are prohibited in the 1st and 3rd Street Overlay.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.8. 1st and 3rd Overlay District
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-111
6.8.12 Screening and Buffering
A. Article 7, General Development Standards, Section 7.6 Screening and
Buffering applies in its entirety with the following additions and
exceptions.
B. Screening of Mechanical Equipment
This subsection applies to all nonresidential and multiple-family development and uses
in the 1st and 3rd Overlay District.
1. All roof, ground and wall-mounted mechanical equipment (e.g., air handling
equipment, compressors, duct work, transformers and elevator equipment) must be
screened from view or isolated so as not to be visible from any residential districts or
uses, streets, rights-of-way or public park areas within 150 feet of the property line of
the subject lot or tract, measured from a point five feet above grade in accordance
with this Section.
2. Roof-mounted mechanical equipment must be shielded from view on all sides using
parapet walls.
3. Wall or ground-mounted equipment screening must be constructed of:
a. Vegetative screens; or
b. Brick, stone, architecturally finished concrete, or other similar masonry
materials; and
c. All fence or wall posts must be concrete-based masonry or concrete pillars.
4. Exposed conduit, ladders, utility boxes and drain spouts must be painted to match the
color of the building.
5. Mechanical equipment screening shrubs and landscape area may be counted towards
the general site landscaping requirements established in Section 6.8.8.
C. Screening of Waste Containers
This subsection applies to all nonresidential and multiple-family development and uses
in the 1st and 3rd Overlay District.
1. Waste containers must be located at the rear of the building and screened on all
sides, including gates, from public view to minimize visibility. If the property has two
public frontages the waste container must be placed on the side of the structure.
2. Waste containers must be located a minimum of 50 feet away from any residential
use or district’s property lines.
3. Waste containers must be located a minimum of 50 feet away from a multi-family
entryway.
4. Screening must be at least as tall as the waste container(s) and comprised of materials
and color schemes that are visually and aesthetically compatible with the overall
project that incorporate the following:
a. Brick;
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.8. 1st and 3rd Overlay District
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-112
b. Stone;
c. Stucco;
d. Architecturally finished concrete; or
e. Other similar masonry materials.
5. Waste containers with fence posts must be rust-protected metal, concrete based,
masonry or concrete pillars; and waste containers must have six-inch concrete filled
steel pipes (bollards) that are located to protect the enclosure from truck operations
and not obstruct operations associated with the waste container.
6. Waste container enclosures must have steel gates with spring-loaded hinges or the
equivalent and fasteners to keep them closed. When in use, tie-backs must be used to
secure the steel gates in the open position.
7. Waste container screening must be maintained by the owner at all times.
8. The ingress, egress, and approach to all waste container pads must conform to fire
lane requirements.
9. Waste container pad and aprons requirements must be constructed in accordance
with the Design and Development Standards Manual.
10. Waste container screening shrubs and landscape area count towards the general site
landscaping requirements established in Section 6.8.8.
D. Screening of Loading Docks
This subsection applies to all nonresidential development and uses in the 1st and 3rd
Overlay District.
1. Loading and service areas must be located at the rear of the building and screened
from public view to minimize visibility. If the property has two public frontages the
waste container must be placed on the side of the principal building.
2. Loading areas must not be located closer than 50 feet to any single-family lot, unless
wholly within an enclosed building.
3. Off-street loading areas must be screened from view from any street or adjacent
property of differing land use.
4. All loading areas must be enclosed on three sides by a wall or other screening device
a minimum of eight feet in height.
5. Loading areas that are visible from any public right-of-way must also include a
combination of evergreen trees and shrubs that will result in solid opaque vegetative
screening a minimum of eight feet in height within two years of planting. The planting
area must be a prepared bed that is at least four feet in width.
6. Loading dock screening shrubs and landscape area may be counted towards the
general site landscaping requirements established in Section 6.8.8.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.8. 1st and 3rd Overlay District
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-113
E. Fence and Wall Standards for All Uses
This subsection applies to all development and uses in the 1st and 3rd Overlay District.
1. Fences and walls on the primary and secondary frontage may have a maximum height
of four feet.
2. Fences and walls to the rear of the site may have a maximum height of six feet, unless
they are required for loading dock screening.
3. Fencing and walls must not be placed within the required line of sight as determined
by the sight triangle established in Section 4.4.8.
4. Chain link, barbed wire, razor wire and metal or corrugated panels are prohibited for
all uses.
F. Nonresidential and Multiple-Family Uses - Fences
This subsection is applicable to all nonresidential and multiple-family development and uses
in the 1st and 3rd Overlay District.
1. Fences and walls must be constructed of wood panels on steel posts, decorative
blocks, brick, stone, vinyl, woodcrete and wrought iron.
2. Breaks in the fence or wall must be made to provide for required pedestrian
connections to the perimeter of the site and to adjacent developments.
G. Single-Family Uses - Fences
This subsection is applicable to all single-family-detached or attached dwelling, row house
and townhouse uses in the 1st and 3rd Overlay District. Fences and walls must be
constructed of decorative blocks, brick, stone, vinyl, wood, woodcrete and wrought iron.
H. Outdoor Storage
Outdoor storage is not permitted in the 1st and 3rd Overlay District. Prohibited outdoor
storage includes open storage of inventory and equipment, portable containers, portable
buildings or any other structure not fixed onto a permanent slab and that adheres to the
architectural standards defined in Section 7.7.
I. Outdoor Retail Display
Commodities must not be displayed outdoors for sale in the 1st and 3rd Overlay District,
except that temporary outdoor display for a sidewalk sale is permitted that does not
extend more than five feet from a front façade and reserves at least five feet of sidewalk or
walkway for pedestrian use. Commodities must be brought indoors at the end of each
business day.
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.8. 1st and 3rd Overlay District
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-114
6.8.13 Building Exterior Materials
A. Article 7, General Development Standards, Section 7.7 Building Exterior
Materials Applies in its entirety.
6.8.14 Utility Standards
A. Applicability
The 1st and 3rd Overlay District utility standards in this Section apply to all nonresidential
and multiple-family development zoning districts and uses.
B. Underground Utilities Required
All electric, telephone and cable television wires and cables from the property line to all
structures being served on the site must be located underground.
6.8.15 Exception Requests
A. Upon application, the Director of Planning may consider an administrative exception for
sidewalk width and location. In determining whether to approve, approve with conditions
or deny an administrative exception, the Director of Planning must consider:
1. whether the reduction in width or location is consistent with the purpose of the
overlay district; and
2. building location; and
3. extent to which parking is affected and cannot be remedied by restriping, relocation,
and/or other means
B. Application Submittal
An exception application must be submitted to the Director of Planning. The application
must include a dimensioned site plan of the property depicting the proposed location and
width of the sidewalk, and existing parking, buildings, driveways, curb cuts, and landscaping.
C. Any party aggrieved by a decision of the Director of Planning on a development review
application in the 1st and 3rd Street Overlay District may appeal to the Planning and Zoning
Commission and City Council for final action.
[Ord. 2012-4532]
Article 6: Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 6.8. 1st and 3rd Overlay District
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
6-115
[This page intentionally left blank]

Article 7 – General Development Standards
Table of Contents
Sec. 7.1. Performance Standards .................................................................................................... 7-1
Sec. 7.2. Access and Circulation ..................................................................................................... 7-4
Sec. 7.3. Sidewalks .......................................................................................................................... 7-8
Sec. 7.4. Landscaping ...................................................................................................................... 7-9
Sec. 7.5. Off-Street Parking and Loading ...................................................................................... 7-16
Sec. 7.6. Signs ............................................................................................................................... 7-24
Sec. 7.7. Screening and Buffering.................................................................................................. 7-65
Sec. 7.8. Building Exterior Materials ............................................................................................. 7-72
[This page intentionally left blank]
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-1
Article 7 General Development Standards
Sec. 7.1. Performance Standards
7.1.1 General
All uses in the LI, Light Industrial and the HI, Heavy Industrial zoning districts must conform in
operation, location and construction to the performance standards specified in this Section for
noise, smoke and particulate matter, odorous matter, fire and explosive or hazardous matter,
toxic and noxious matter, vibration and glare.
7.1.2 Noise
A. At no point at the property line may a zoning district receive sound pressure levels that
exceed the decibel levels specified in the groups designated in the following table:
Residential
Zoning District
Business
Zoning District
Ag/Industrial
Zoning District
UE
SF-1
SF-2
SF-3
SFA
SFA-2
SFA-3
MH
2F
TH
MF-1
MF-2
MF-3
MU
O-1
O-2
NS
GR
CA
C
A
LI
HI
Max dB
Received
Max dB
Received
Max dB
Received
65 70 75
B. Decibel (dB) means a unit of measure of sound pressure, or noise level. An increase by
ten decibels doubles the volume.
C. Measurement of the noise level must be made with a decibel meter meeting American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) standards using the A-weighted scale.
D. The noise levels included in this Section are not applicable to extraction operations or
emergency vehicles.
7.1.3 Smoke and Particulate Matter
A use in the LI or HI zoning district may not cause, create or allow the emission of air
contaminants that violate state or federal environmental laws. Open storage and open
processing operations, including on-site transportation movements that are a source of wind
or airborne dust or other particulate matter, are subject to the standards and regulations
specified in this UDC.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.1. Performance Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-2
7.1.4 Odorous Matter
A. A use may not be located or operated in the LI zoning district that involves the emission
of odorous matter from a source of operation where the odorous matter exceeds the
odor threshold at the bounding property line or any point beyond the tract on which
such use or operation is located.
B. A use may not be located or operated in the HI zoning district that involves the emission
of odorous matter from a source of operation where the odorous matter exceeds a
concentration at the bounding property line or any point the tract on which such use or
operation is located which, when diluted with an equal volume of odor free air, exceeds
the odor threshold (two odor units).
C. The Chief Building Official determines the odor threshold as set forth in this UDC by
observation. In any case where uncertainty may arise or where the operator or owner
of an odor emitting use may disagree with the enforcing officer or where specific
measurement of odor concentration is required, the American Society for Testing of
Materials, A.S.T.M.D. 1391-57, Entitled "STANDARD METHOD FOR MEASUREMENT
OF ODOR IN ATMOSPHERES", method and procedures must be used and a copy of
A.S.T.M.D. 1391-57 is incorporated into this UDC by reference.
7.1.5 Fire and Explosive Hazard Material
A. A use involving the manufacture or storage of compounds or products that decompose
by detonation is not permitted in an LI or HI zoning district except that the Fire Chief
may approve chlorates, nitrates, perchlorates phosphorus and similar substances and
compounds in small quantities for use by industry, school laboratories, druggists or
wholesalers if such substances do not present a fire or explosion hazard.
B. The storage and use of all flammable liquids and materials such as pyroxylin plastics,
nitrocellulose films, solvents and petroleum products is permitted only when such
storage or use conforms to the standards and regulations of Chapter 12, Fire Prevention
and Protection, of the Code of Ordinances.
7.1.6 Toxic and Noxious Matter
A. A use permitted in the LI zoning district may not emit a concentration across the
property line of the subject property of toxic or noxious matter that exceeds the
concentration (exposure) deemed as the threshold limit for an industrial worker as the
Texas Department of Health set forth such standards in Threshold Limit Values
Occupational Health Regulation No. 3.
B. A use permitted in the HI zoning district may not emit a concentration across the
bounding property line of the tract on which such operation or use violating state or
federal environmental laws. Open storage and open processing operations, including onsite
transportation movements that are a source of wind or airborne dust or other
particulate matter, are subject to the standards and regulations specified in this UDC.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.1. Performance Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-3
7.1.7 Vibration
A. A use in the LI zoning district may not at any time create earthborn vibration that, when
measured at the property line of the subject property, exceed the limit of displacement
set forth in the following table in the frequency ranges specified.
Frequency (Cycles per
Second)
Displacement in Inches
0 to 10 .0010
10 to 20 .0008
10 to 30 .0005
30 to 40 .0004
40 to 50 .0003
B. A use in the HI zoning district may not at any time create earthborn vibration that, when
measured at the property line of the subject property, exceed the limit of displacement
set forth in the following table in the frequency ranges specified.
Frequency (Cycles per Second) Displacement in Inches
0 to 10 .0020
10 to 20 .0016
10 to 30 .0010
30 to 40 .0006
40 and over .0005
7.1.8 Glare
A use in any zoning district may not be located or conducted so as to produce intense glare or
direct illumination across the bounding property line from a visible source of illumination nor
may any such light be of such intensity as to create a nuisance or detract from the use and
enjoyment of adjacent property.
[Ord. No. 2013-4580]
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.2. Access and Circulation
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-4
Sec. 7.2. Access and Circulation
7.2.1 Applicability
A. The following access and circulation standards must be utilized in the determination of
drive approaches in the City of Temple. These standards address factors including curb
cut placement, width, angle, number of approaches per tract and other elements as
appropriate to provide adequate and safe access between private property and the
public street system in the City.
[Ord. 2012-4545]
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, the Texas Department of Transportation
requires access points on state-maintained roads to conform to its access management
policies.
7.2.2 Site Plan Required
A site plan must be submitted with the Building Permit application demonstrating compliance
with the standards of this Section.
7.2.3 General
A. If a change in curb cuts or an additional curb cut is proposed which would result in an
additional conflict with these regulations, the Planning and Zoning Commission must
determine the appropriateness of the request.
B. The City may impose a more restrictive standard than contained in this Section, in
conjunction with review of a subdivision plat, if anticipated development under these
standards will result in a dangerous or unsafe condition to the public.
C. The linear feet of property frontage determines the maximum number of drive
approaches allowed under this Section, as shown in the tables in Secs. 7.2.5 and 7.2.6.
Platting or replatting that reduces the property frontage may result in a reduction in the
number of permitted drive approaches according to the standards in such tables.
D. In conjunction with curb cuts approved under this Section, medians, signage, striping or
other traffic control devices may be required to be installed at the time of permit
approval or at some time in the future as needed for public safety or welfare.
E. Commercial and Industrial drive approaches as set forth in Secs. 7.2.5 and 7.2.6 must be
set at an angle of between 45 and 90 degrees from an abutting two-way public street
right-of-way or private access easement. One-way egress or ingress drive approaches
may be reduced to an angle of 30 degrees.
F. Curb radii for intersections of public streets and alleys are set forth in the table in
subsection 8.2.1G.
G. Where access to properties is desired at more frequent intervals than these standards
permit, the property owner may install service roads or acceleration/ deceleration lanes
after the applicable authorities, including the Director of Public Works and the Texas
Department of Transportation, review and approval such plans.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.2. Access and Circulation
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-5
7.2.4 Residential Drive Approaches
A. A drive approach for a Residential Use listed in the use table in Sec. 5.1 is prohibited on
arterial streets, unless the lot fronts on an arterial street on a final plat approved prior to
February 19, 1987.
B. Joint access curb cuts are encouraged where lots are less than 50 feet in width.
C. The minimum corner clearance of a residential curb cut is15 feet.
D. The minimum radius for a residential curb cut is two and one-half feet.
E. Where a circular residential driveway is proposed for a corner tract, both curb cuts
must meet the minimum corner clearance of 15 feet as set forth in paragraph C above.
F. Please see the Design and Development Standards Manual for curb cut standard details.
7.2.5 Commercial Drive Approaches
A. A drive approach for the following commercial uses listed in the use table in Sec. 5.1
must conform to the standards in the table below:
1. Agricultural Uses;
2. Commercial Uses;
3. Education and Institutional Uses;
4. Office Uses;
5. Overnight Accommodations;
6. Recreational & Entertainment Uses;
7. Restaurant Uses;
8. Retail Sales & Service Uses;
9. Transportation and Related Uses;
10. Utility and Service Uses;
11. Vehicle Sales and Service Uses.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.2. Access and Circulation
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-6
Property
Frontage (ft)
A B C D E
Curb Return
Radii (ft)
Suggested
Min. Island
Width (ft.)
Min. Corner
Clearance
Min. (ft.)
Two-way
Curb Cut
Width (ft)
Maximum
Number of
Two-Way
Curb
Cuts Per
Frontage
Min. Max. Min. Max.
Up to 100 2.5 30 10 15 24 45 2
101-200 2.5 30 15 15 24 45 3
201-300 2.5 30 20 20 24 45 4
301-400 2.5 30 25 20 24 45 5
401-500 2.5 30 30 20 24 45 6
501-600 2.5 30 35 20 24 45 7
601 and up The Planning and Zoning Commission reviews curb cuts for commercial
tract sizes in excess of 600 feet
B. Maximum drive approach widths and maximum number of drive approaches may be
used only where the frontage is sufficient to achieve minimum corner clearance, curb
return radii and suggested minimum island width. The width of the combined curb cuts
must not exceed 50 percent of the lot frontage.
C. One-way access curb cuts are permitted, but may not be less than 15 feet in width. The
combination of one-way curb cut widths must not exceed the maximum width for a
two-way curb cut based on lot frontage.
D. A minimum edge clearance of five feet must be provided, unless a joint access drive
approach is provided.
E. Joint access curb cuts are encouraged where lots are less than 100 feet in width.
7.2.6 Industrial Drive Approaches
A. A drive approach for Industrial Uses and Natural Resource Storage and Extraction Uses
set listed in the use table in Sec. 5.1 must conform to the standards in the table below.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.2. Access and Circulation
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-7
A B C D E
Property
Frontage (ft)
Curb Return
Radii (ft)
Suggested
Min. Island
Width (ft.)
Min.
Corner
Clearance
Min. (ft.)
Two-way
Curb Cut
Width (ft)
Maximum
Number of
Two-Way
Curb
Cuts Per
Frontage
Min. Max. Min. Max.
Up to 200 15 50 15 15 35 50 3
201-400 15 50 20 15 35 50 5
401-600 15 50 25 15 35 50 7
601-800 15 30 30 15 35 50 9
801-1,000 15 30 35 15 35 50 11
1,001and up The Planning and Zoning Commission reviews curb cuts for industrial
tract sizes in excess of 1,001 feet
B. Maximum drive approach widths and maximum number of drive approaches may be
used only where the frontage is sufficient to achieve minimum corner clearance, curb
return radii and suggested minimum island width.
C. One-way access curb cuts are permitted, but may not be less than 25 feet. The
combination of one-way curb cut widths must not exceed the maximum width for a
two-way curb cut based on lot frontage.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.3. Sidewalks
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-8
Sec. 7.3. Sidewalks
7.3.1 Applicability
Sidewalks built in accordance with the standards in Sec. 8.2.3 are required adjacent to a
collector street, minor arterial or major arterial if:
A. A new building or structure is built requiring a Building Permit as set forth in Sec. 3.13;
or
The cost to remodel an existing structure is by 50 percent or more of the assessed value
of the property per the current tax rolls.
7.3.2 Sidewalks Not Required
Sidewalks are not required:
A. For a new single-family dwelling where all adjacent properties are developed and where
no sidewalks have been provided on adjoining property.
B. For property located within an Industrial Park as set forth in Sec. 8.2.3.
7.3.3 Waiver of Sidewalk Requirements
The Planning Director may exercise discretion to waive all or a portion of the requirement
that a sidewalk be constructed as a condition of a Building permit in accordance with the
procedures in Sec. 3.10.
[Ord. No. 2013-4580]
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.4. Landscaping
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-9
Sec. 7.4. Landscaping
7.4.1 Purpose
The purpose of these landscaping standards is to enhance the attractiveness of the City
through a limited amount of landscaping provided in conjunction with new development.
7.4.2 Applicability
A. These standards do not apply to single-family or duplex residential uses located in any
zoning district, since these uses typically exceed the required landscaping. All other land
uses, including HUD-Code manufactured home developments and land lease
communities, apartments, offices, retail, commercial and industrial uses and parking lots
are subject to these standards, except in the CA district. Existing development is
encouraged, but not required, to provide this landscaping standard.
B. These standards to not apply to the Draughon-Miller Central Texas Regional Airport.
C. These landscaping standards are applicable in conjunction with a Building Permit for new
development, or an addition that increases site intensity on the lot or tract by 100
percent or more. Site intensity includes, but is not limited to, number of apartment
units, paved surface or square footage proposed for nonresidential development.
[Ord. 2015-4707]
7.4.3 Landscape Plan Required
A landscape plan must be submitted with the Building Permit application demonstrating
compliance with the standards of this Section.
7.4.4 Landscaping Standards
A. The developer of each lot subject to these standards is required to provide a minimum
landscaped area of five percent of the lot area to be utilized.
B. If the public street right-of-way is developed with landscaping conforming to these
standards, and is combined into an integrated landscape plan with required landscaping,
total required landscaping may be reduced to three percent of the lot area. The adjacent
property owner must maintain the public street right-of-way adjacent to the required
landscaped area in the same manner as the required landscaping.
C. The required landscaped area must be located in the front and side yards, except in the
C, LI and HI zoning districts where no front or side yard is required. In these districts,
required landscaping must be provided between the principal buildings and the streets
to which the buildings are oriented.
D. Required landscaped area must consist of living trees, shrubs, turf or other living
groundcover, native to Central Texas and Bell County, as described below.
E. A minimum of one tree is required to be planted in the landscaped area described in
paragraph A above or in the parking lot for each 40 feet, or fraction thereof, of linear
street frontage. The required number of trees need not be placed uniformly, but may be
clustered in groups.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.4. Landscaping
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-10
F. As an alternative to satisfying the requirement above for one tree per 40 linear feet of
street frontage, three shrubs, a minimum of five gallons each in size may be substituted.
G. The height and placement of landscaping must not encroach upon the intersection
visibility triangle defined in Sec. 4.4.8.
H. Where Sec. 7.7 requires a wood or masonry fence, it may be located within the
required landscaped area.
7.4.5 General Planting Criteria
A. Applicability
General planting criteria in this Section apply to all zoning districts and uses.
B. Approved Tree List
The table below lists the tree species that are eligible to fulfill tree planting
requirements. The Director of Planning and City Arborist may determine as acceptable
other species for plantings.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.4. Landscaping
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-11
Large Canopy Trees
Common Name Scientific Name Type Street Tree
Cypress, Arizona Cupressus arizonica Evergreen Yes
Cypress, Montezuma Taxodium mucronatum Deciduous Yes
Elm, Cedar Ulmus crassifolia Deciduous Yes
Elm, Lacebark Ulmus parvifolia Deciduous
Oak, Bur Quercus macrocarpaa Deciduous
Oak, Chinkapin Quercus muhlenbergii Deciduous
Oak, Live Quercus virginiana Evergreen
Pecan Carya illinoensis Deciduous
Medium Canopy Trees
Common Name Scientific Name Type Street Tree
Oak, Lacey Quercus laceyi Deciduous Yes
Oak, Mexican White Quercus polymorpha Deciduous
Oak, Texas Red Quercus texana Deciduous Yes
Pistache, Chinese Pistacia chinensis Deciduous Yes
Small Trees
Common Name Scientific Name Type Street Tree or
Screening Street
Tree (1st St. Only as
applicable in TMED)
Buckeye, Mexican Ungnadia speciosa Deciduous
Crape Myrtle Lagerstroemia indica Deciduous Yes
Holly, Yaupon Ilex vomitoria Evergreen Yes (1st Street
Screening Only)
Laurel, Texas Mountain Sophora secundiflora Evergreen
Maple, Shantung Acer truncatum Deciduous Yes
Persimmon, Texas Diospyros texana Deciduous
Pistache, Texas Pistacia texana Deciduous Yes (1st Street
Screening Only)
Plum, Mexican Prunus mexicana Deciduous
Possumhaw Holly Ilex decidua Deciduous
Redbud, Oklahoma Cercis reniformis Deciduous Yes
Redbud, Texas Cercis Canadensis var.
texensis
Deciduous Yes
Vitex (Chaste Tree) Vitex agnus castus Deciduous Yes
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.4. Landscaping
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-12
C. Approved Shrub List
The table below lists the shrub species that are eligible to fulfill landscape planting
requirements. The Director of Planning and City Arborist may determine as acceptable
other species for plantings.
Drought Tolerant Shrub List
Abelia, Glossy Abelia grandiflora
Agarita Berberis trifoliate
Agave, Century Plant Agave sp.
Artemesia Artemisia ‘Powis Castle’
Barberry, Japanese Berberis thunbergii
Black Dalea Dalea frutescens
Butterfly Bush Buddleja davidii
Butterfly Bush, Wooly Buddleja marrubiifolia
Contoneaster Cotoneaster sp.
Flame Acanthus Anisacanthus quadrifidus var.
Holly, Burford Ilex cornuta ‘Burfordii’
Holly, Dwarf Burford Ilex cornuta ‘Burfordii Nana’
Holly, Dwarf Chinese Ilex cornuta ‘Rotunda Nana’
Holly, Dwarf Yaupon Ilex vomitoria ‘Nana’
Lantana, Pink Lantana camara
Lantana, Texas Lantana horrida
Mountain Sage Salvia regla
Nandina (dwarf types) Nandina sp.
Oleander Nerium olender
Primrose Jasmine Jasminum mesnyi
Rock Rose Pavonia lasiopetala
Rose, Belinda’s Dream Rosa, ‘Belinda’s Dream’
Rose, Knock Out Rosa, ‘Knock Out’
Rose, Living Easy Rosa, ‘Living Easy’
Rose, Marie Pavie Rosa, ‘Marie Pavie’
Rose, Mutabilis Rosa, ‘Mutablis’
Rose, Nearly Wild Rosa, ‘Nearly Wild’
Rose, Old Bush Rosa, ‘Old Bush’
Rosemary Rosmarinus officinalis
Sage, Texas Leucopyllum frutescens
Sotol, Texas Dasylirion texanum
Sumac, Evergreen Rhus virens
Sumac, Fragrant (Aromatic) Rhus aromatic
Turk’s Cap Malvaviscus arboreus
Yucca, Paleleaf Yucca pallida
Yucca, Red Hesperaloe parviflora
Yucca, Softleaf Yucca, recurvifolia
Yucca, Twistleaf Yucca, rupicola
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.4. Landscaping
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-13
D. Approved Groundcover List
The table below lists the groundcover species that are eligible to fulfill landscape planting
requirements. The Director of Planning and City Arborist may determine as acceptable
other species for plantings.
Groundcover
Common Name Scientific Name
Asian Jasmine Trachelospermum asiaticum
Big Bluestem Andropogon gerardii
Bushy Bluestem Andropogon gerardii
Carolina Jessamine Lonicera sempervirens
Coral Honeysuckle Lonicera sempervirens
Coral Vine Antigonon leptopus
Cross Vine Bignonia capreolata
Dwarf Fountain Grass Pennisetum alopecuroides
Fig Vine Ficus pumila
Frogfruit Phyla incisa
Horseherb Calypotcarpus vialis
Indian Grass Sorghastrum nutans
Inland Seaoats Chasmanthium latifolium
Lady Banksia Rose Rose banksiae
Leadwort Plumbago Ceratostigma plumbaginoides
Liriope (including Giant) Liriope muscari
Little Bluestem Schizachyrium scoparium
Mulhly, Big Muhlenbergia lindheimeri
Mulhy, Deer Muhlenbergia rigens
Muhly, Seep Muhlenbergia reverchonii
Oregano Origanum vulgare
Passion Vine Passiflora incarnata
Littleleaf Periwinkle Vinca minor
Pigeonberry Rivina humilis
Purple Heart Secreasea pallida
Sanotlina Santolina chamaecyparissus
Sedge, Berkeley Carex tumlicola
Sedge, Meadow Carex perdentata
Sedge, Texas Carex texensis
Sedum Sedum nuttallianum
Sideoats Grama Bouteloua curtipendula
Silver Pony-foot Dichondra argentea
Sweet Autumn Clematis Clematis paniculata
Switch Grass Punica vigatum
Trumpet Vine Campsis radicans
Virginia Creeper Parthenocissus quinquefolia
White Avens Gerum canadense
Wooly Stemodia Stemodia lanata or tomentosa
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.4. Landscaping
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-14
E. Approved Lawn Grass
The table below lists the turf grass species that are eligible to fulfill landscape planting
requirements. The Director of Planning and City Arborist may determine as acceptable
other species for plantings.
Turfgrass
Common Name Scientific Name
Buffalo Grass Buchloe dactyloides
Palisades Zoysia Grass
El Toro Zoysia Grass
Empire Zoysia Grass
Jamur Zoysia Grass
Zoysia japonica
Zoysia japonica, El toro
Zoysia japonica, Empire
Zoysia japonica, Jamur
Argentine Bahia Grass
Pensacola Bahia Grass
Paspalum notatum, Argentina
Paspalum notatum, Pensacola
Common Bermuda Grass
Tiffway 419 Bermuda Grass
Celebration Bermuda Grass
Sahara Bermuda Grass
GN 1 Bermuda Grass
TexTurf Bermuda Grass
TifSport Bermuda Grass
Grimes EXP Bermuda Grass
Cynodon dactylon
Cynodon dactylon, Tiffway 419
Cynodon dactylon, Celebration
Cynodon dactylon, Sahara
Cynodon dactylon, GN 1
Cynodon dactylon, Tex Turf
Cynodon dactylon, TifSport
Cynodon dactylon, Grimes EXP
F. Landscape Installation
1. Trees
a. All required canopy trees must be a minimum of two inches in diameter
(single trunk) at breast height or 65-gallon container size at planting.
2. Shrubs
All required shrubs must be a minimum three-gallon container size at
planting.
3. Groundcover
All required groundcover must be a minimum one-gallon container size at
planting.
4. Lawn Grass
Grass areas must be sodded, plugged, sprigged, or seeded. However, solid
sod must be used in swales, berms or other areas subject to erosion.
7.4.6 Phased Projects
Each phase of a phased project must comply with the requirements of this Section.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.4. Landscaping
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-15
7.4.7 Existing Plant Material
In instances where healthy plant material exists on a site prior to its development, the
application of the above landscaping requirements may be adjusted if these standards are
satisfied.
7.4.8 Maintenance and Irrigation
A. All required landscaping must be maintained at all times in a living and growing
condition.
B. The owner must replace, within 30 days, any plant material that is diseased,
deteriorated or dead. The Director of Planning may issue up to a 90-day extension of
time for replacement during drought or summer months.
C. All required landscaping must be irrigated by an automatic sprinkling system or have
access to a hose connection within 100 feet of all landscaping.
7.4.9 Installment Guarantee
A final Certificate of Occupancy may be issued without the required landscaping in place,
provided a letter of credit or other suitable assurance is given that landscaping complying with
these standards will be installed no later than six months after issuance of the Certificate of
Occupancy.
[Ord. No. 2013-4580]
7.4.10 Phased Projects
Each phase of a phased project must comply with the requirements of this Section.
7.4.11 Existing Plant Material
In instances where healthy plant material exists on a site prior to its development, the
application of the above landscaping requirements may be adjusted if these standards are
satisfied.
7.4.12 Maintenance and Irrigation
All required landscaping must be maintained at all times in a living and growing condition. All
required landscaping must be irrigated by an automatic sprinkling system or have access to a
hose connection within 100 feet of all landscaping.
7.4.13 Installment Guarantee
A final Certificate of Occupancy may be issued without the required landscaping in place,
provided a letter of credit or other suitable assurance is given that landscaping complying with
these standards will be installed no later than six months after issuance of the Certificate of
Occupancy.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.5. Off-Street Parking and Loading
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-16
Sec. 7.5. Off-Street Parking and Loading
7.5.1 Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to ensure that developments within the City provide adequate
and reasonable parking and loading spaces necessary to serve the development.
7.5.2 Applicability
A. Except as provided in this Section, a building or structure may not be erected, altered or
converted for any permitted use unless off-street parking is provided as required in this
Section.
B. An established use lawfully existing on September 19, 1991, need not provide required
off-street parking as set forth in this Section. In addition, the number of required parking
spaces in an off-street parking area in connection with said uses existing on September
19, 1991, may not be reduced below the minimum number of spaces as required in this
Section.
7.5.3 Parking Plan Required
Off-street parking must be provided on the lot, an immediately adjacent lot, or on a lot within
150 feet of the building or structure, in accordance to the Required Parking Ratios and design
standards. Parking must be located within a zoning district that allows the use for which the
parking is intended. Shared parking must provide parking in an amount equal to the total of
the Required Parking Ratios for all uses. A parking plan must be submitted with the Building
Permit application demonstrating compliance with the standards of this Section.
[Ord. No. 2014-4631]
7.5.4 Off-Street Parking Ratios
A. Rules for Computing Required Parking and Loading Spaces
The following rules apply to the minimum parking space requirements set forth in the
table below.
1. Developments containing more than one use must provide parking and loading
spaces in an amount equal to the total of the requirements for all uses.
2. Ratios based on number of employees must be based on the largest number of
persons working on any shift.
3. The gross floor area of a structure devoted to off-street parking may be excluded
in computing the off-street parking requirements of any use.
4. The term “seats” includes “seating spaces.” Required parking spaces based on
seats must be computed based on the maximum seating arrangement.
B. Required Parking Ratios
Except as provided in paragraph C below, the following minimum off-street parking
requirements apply to all zoning districts.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.5. Off-Street Parking and Loading
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-17
SF= Square Feet GFA = Gross Floor Area
Specific Use Minimum Required Parking Spaces
RESIDENTIAL USES
Home for the aged 1 per 6 rooms or beds
HUD-Code manufactured
home
2 per home plus 1 guest space per 4 pad sites in land use
communities located in the vicinity of the pads to be served
Accessory dwelling unit
1 per unit in CA and C zoning districts; 2 per unit in all other
zoning districts
Family or group home 1 per resident plus 1 per employee
Multiple-family dwelling
(Apartment)
(a) 1.75 per dwelling unit with 1 bedroom
(b) 2 per dwelling unit with 2 or more bedrooms
(c) 1 per dwelling unit designed exclusively for elderly or
low-income persons
(d) 2 per dwelling unit if less than 3 units
(e) .75 per dwelling if units designed exclusively for
handicapped residents
All other Residential Uses listed
in the use table in Sec. 5.1 that
are not listed above
2 per dwelling unit
NONRESIDENTIAL USES
AGRICULTURAL USES
All Agricultural Uses listed in the
use table in Sec. 5.1
None
COMMERCIAL USES
All Commercial Uses listed in
the use table in Sec. 5.1
1 per 2 employees or 1 per 1,000 SF GFA, whichever is
greater
EDUCATIONAL AND INSTITUTIONAL USES
Art gallery, library or museum 10 plus 1 per 300 SF GFA
Cemetery or mausoleum 1 per 150 plots plus 1 per 350 SF office area
Child care: Family home
Off-street parking in addition to normally required parking for
the residence is not required
Child care: Day care center 1 per 400 SF GFA
Child care: Group day care
home
2 plus 1 additional space per staff member in excess of 2
Crematorium
1 per 2 employees or 1 per 5,000 SF GFA, whichever is
greater
Halfway house
Required parking spaces are established in the Conditional
Use Permit based on number and condition of clientele,
location, other surrounding conditions with the objective of
compatibility in the area
Hospital 1 per 2 beds
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.5. Off-Street Parking and Loading
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-18
SF= Square Feet GFA = Gross Floor Area
Specific Use Minimum Required Parking Spaces
Institution, religious-,
charitable-, philanthropicnature
10 plus one per employee
Meeting rooms and places of
public assembly
1 per 3 seats
Place of worship 1 per 3 seats in main worship space
School, elementary or middle
(public or private)
1 per classroom plus 1 per 4 seats in any auditorium,
gymnasium or other place of assembly
School, high or college,
university or seminary (public
or private)
1 per classroom, laboratory or instruction area plus 1 per 3
students accommodated in the institution
All other Educational and
Institutional Uses listed in the
use table in Sec. 5.1 that are
not listed above
1 per 300 SF GFA
INDUSTRIAL USES
Recycling operation inside or
outside a building 1 per 500 SF GFA or 5 spaces, whichever is greater
Wrecking or salvage yard
Storage or warehousing
1 per 2 employees or 1 per 5,000 SF GFA, whichever is
greater
All other Industrial Uses listed in
the use table in Sec. 5.1 that
are not listed above
1 per 2 employees or 1 per 1,000 SF GFA, whichever is
greater
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.5. Off-Street Parking and Loading
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-19
SF = Square Feet GFA = Gross Floor Area
Specific Use Minimum Required Parking Spaces
NATURAL RESOURCE STORAGE AND EXTRACTION USES
All Natural Resource Storage
and Extraction Uses listed in
the use table in Sec. 5.1
1 per 300 SF of office area
OFFICE USES
All Office Uses listed in the use
table in Sec. 5.1
1 per 300 SF GFA
OVERNIGHT ACCOMMODATIONS
Hotel or motel 1 per room, unit or guest accommodation
RECREATIONAL & ENTERTAINMENT USES
Alcoholic beverages, onpremise
consumption 1 per 3 seats under maximum seating arrangement
Amusement, commercial
(indoor or outdoor)
30 spaces plus 1 per 100 SF GFA over 2,000 SF.
Bowling alley 6 per lane
Golf Course 30 spaces
Theater or playhouse (indoor) 1 per 3 seats
All other Recreational &
Entertainment Uses listed in the
use table in Sec. 5.1 that are
not listed above
1 space for each 3 seats 1 space for each 4 persons to be
normally accommodated in the establishment
RESTAURANT USES
All Restaurant Uses listed in the
use table in Sec. 5.1
1 per 3 seats
RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE USES
Bank or savings and loan 1 per 400 SF GFA
Flea market (indoor or
outdoor)
1 per 300 SF GFA or market area; or 10 spaces whichever is
greater
Furniture and appliance sales
and service
1 per 500 SF GFA
All other Retail Sales and
Service Uses listed in the use
table in Sec. 5.1 that are not
listed above
1 space for each 250 square feet of total floor area
TRANSPORTATION AND RELATED USES
All Transportation and Related
Uses listed in the use table in
Sec. 5.1
1 per 250 SF of terminal area
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.5. Off-Street Parking and Loading
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-20
SF = Square Feet GFA = Gross Floor Area
Specific Use Minimum Required Parking Spaces
UTILITY AND SERVICE USES
Personal wireless facility 1 per facility site
All other Utility and Service
Uses listed in the use table in
Sec. 5.1 that are not listed
above
1 per vehicle normally required to service the utility
VEHICLE SALES AND SERVICE USES
Car wash 2 per bay
Fuel sales (self- or full-service) 6 spaces
Vehicle repair, major and
minor
1 per 200 SF GFA
All other Vehicle Sales and
Service Uses listed in the use
table in Sec. 5.1 that are not
listed above
5 per bay or 1 per 200 SF GFA, as applicable and whichever
is greater
C. Special Zoning District Provisions
Notwithstanding the off-street parking requirements in the table above, residential uses
in the C, Commercial, CA, Central Area and MU, Mixed Use zoning districts are as
follows.
1. Residential uses other than multiple-family dwellings in the C, Commercial and
CA, Central Area zoning districts require a minimum of one parking space per
dwelling unit. Minimum off-street parking requirements for multiple-family
dwellings and permitted nonresidential uses are as required in the parking table in
paragraph B above.
2. In the MU, Mixed Use zoning district, the following minimum off-street parking
requirements apply.
Specific Use Minimum Parking Requirement
Single-family detached dwelling,
two-family dwelling or townhouse
1 per 900 square feet of living area
Single-family attached dwelling 2 per dwelling unit
Multiple-family dwelling 1 for first bedroom unit and 0.5 per
additional bedroom
All other permitted uses See the table in B above.
3. In the MU, Mixed Use zoning district the Director of Planning may grant a 30
percent reduction in parking for nonresidential and multiple-family uses if the
applicant presents an alternate parking plan using shared parking, off-site parking
or other parking scheme. On-street parking spaces or areas directly in front of the
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.5. Off-Street Parking and Loading
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-21
building may provide up to 50 percent of required nonresidential parking. A
minimum of 50 percent of the required nonresidential parking must be located in
the side and rear yards.
4. The parking requirements in the table in paragraph B above do not apply in the
CA, Central Area zoning district.
5. In the residential zoning districts and the O-1, Office One; O-2, Office Two and
NS, Neighborhood Service zoning districts, a parking space, garage or carport or
other automobile storage space or structure may not be used for the storage of
any truck, truck trailer or van except a panel or pickup truck not exceeding one
and one-half tons’ capacity.
6. Private access drives to parking lots, or areas that are accessory to or serve
nonresidential uses in a nonresidential zoning district are prohibited through
residential zoning districts.
7.5.5 Off-Street Parking Design Standards
A. Dimensional and Access Standards
1. A typical 90 degree parking space must be striped and measure nine feet by 18-
feet.
2. Off-street parking spaces and areas must be designed so that a driver can exit the
space or area without backing a vehicle into a public street, right of way or alley.
This provision does not apply to residential uses in the following zoning districts:
AG, UE, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SFA, SFA-2, SFA-3, 2-F, TH and MH.
B. Curb and Gutter
1. Curb and gutter six inches in height is required around the perimeter of the
parking area and all landscaped parking islands. An alternative design may be
proposed by a design engineer to be considered for approval by the Director of
Planning. Areas not accessible or visible from the public street right-of-way or a
public park are exempt from this requirement.
[Ord. 2012-4545]
C. Material Standards
All parking areas (required and optional) must be paved with either asphalt or concrete.
A parking space or area must include an asphalt or concrete driveway connecting the
parking space or area with a street or alley permitting free ingress and egress to the
street or alley.
D. Where questions arise concerning the minimum off-street parking requirements for any
use not specifically listed in the table in paragraph 7.5.4B, the Director of Planning may
apply the parking requirements of a similar use to the use in question.
E. Where a determination of the minimum parking requirements cannot be readily
ascertained for new or unlisted uses according to paragraph 7.4.4A above, the minimum
off-street parking requirements are established by the same process as provided in Sec.
5.2 for classifying new and unlisted uses.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.5. Off-Street Parking and Loading
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-22
[Ord. 2012-4516]
7.5.6 Off-Street Loading Regulations
Uses must provide off-street loading in accordance with this subsection.
A. Except in the CA, Central Area zoning district, all nonresidential uses except for those
specified in paragraph C below must provide and maintain off-street loading areas.
Loading areas must be paved with either asphalt or concrete. Such off-street loading
space may be adjacent to a public alley or private service drive or may consist of a truck
berth within the structure. Such off-street loading space or truck berth must consist of a
minimum area of 10 feet by 45 feet and such spaces or berths must be provided in
accordance with the following table.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.5. Off-Street Parking and Loading
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-23
Gross Floor Area of Structure (sq ft) Area
0 to 5,000 None
5,001 to 15,000 1
15,001 to 40,000 2
40,001 to 65,000 3
65,001 to 100,000 4
B. The existence of a paved alley a minimum of 20 feet in width adjacent to the property is
deemed the equivalent of one berth.
C. For Overnight Accommodations, Office Uses and Restaurant Uses as listed in the use
table in Sec. 5.1 located in zoning districts other than in the CA, Central Area zoning
district, off-street loading areas must be provided in accordance with the following table.
Gross Floor Area of Structure (sq ft) Area
0 to 10,000 None
10,001 to 50,000 1
50,001 to 100,000 2
101,001 to 200,000 3
Each additional 200,000 1 additional
D. In the MU, Mixed Use zoning district, off-street loading areas and truck staging areas
must be located in the side or rear yard.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-24
Sec. 7.6. Signs
7.6.1 Purpose
Signs use private land and the sight lines that public rights-of-way create to publish a message
to inform and persuade the general public. This Section provides standards for the erection
and maintenance of private signs. All signs not exempted as provided in this Section must be
erected and maintained in accordance with these standards. The general objectives of these
standards are to promote health, safety, welfare, convenience and enjoyment of the public,
and in part to achieve the following.
A. Safety
To promote the safety of persons and property by requiring signs that do not:
1. Create a hazard due to collapse, fire, decay or abandonment;
2. Obstruct firefighting or police surveillance; and
3. Create traffic hazards by confusing or distracting pedestrians, obstacles or other
vehicles or to read traffic signs.
B. Communications Efficiency
To promote the efficient transfer of information in sign messages so that:
1. Those signs that provide messages and information most needed and sought by
the public are given priorities,
2. Businesses and services may identify themselves;
3. Customers and other persons may locate a business or services;
4. A person or group is not arbitrarily denied the use of the sight lines from the
public street right-of-way for communication purposes;
5. Persons exposed to signs are not overwhelmed by the number of messages
presented and are able to exercise freedom of choice to observe or ignore such
messages, according to the observer's purpose;
6. The right of free speech exercised through the use of signs containing noncommercial
messages is preserved; and
7. Community events may be identified to the public at large, at strategic locations
throughout the City, as approved by the Chief Building Official.
C. Landscape Quality and Preservation
To protect the public welfare and to enhance the appearance and economic value of the
landscape, by requiring signs that:
1. Do not interfere with scenic views;
2. Do not create a nuisance to persons using the public rights-of-way;
3. Do not create a nuisance to occupants of adjacent and contiguous property by
their brightness, size, height or movement;
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-25
4. Are not detrimental to land or property values;
5. Do not contribute to visual blight or clutter; and
6. Are architecturally compatible and harmonious with the structure to which they
pertain and to neighboring structures.
7.6.2 Definitions
As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following words are
defined as follows:
A-Frame Sign. A freestanding portable sign typically hinged at the top and widening at the bottom to
form a shape similar to the letter “A”.
Abandoned Sign. A sign that has not been used for advertising for one year.
Advertising Device. A device, sign, flag, light, figure, statue, picture, letter, word, message, symbol,
plaque or poster visible from outside the premises on which it is located and designed to inform
or attract the attention of persons not on the premises. The word “sign” includes the word
“advertising device”.
Agricultural Sign. A sign identifying the farm or ranch on which it is placed and advertising the produce,
crops, animals or poultry raised or quartered thereon.
Animated Sign. A sign that uses mechanical movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a
special effect or scene.
Apartment Name Sign. A sign for the identification of an apartment building or complex of apartment
buildings.
Awning. An architectural projection that provides weather protection, identity or decoration and is
wholly supported by the building to which it is attached. An awning is comprised of a lightweight,
rigid skeleton structure over which a rigid covering is attached.
Banner. A flexible roll-up sign made of vinyl, cloth or any other lightweight material, containing words,
symbols or logos intended for advertising or attracting attention to a business or event. A banner
is not a wall sign, fence sign or a flag.
Banner, Pole. A device made of any lightweight material, whether or not containing a message of any
kind, suspended from a permanent pole secured with braces. A pole banner is not a banner or a
flag.
Bench Sign. A sign mounted, affixed or painted on a bench.
Canopy. An architectural projection that provides weather protection, identity or decoration and is
supported by the building to which it is attached and at the outer end by not less than one
stanchion. A canopy is comprised of a rigid structure over which a rigid covering is attached.
Cardboard Sign. A sign made of cardboard.
Changeable Copy. An on-premise sign advertising commodities or services offered on the premises
consisting of individual message elements such as letters, numbers or symbols, that are designed
and intended for frequent manual replacement or alteration after the sign is erected.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-26
Community Event Sign. A sign that solicits support for or advertises a nonprofit community use, City
event, public use or social institution. Such signs may include, but are not be limited to, seasonal
holidays such as Christmas or Easter, school activities, charitable programs, community festivals,
religious activities or events of community interest, but not including any business sign or real
estate sign.
Construction Sign. A sign identifying the property owner, architect, contractor, engineer, landscape
architect, decorator or mortgagee engaged in the design, construction or improvement of the
premise on which the sign is located.
Corporate Flag. The official flag of a company, including a logo flag that the parent company supplies. A
corporate flag does not include advertising of any kind.
Curb Line. An imaginary line drawn along the outermost part or back of the curb and gutter on either
side of a public street, or, if there is no curb and gutter, along the outermost portion of the
paved roadway, or if there is no paved roadway, along the edge of the traveled portion of the
roadway.
Development Sign. A sign related to the promotion of new developments and located on the premises
involved in the development.
Dilapidated or Deteriorated Sign. A sign that has any of the following characteristics:
(a) Where elements of the surface or background can be seen, as viewed from the normal
viewing distance, to have portions of the finished material or paint rusted, flaked, broken
off or missing or otherwise not in harmony with the rest of the surface;
(b) Where the structural support or frame members are visibly bent, broken, dented or
torn;
(c) Where the panel is visibly cracked, or in the case of wood and similar products,
splintered in such a way as to constitute an unsightly or harmful condition;
(d) Where the sign or its elements are twisted or leaning or at angles other than those at
which it was originally erected (such as may result from being blown or the failure of a
structural support); or
(e) Where a person with normal eyesight under normal viewing conditions may no longer
read the message or wording.
Directional Sign. A permanent sign that directs the flow of traffic or pedestrians and that contains no
commercial message.
Directory Sign. A sign, or group of signs designed as a single display, which gives information about the
location of businesses, buildings or addresses within a residential or nonresidential complex and
with no commercial message.
Double Faced Sign. An advertising device with two closely located signs with faces in opposing
directions, with less than a 60 degree angle between the sign faces.
Erect. To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, affix or paint a sign.
Façade. Any separate face of a building, including parapet walls and vertical offsets, or any part of a
building that encloses or covers usable space. Where separate faces are oriented in the same
direction, or in the directions within 45 degrees of one another, they are to be considered as part
of a single façade.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-27
Face, Facing or Surface. The surface of the sign, excluding structural supports, upon, against or
through which the message is displayed or illustrated on the sign. The face includes trim and
architectural design elements.
Fence Sign. A sign attached to or painted on the side of a fence.
Freestanding (Pole or Ground) Sign. A sign that is not affixed to a building or structure, but that is
permanently affixed to the ground independent of any other structure.
Garage or Yard Sale Sign. A sign that advertises the date, time or location of a garage or yard sale.
Governmental Sign. A sign a governmental entity erects for a governmental purpose, including but not
limited to traffic control devices, street signs, barricades, survey monuments and markers, signs
of public utility companies indicating location of utilities or aiding service or safety, signs
identifying City infrastructure projects, pedestrian signs and signs identifying governmental
facilities.
H-Frame Sign. A freestanding portable sign typically with two horizontal struts between two vertical
supports that form a shape similar to the letter H.
Handheld Sign. A sign personally held so that neither the sign nor any object that supports the sign
touches the ground.
Handmade Sign. A sign made by hand—not produced by a commercial sign-making establishment.
High Profile Sign. Along Central Avenue, an on-premise sign, including its supporting structure, that is
mounted on one or more freestanding poles or other supports independent of a building, with a
height over eight feet.
Historical Sign. An integral part of the historic character of a landmark building or the –H, North
central Temple Historic Overlay zoning district.
Holiday Decoration. A decorative display clearly incidental to and customarily and commonly
associated with, a national or religious holiday.
Home Occupation Sign. A sign or any other advertising devise, advertising a business, profession,
occupation or trade conducted in the residence.
Horizontal Projecting Sign. A projecting sign that is greater in width than height.
Illuminated Sign. A sign that has characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines illuminated externally or
internally by electric lights or internally by luminous tubes.
Inflatable Device. A device filled with air or other gasses either sealed or fed with a constant air supply
(fan or pressure fed) designed to attract attention to a business or event. An inflatable device
includes but is not limited to a balloon that is lighter than air and tethered, a balloon that is filled
with air and anchored, or another inflatable device that is set in motion by a constant air supply
(air-powered device).
Institutional Sign. A sign for the identity of a school, church, hospital or similar public or quasi-public
institution.
Logo. A registered trademark of an organization, individual, company or product that is commonly used
in advertising to identify that organization, individual company or product.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-28
Luminance. The brightness of a sign or a portion thereof expressed in terms of foot candles. Luminance
is determined by the use of an exposure meter calibrated to standards established by the
National Bureau of Standards.
Marquee Sign. Any sign affixed to a permanent canopy projecting over an entrance or on the face of a
building and supported from the building.
Median Strip. A paved or planted strip dividing a street or highway into lanes according to direction of
travel.
Memorial Sign. A memorial or commemorative plaque or tablet denoting a building name and/or date
of erection of a location of historic significance.
Message Board. A permanent changeable sign whose informational content is in the form of individual
letters or numbers that can be changed or altered by any means, including manual, electric,
electromechanical or electronic means.
Monument Sign. A freestanding sign having a low profile and made of stone, concrete, metal, routed
wood planks or beams, brick or similar materials, including individual lettering, that repeat or
harmonize with the architecture of the establishment it serves.
Moving Sign. A sign that moves or has moving parts other than parts which indicate time or
temperature.
Mural. A decorative hand-painted work of art applied to an exterior wall within public view that does
not include graphics or text advertising a specific business, product or brand. Embellishments to
or decoration of architectural elements are not deemed a mural. A mural is not a wall sign.
Name Plate Sign. A sign that is located on the premises, giving the name or address or both, of the
owner or occupant of a building or premise.
National Flag. The flag of the United States of America.
Noncombustible Material. Any material that will not ignite at or below a temperature of 1200 degrees
Fahrenheit and will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature.
Off-Premise Sign. A sign of which the contents does not relate to the premises on which it is located,
and that does not refer exclusively to the name, location, products, persons, accommodations,
services, sale, lease, construction or activities of or on the premises where it is erected. The
premises of a shopping center include the shopping center pad site.
On-Premise Sign. A sign, the content of which relates to the premises on which it is located, referring
exclusively to the name, location, product, persons, accommodations, services or activities of or
on those premises, or the sale, lease or construction of those premises. The premises of a
shopping center include the outparcels.
Outdated Sign. A sign or other advertising structure that continues to advertise a business or project
that has been out of business in excess of 90 days.
Permittee. A person receiving a permit pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance.
Political Campaign Sign. A sign that supports or opposes a political candidate, issue, election or party.
Portable Sign. A sign that is easily moved from one location to another, including a sign that is mounted
on skids, trailers, wheels, legs or stakes (including an A Frame or H Frame sign), and that is not
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-29
fixed permanently to the ground, and that is not an attached sign, political sign or a sign that
refers solely to the sale or lease of the premises.
Projecting Sign. A sign that is attached to a building or other structure and extends beyond the line of
the building or structure or beyond the surface of that portion of the building or structure to
which is attached. A marquee is a projecting sign.
Protective Sign. A sign that is commonly associated with safeguarding the permitted uses of the
occupancy, for example, “beware of dog,” “no trespassing,” and “no solicitors.”
Real Estate Sign. A sign that is used to advertise the sale, lease or rental of property.
Roof Sign. A sign erected, constructed and maintained wholly upon or above the roof of a building with
the principal support attached to the roof structure.
Sign. Any writing, pictorial representation, illustration, emblem, symbol, design or other figure of similar
character that is a structure or a part of a structure, or is attached to or in any manner
represented on a building or other structure, and that is placed out of doors in view of the
general public and is used for purposes of advertisement, identification or expression. “Sign” is
synonymous with “advertising device”.
Sign Area. The entire advertising face of a sign excluding any framing, trim or molding and the
supporting structure.
Sign Height. The vertical distance between the base of the sign at the nearest natural grade to the
highest part of the sign or any attached component.
Sign Setback. Along Central Avenue, the sign setback is measured as the perpendicular distance
between the nearest curb line parallel to Central Avenue and the outer (leading) edge of any
portion of a sign. In all other locations, sign setback is measured as the distance between the
property line and the outer (leading) edge of any portion of a sign.
Snipe Sign. A sign made of any material when such sign is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or
otherwise attached to trees, poles, utility poles, fences, public structures or other objects, and
the advertising matter appearing thereon is not applicable to the use of the premises upon which
such sign is located. This may include but is not limited to signs advertising property for sale or
rent, garage sale signs, flyers, wanted signs, lost signs, et cetera.
Special Height Sign. A special sign for highway-oriented automotive uses such as hotels, motels, service
stations, shopping centers, office centers and other similar uses where because of location or
setback special signs identification is desirable.
Spirit Flag. A school flag that contains crests, pictures and such but no advertising.
State Flag. The flag of the State of Texas, or the flags of other states in the United States of America, or
its protectorates.
Streamer. An attention-attraction device consisting of two or more pennants, banners, balloons,
ribbons, reflectors, fringes or similar objects strung together on a common line, string, wire, pole
or attached to one or more products offered for sale.
Subdivision Entry Sign. A freestanding sign identifying a subdivision entrance on which only the name
of the subdivision is specified.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-30
Vertical Projecting Sign. A projecting sign that is greater in height than in width.
Wall Sign. A sign permanently affixed to, or painted on, the façade of a building such that the wall is the
supporting structure for, or forms the background surface of the sign and that does not project
more than 18 inches perpendicular to the wall.
Window Sign. A sign attached to, placed upon or painted on the exterior or interior of a window or
door that is intended for viewing from the exterior of such building. A window sign is not
deemed a handmade sign or a hand-painted sign.
7.6.3 General Sign Provisions
A. Display of Permit
Every permitted sign or other advertising device must display in a conspicuous place the
date of erection, the permit number and the voltage of any electrical apparatus used.
B. Bond Requirement
Subject to the need determined by the Chief Building Official based on the construction
materials for the sign type proposed, an applicant for a sign permit must, before the
permit is approved, present to the Chief Building Official a bond in the minimum
amount established by current rates, conditioned for the faithful observance of all laws
and ordinances relating to signs, and which indemnifies and holds harmless the City from
any and all damages, judgments, costs or expenses which the City may incur or suffer by
reason of the granting of the permit.
C. Building Code
A sign may not be erected in violation of the City’s building code.
D. Unlawful Signs
1. A sign or other advertising device may not be erected or maintained in violation of
the requirements of this Section or of the Sign Permit requirements in Sec. 3.14.
An unlawful sign is not a nonconforming sign and must be removed or brought into
conformance.
2. If the Chief Building Official finds that a sign is erected or maintained in violation of
this Section or Sec. 3.14, the Director must give written notice of the violation to
the permittee or the owner of the property where the violation exists.
3. An unlawful sign that is lightweight or portable (for example, banner or H frame
sign) must be removed within 24 hours after notice of violation. An unlawful sign
that is not lightweight or portable (for example, freestanding or monument sign)
must be removed within 30 days after notice of violation.
4. If the permittee or owner fails, after notice, to timely abate a violation, the Chief
Building Official may undertake enforcement by filing a complaint in municipal
court, seeking quasi-judicial enforcement through the Building and Standards
Commission, or bringing a civil action.
5. The Chief Building Official may immediately and without notice or compensation
remove any sign that presents an immediate peril to persons or property.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-31
E. Variances
A sign owner may request a Variance in accordance with Sec. 3.15 from the provisions
of this Section relating to sign spacing, area, height and setback.
F. Non-Commercial Messages Permitted in Substitution
1. Any sign allowed under this Section may contain, in lieu of any other copy, any
lawful noncommercial message that complies with all other requirements of this
ordinance Section.
2. The right that this subsection creates is one of substitution and not one of addition.
G. Signs Exempt from Regulation
The following signs are exempt from regulation under this Section and do not require a
Sign Permit:
1. Address and postbox numerals;
2. Governmental signs that the City, county, state or federal government erects in
furtherance of their governmental responsibility;
3. Public notice or warning that a valid and applicable federal, state or local law,
regulation or ordinance requires;
4. Sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door, and not legible from a
distance of more than five feet beyond the lot line of the property on which such
sign is located;
5. Works of art that do not include a commercial message; and
6. Memorial signs or tablets including headstones in cemeteries.
H. Maintenance
The owner of a sign, whether on- or off-premise, must:
1. Maintain all signs and keep them in good repair;
2. Keep all signs with painted or plastic faces free of fading, rusting, cracking, peeling,
gaps and holes;
3. Repair or remove any sign that has more than 25 percent of its face damaged;
4. Repair or remove a sign in its entirety with broken or damaged sign faces;
5. Install blank sign faces on signs with faces removed due to vacancy of the building;
6. Remove sign poles with open metal frames;
7. Keep signs with paper or fabric faces free of tears, rips, fading and voids where
part of the text or face is missing;
8. Keep ties or ropes that hold in place signs with fabric faces secure and taut with no
loose or missing ties;
9. Maintained sign poles in a uniform and sound condition;
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-32
10. Repair or remove poles that are dented to the point where they are leaning out of
plumb or have damage to the support or hangers
11. Maintained sign poles free of rust, peeling or fading so that they are uniform in
color;
12. Maintain flags, banners and pole banners free of tears, fading and rips; and
13. Remove flags, banners and pole banners when they become torn, faded or ripped.
I. Luminance
1. An applicant may not erect a lighted sign must within 150 feet of a residential
district unless the lighting is shielded from view of the residential district.
2. A sign or must not be illuminated with lights that:
a. Glare into or upon the surrounding area or any residential property; or
b. Distract operators of vehicles or pedestrians on the public right-of-way.
7.6.4 Prohibited Signs
The following signs are prohibited.
A. Abandoned Signs
The owner of a sign must remove any sign that is abandoned such that it has not been
used for advertising for one year. A tarp on an abandoned sign for more than 30 days is
prohibited.
B. Animated or Moving Signs
Animated or moving signs as defined in Sec. 7.6.2 are prohibited.
C. Bench Signs
Signs fastened to a bench are prohibited.
D. Cardboard Signs
Signs made of cardboard are prohibited.
E. Glaringly Illuminated Signs
A sign must not have lights that glare into or upon the surrounding area or any
residential premises or distract operators of vehicles or pedestrians on the public street
right-of-way.
F. Handmade Signs
A sign made by hand that is not produced by a commercial sign-making establishment is
prohibited.
G. Obscene Signs
Signs must not display gestures, graphics or words that are obscene, profane or
pornographic in nature.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-33
H. Obstructing Signs
A person may not erect, relocate or maintain a sign so as to prevent free ingress to or
egress from any door, window or fire escape. A person may not attach a sign to a stand
pipe or fire escape.
I. Outdated Sign
A sign may not continue to advertise a business or project that has been out of business
in excess of 90 days. A tarp on an outdated sign for more than 30 days is prohibited.
J. Pole Signs in MU
Pole signs are prohibited in the MU, Mixed Use zoning district.
K. Portable Signs
Portable signs are prohibited. In addition, a person may not convert a portable sign into
a permanent sign.
L. Sign Creating a Traffic Hazard
A sign or other advertising structure must not:
1. Obstruct free and clear vision at any street intersection;
2. Interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign,
signal or device because of its position, shape or color;
3. Make use of the words "STOP", "LOOK", "DANGER" or any other word, phrase,
symbol or character in a manner that interferes with, misleads or confuses traffic;
or
4. Present a traffic hazard by using illumination resembling an emergency signal.
M. Snipe Signs
Snipe signs as defined in Sec. 7.6.2 are prohibited.
N. Unlisted Sign
Any sign not listed, classified or defined in this Section is prohibited.
O. Unsafe Signs
A sign must not constitute a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate design,
construction, repair or maintenance.
P. Signs On or Over Public Property or Right-of-Way
1. A sign must not be erected so as to project into the public street right-of-way of
any street or alley, except as allowed in the CA, Central Area zoning district. Any
projecting sign must not extend outward from any building face to the public
street right-of-way for a distance of more than ten feet or to within one foot of
the street curb, whichever is more restrictive.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-34
2. It is unlawful for any person to place a sign, except a governmental sign or
subdivision entry sign, on the premises of any public property, including but not
limited to park land, median strips and public rights-of-way.
3. A person may not attach any sign, paper, material, paint, stencil, or write any
name, number (except house or street address numbers) or otherwise mark on or
obstruct any sidewalk, curb, gutter or street.
4. A person may not erect a sign over or in the public street right-of-way except for
traffic control devices, street signs, directional signs, subdivision entry signs or real
estate kiosks that the City or state has authorized.
7.6.5 Sign Measurement Standards
The following principles control the measurement of sign area, sign height and sign setback.
A. Sign Area
1. The area of a sign includes all lettering, wording, designs and symbols, together
with the background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed. The
area of uprights, bracings and other structures supporting a sign may be omitted in
measuring the area of the sign unless such upright or bracing consists of a
corporate logo, is made part of the message, face or border of the sign or is
otherwise designed or used to attract the attention of the public.
COMMENTARY: The “golden arches” at McDonald’s, if used as support for a
sign, are clearly integral to the sign message and would be included in the
measurement of the area of the sign face.
2. Where a sign consists of individual letters, words or symbols attached to a surface,
the sign area is deemed to be the area of the smallest rectangle that completely
encompasses all such letters, words or symbols and any accompanying background
of a color different than the color of the wall.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-35
COMMENTARY: Channel letter signs, mounted logos, and similar devices are
treated differently than signs in cabinets – the wall area between multiple
elements does not count as sign area.
3. The area for a sign with more than one face is measured by adding together the
area of all sign faces, except where the angle at which the two sign faces are
placed does not exceed 60 degrees or where the sign faces are parallel and not
more than 36 inches apart.
COMMENTARY: It is presumed that where sign faces are placed less than 60
degrees apart, both faces are not readable from any one point.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-36
B. Sign Height
The height of a sign is measured as the distance from the base of
the sign at finished grade to the top of the highest attached
component of the sign. Finished grade is the newly established
grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming,
mounding or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign.
C. Sign Setback
The setback of a sign is measured as the shortest distance from
each property line to the leading edge of the sign.
COMMENTARY: The setback should be measured from the
property to the edge of the sign, not to the pole, in the case of a pole sign.
7.6.6 Number of Signs
A. A maximum of three types of signs and a maximum of 12 individual signs may be used
per business at a time with a business property frontage of less than 200 feet.
COMMENTARY: A business with 150 feet of property frontage, for example, is
allowed is allowed a pole sign, a wall sign, and a banner.
B. A maximum of four types of signs and a maximum of 15 individual signs may be used per
business at a time with a business frontage of 200 feet or more.
C. Specific standards for the number of permitted freestanding signs are set forth in Sec.
7.6.9.
7.6.7 Special Height Signs
A. Only Special Height Signs may exceed the maximum building height permitted in the
specific district.
B. Special Height Signs are allowed in association with Office Uses or Retail Sales and
Service Uses as listed in the use table in Sec. 5.1 containing six acres or more, or for
Fuel Sales, Overnight Accommodation Uses, Restaurant Uses or Vehicle Sales and
Service Uses as listed in the use table in Sec. 5.1 when located on or adjacent to IH 35
or H. K. Dodgen Loop. These pylon or major identification signs must not exceed 75
feet in height.
7.6.8 Standards According to Sign Type
The standards applicable to each permitted sign type are set forth in the table below. Signs
listed in the table must be on-premise signs unless off-premise placement is specifically
allowed.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-37
[This page intentionally left blank]
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/20187
7-38
Type
District
Permitte
d
Maximum
Area
Permit
Reqd?
Time
Limit
Standards
Illustration
Agricultural Sign
AG, UE,
NS, GR, C,
LI, HI
100 SF Yes None One per every 200 LF
Apartment
Name Sign
All 64 SF Yes None One per street frontage
Awning
All except
res. and
AG
20% of
surface area
of awning
Yes None
Not less than 9 feet above the level of the sidewalk or
public thoroughfare over which it is erected.
Not extending beyond 1 foot inside the curb line.
The name of the owner and the business, industry or
pursuit conducted on the premises may be painted or
otherwise permanently placed in a space on the front and
side of the awning.
Awnings must be constructed of a rigid framework with
an approved covering that is flame resistant in accordance
with NFPA 701 or has a flame spread index not greater
than 25 when tested in accordance with ASTM E 84.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-39
Type
District
Permitte
d
Maximum
Area
Permit
Reqd?
Time
Limit
Standards
Illustration
Banner
All except
res. and
AG
10% of façade
mounted on.
On multitenant
buildings, not
to exceed 10%
of leased
frontage
façade it is
mounted on
No None
One per building or tenant.
Must be affixed flush to a façade, awning or canopy, or
attached flush to a fence. No stakes, posts, poles, A--
frames or H-frames are permitted to secure a banner to
the ground.
Banner, Pole
All except
res. and
AG
12 SF No None
One per every 40 LF, separated by a minimum of 5 feet,
not to exceed 10 pole banners per property.
Height of pole must not exceed 35 feet.
Must be secured to permanent pole and mounted with
brackets manufactured for that purpose. No T-posts
allowed.
Combinations of corporate, spirit and pole banners may
be used, but may not exceed a combined total of 10.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-40
Type
District
Permitte
d
Maximum
Area
Permit
Reqd?
Time
Limit
Standards
Illustration
Canopy
All except
res. and
AG
25% of surface Yes None
Must not be less than 9 feet above the level of the
sidewalk or public thoroughfare over which it is erected.
Must not extend beyond 1 foot inside the curb line.
The name of the owner and the business, industry or
pursuit conducted on the premises may be painted or
otherwise permanently placed in a space on the front and
side or the awning.
Canopy signs associated with gasoline service stations are
limited to gas prices, name and company identification.
Community
Event Sign
All 40 SF No
From 30 days
before to 7 days
after event
Banners or other signs placed, hung or attached to the
inside walls of an event, that advertise businesses that
sponsored the event, are allowed only during the event.
A community event sign may not be placed in public
street right-of-way.
Construction
Sign,
Commercial
All except
res. and
AG.
64 SF No
From issuance
of Building
Permit to 7 days
after
completion of
project
One per construction work site.
Construction
Sign, Residential
Res. 6 SF No
From issuance
of Building
Permit to 7 days
after
completion of
project
1 per platted lot or tract
H-Frame allowed.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-41
Type
District
Permitte
d
Maximum
Area
Permit
Reqd?
Time
Limit
Standards
Illustration
Development
Sign,
Commercial
All 128 SF Yes
7 days after
completion of
project.
Two per project for every 100 acres in the project.
Signs may be double faced.
Development
Sign, Residential
Res.
128 SF
Exterior
320 SF
Interior
No
From issuance
of Building
Permit to 7 days
after
completion of
project
Two per entrance at exterior/perimeter roads of
development.
One interior residential sign per 40 LF, not to exceed
total of 10, with a maximum combined area of 320 SF
Signs may be double faced.
Must have uniform design elements and colors
Directional Sign
All except
res. and
AG
3 SF or per
MUTCD
No None
Signs may be attached or detached.
A maximum of two signs may be visible from the
roadway.
Must be stationary. If a sign is an attached sign, the words
must not exceed 4 inches in height.
Each sign must convey a message that directs vehicular or
pedestrian movement within or onto the premise on
which the sign is located.
Must contain no advertising, but may have company
identification or logo.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-42
Type
District
Permitte
d
Maximum
Area
Permit
Reqd?
Time
Limit
Standards
Illustration
Directory Sign
All except
res. and
AG
4 SF Yes None One per street frontage.
Fence Sign
All except
res. and
AG
25% of fence
area, not to
exceed 60 SF
Yes None
One per street frontage
Fence signs must be affixed directly to and flush with the
fence. Extender poles are not allowed.
Fence signs are prohibited in shopping centers.
Flag, Corporate
and Spirit
All except
res. and
AG
48 SF No None
One per 40 feet of street frontage, separated by a
minimum of 5 feet, not to exceed 10 flags per property.
Combinations of corporate flags, spirit flags and pole
banners may be used, but may not exceed a combined
total of 10.
Height of pole must not exceed 35 feet.
When tags become torn, tattered or faded, they must be
removed or replaced.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-43
Type
District
Permitte
d
Maximum
Area
Permit
Reqd?
Time
Limit
Standards
Illustration
Flag, State and
National
All
375 SF along
I-35 and H. K.
Dodgen LP.
150 SF in
nonresidential
district.
48 SF in
residential
district.
No None
Anytime the American flag is displayed, it will be in
accordance with Public Law 94-344, dated July 7, 1976,
and will not be torn, tattered or faded.
Nonresidential Districts: No limit on Height of pole
except height of pole must not exceed 50 feet if located
within 100 feet of residential uses or zoning districts.
Residential Districts: Height of pole must in
nonresidential districts or not exceed 20 feet in
residential districts.
[Ord. No 2012-4549].
Freestanding
(pole or
ground) Sign
All except
res. and
AG
See section 7.6.9
Garage or Yard
Sale Sign
Res. and
places of
worship in
any district
2 SF No
From 3 days
before to 1 day
after sale
One per property.
Off-premise signs are prohibited.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-44
Type
District
Permitte
d
Maximum
Area
Permit
Reqd?
Time
Limit
Standards
Illustration
Handheld Sign All 10 SF No None
Historical Sign All 4 SF No None None
Holiday
Decoration
All except
res. and
AG
N/A No
From 45 days
before to 14
days after
celebration
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-45
Type
District
Permitte
d
Maximum
Area
Permit
Reqd?
Time
Limit
Standards
Illustration
Inflatable device Res. None No
From 45 days
before to 14
days after
celebration
Maximum of 10 feet tall.
Inflatable device
All except
res. and
AG
N/A Yes
14 consecutive
days per permit.
30 days after
grand opening.
Maximum of 2 permits per year per business.
Maximum of 20 feet tall.
Must be ground mounted; must not be affixed to roof.
Institutional Sign All 32 SF Yes None One per street frontage.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-46
Type
District
Permitte
d
Maximum
Area
Permit
Reqd?
Time
Limit
Standards
Illustration
Memorial Sign All 4 SF No None N/A
Message Board
All except
res. and
AG
150 SF Yes None
A message board must not have any distracting
appearance of animated motion of graphics, blinking,
flashing or shimmering.
A message board with an electronic message may have a
scrolling message.
When the display of a message board with an electronic
message displays changes from message to message, it
must change as rapidly as technologically practicable with
no phasing, rolling, flashing or blending and must change
no more frequently than once every 8 seconds.
Mural
All except
res. and
AG
None Yes. None
The design of a mural must be approved the Chief
Building Official before being placed.
A mural may not contain a commercial message or be
used as an advertising device.
A mural is not a Wall Sign.
Name Plate Sign All
2 SF in
residential
district; 6 SF in
nonresidential
district
No None One per building or tenant per street frontage
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-47
Type
District
Permitte
d
Maximum
Area
Permit
Reqd?
Time
Limit
Standards
Illustration
Political
Campaign Sign
All
16 SF in
residential
district; 32 SF
in
nonresidential
district
No
From 60 days
before to 7 days
after election or
referendum
Must only be placed on private property, outside of the
public street right-of-way. An automobile, truck, trailer or
other vehicle with an affixed sign may not be parked on
public property for any period of time longer than it takes
the operator of owner to transact ordinary day-to-day
business (for example, shopping, paying bills and picking
up laundry). The owner may, however, park such a
vehicle on public property adjacent to his own property.
An owner or operator of a vehicle in violation of the
preceding section will be contacted and given an
opportunity to move the vehicle immediately. If the
registered owner or operator cannot be contacted, or
when contacted refuses to remove the vehicle, the
vehicle will be taken into police custody and towed away
at the owner’s expense.
Must not be illuminated or have any moving elements.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-48
Type
District
Permitte
d
Maximum
Area
Permit
Reqd?
Time
Limit
Standards
Illustration
Projecting Sign
All except
res. and
AG
50 SF for
horizontal
sign; 100 SF
for vertical
Yes None
The distance between the principal faces of a projecting
sign may not exceed 18 inches.
Every projecting sign must be placed at least 9 feet above
the public sidewalk over which it is erected, a maximum
of 2 feet from the face of the wall to which it is attached,
measuring from the point of the sign nearest the wall and
at least 1 foot from the curb line. Every projecting sign
must be placed at least 15 feet above the public driveway,
alley or thoroughfare over which it is erected.
A projecting sign over public property is allowed to be
permitted only in the Central Area district. In other
locations, a projecting sign over public property requires
a Street Use License by the City Council.
Protective Sign All 1 SF No None A maximum of 2 per property.
Real Estate Sign,
Commercial
All except
res. and
AG
32 SF No
7 days after sale
or rental of
subject
property
One per platted lot or tract. For acreage, one per 200
feet of street frontage.
The setback for a nonresidential sign is 8 feet from the
property line.
The maximum height of an on-premise real estate sign in
a nonresidential district is 15 feet.
An off-premise real estate sign is allowed only if erected
on a City-authorized kiosk.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-49
Type
District
Permitte
d
Maximum
Area
Permit
Reqd?
Time
Limit
Standards
Illustration
Real Estate Sign,
Residential
Res. 6 SF No
7 days after sale
or rental of
subject
property
One builder sign and one real estate agent sign per
platted lot or tract.
On corner lots, one builder sign and one real estate agent
sign per street frontage per platted lot or tract.
For acreage, one builder sign per 200 feet of street
frontage, with combined maximum area of 32 SF.
H-Frame sign is allowed.
Roof Sign
All except
res. and
AG
300 SF Yes None
A roof sign may not be placed on the roof of any building
or structure in such manner as to prevent free passage
along the roof or interfere with openings in the roof.
Highest point must not extend 20 feet above the roof
level.
Searchlight
All except
res. and
AG
N/A Yes.
3 consecutive
days per permit
Must not have glaring or illumination that interferes with
traffic safety.
Must not be within 500 feet of a residential area.
Must not be placed in public street right-of-way.
Limit of 2 permits per year per business.
Streamers All N/A Yes
3 consecutive
days per permit;
3 permits per
business per
calendar year
In residential districts streamers are allowed only at
entrances of developments under construction.
Must not be tied to a utility pole or other public
structure.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-50
Type
District
Permitte
d
Maximum
Area
Permit
Reqd?
Time
Limit
Standards
Illustration
Subdivision
Entry Sign
All except
LI and HI
80 SF Yes
Must bear only the name of the subdivision.
A maximum of 2 signs located at each entrance to a
subdivision.
Must be constructed of masonry and/or wood, and metal,
or other natural materials.
The placement of all signs must comply with the 15-foot
visibility triangle setback from property corners and
intersections.
Sign placement within public street right-of-way will
require Street Use Licenses and be subject to visibility
and vehicle safety review during the permit process.
Must not project more than 8 feet above the curb line.
Vehicular Sign All N/A No None
A vehicular sign must not extend more than 24 inches
from the top of any vehicle.
It is unlawful to attach any sign to a trailer, skid, boat or
similar mobile structure or to a vehicle, where the
primary use of such structure or vehicle is to provide a
base for such sign or constitute a sign itself.
Signs painted on or attached to an inoperable vehicle are
prohibited.
This Section does not prohibit identification of a business
or its products or services on a fleet vehicle parked in a
manner appropriate to the normal course of business.
This Section does not prohibit transportation of a sign to
a site of permanent erection.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-51
Type
District
Permitte
d
Maximum
Area
Permit
Reqd?
Time
Limit
Standards
Illustration
Signs on temporary construction trailers on construction
sites are allowed.
Wall Sign
All except
res. and
AG
See Section 7.6.10
Window Sign
All except
res. and
AG
25% of the
window area
No None
Must not obstruct visibility of the cashier clerk from the
street level.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-52
[This page intentionally left blank]
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-53
7.6.9 Freestanding (Pole or Ground) Signs
A. Maximum Height and Area
1. Freestanding signs must conform to the area-height-setback relationship indicated
in the table below, except as allowed for Special Height Signs as set forth in Sec.
7.6.7.
Maximum Area (sq ft) Maximum Height (ft) Minimum Setback (ft)
0 to 50 15 0
51 to 100 20 5
101 to 150 25 5
151 to 200 30 10
201 to 250 40 10
251 to 300 50 15
>300 75 See 7.6.7
2. Freestanding signs must not exceed a height of greater than 50 feet above the level
of the street upon which the sign faces, or above the adjoining ground level, if such
ground level is above the street level.
3. Freestanding signs must not exceed 300 square feet in area, except as allowed in
incentive provisions.
4. In the MU, Mixed Use zoning district, freestanding signs must be monument style,
not exceeding five feet in height.
B. Minimum Setback
A freestanding sign has a setback from the property line of the property on which the
sign is erected in relation to its area and height, as indicated in the table above.
C. Minimum Separation
A freestanding sign must not be nearer than ten feet to any other sign, building or
structure measured from the sign building or structure to the leading edge of the sign.
D. Maximum Number Allowed
One freestanding sign is allowed per lot, tract or separate building. A lot or tract located
at a street intersection is allowed one freestanding sign per street frontage.
E. Multiple Businesses, Services, Tenants
1. Buildings housing multiple businesses are encouraged to group signage. A 30
percent increase in sign area is allowed for a group sign, advertising a center with
multiple businesses, with no corresponding effect on sign setback and height
specified in the table in Section 7.6.8 above. This incentive may be increased to 35
percent over the sign area allowed in the table 1 in subsection A above if a group
sign is combined with landscaping.
2. The number of freestanding signs allowed may be increased by one of the
following credits.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-54
a. If more than one business, service or tenant occupies a single building on a
lot or tract, a maximum two freestanding signs are allowed. The combination
of sign area for the two signs must not exceed the maximum allowed area in
the table in Section 7.6.8 above in relation to sign height and setback.
COMMENTARY: For example, two 25 square foot signs (maximum 50 square
feet) are allowed if two or more tenants are present in one building. The signs
may not exceed 15 feet in height, and may be placed at the property line (0'
setback)
b. If the lot, tract or parcel exceeds 200' of frontage along the street where the
sign is proposed, additional freestanding signs are allowed, in accordance
with the following table.
Property Frontage (ft) Maximum Signs Permitted
0 to 200 1
201 to 400 2
401 to 600 3
601 or greater 4
F. Alternate Sign Plan
If the provisions in subsections E.1 and E.2 above do not satisfactorily meet the
applicant's needs, the Board of Adjustment may review a Variance request for an
alternate signage plan that meets the unique advertising needs of the site, business,
service or tenant and, at the same time, carries out the intent of this ordinance to
balance on site advertising needs with community appearance.
7.6.10 Wall Signs
A. Location and area
1. A maximum 50 percent of each tenant's store front, side or rear oriented to each
street may be utilized for a wall sign. A single wall sign may not exceed 300 square
feet in area.
2. In the MU district, the maximum aggregate area of wall signs is 200 square feet.
3. A wall sign must not cover wholly or partially any wall opening, nor project beyond
the ends or top of the wall to which it is attached in excess of four feet.
4. A wall sign must not extend more than six inches beyond the building line or be
attached to a wall at a height of less than 10 feet above the sidewalk or ground.
Alternative placement may be permitted with approval by the Director of Planning
for façades that cannot meet this requirement.
[Ord. No. 2013-4580]
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-55
7.6.11 Standards for Off-Premise Signs
An off-premise sign erected after March 7, 2002, must comply with the following standards
unless an alternate standard applies because the sign is erected under incentive or relocation
provisions.
A. Sign Permit Required
A person may not erect an off-premise sign without a Sign Permit issued in accordance
with Sec. 3.14. The Chief Building Official may issue a permit for an off-premise sign
only when all requirements of this section are met. A permit for off-premise sign
construction is valid for a period of six months from date of issuance. The Director of
Planning may extend the time limit for construction of a sign for up to one additional
year. The permittee may present, and the Director of Planning must consider, evidence
relating to market conditions for new sign construction, availability of local financing for
new sign construction, the permittee's history of compliance with the requirements of
this section, and other relevant factors.
[Ord. No. 2013-4580]
B. Dimensional Standards
1. Location
An off-premise sign is permitted solely in the C, LI and HI zoning districts on
property fronting Interstate Highway 35 or H. K. Dodgen Loop.
2. Minimum Spacing
a. An off-premise sign along Interstate 35 may not be erected within 1,500 feet
of another off-premise sign.
b. An off-premise sign along H. K. Dodgen Loop may not be erected within
2,000 feet of another off-premise sign, except that, in exchange for the
removal of one double-faced sign that is larger than 386 square feet and
existing along the Loop on March 7, 2002, three 386-square-foot doublefaced
signs may be erected within 1,500 square feet of another of offpremise
sign, if the permittee has sufficient sign replacement credits.
c. Spacing is measured on the same side of the road, between points along the
public street right-of-way of the regulated highway perpendicular to the
center of the signs.
3. Area
The dimensions of an off-premise sign erected on property fronting Interstate 35
must be 14 feet by 48 feet, for a total area per face of 672 square feet. The
dimensions of an off-premise sign erected on property fronting H. K. Dodgen
Loop must be 10 feet, 6 inches by 36 feet, for a total area per face of 386 square
feet.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-56
4. Height
An off-premise sign must be 42 feet and six inches in height. Sign height is
measured from the grade level of the centerline of the main-traveled way closest
to the sign, at a point perpendicular to the sign location.
5. Setback
An off-premise sign must be set back a minimum of 20 feet from public street
right-of-way line, measured from the closest part of the sign.
C. Design Standards
1. Faces
An off-premise sign may be single-faced or double-faced, but may not contain
more than one face on each side of the display.
2. Roof
An off-premise sign may not be erected or maintained upon the roof of any
building structure.
3. Light
An off-premise sign may not be constructed where it obscures or shades the
windows or doorways of adjacent buildings.
4. Traffic Hazard
An off-premise sign is not permitted that, because of its size, shape or location,
may endanger or obscure or obstruct the view of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
An off-premise sign must not be designed to be confused with any authorized
traffic control device.
5. Scenic Vista
An off-premise sign may not be permitted that, because of its size, shape or
location, may impair any scenic vista from the highway or a building adjacent to the
highway or to the off-premise sign.
6. Construction
An off-premise sign must have a steel post and be constructed and erected in
conformance with Chapter 7, City Code, Buildings.
7. Encroachment
a. A part, foundation or support of any off-premise sign may not be placed on,
in or over any of the following:
i. Public property or street rights-of-way;
ii. Telephone or utility poles; or
iii. Natural features such as trees and rocks.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-57
b. Encroachment into a public utility or drainage easement may be allowed with
a street use license.
D. New Off-Premise Signs
1. Off-Premise Sign Cap
The number of off-premise signs in the City is limited to the number of such signs
in existence on March 7, 2002.
2. Inventory
The owner or operator of one or more off-premise signs within the City must
inventory the signs on forms the Director of Planning provides and file the
completed forms with the planning department within six months from March 7,
2002. Incentive credit or permit for alteration or relocation may not be issued for
an off-premise sign that was not inventoried and reported to the City in a timely
manner.
3. Incentives
a. To encourage removal of off-premise signs that do not comply with current
sign standards, the owner of a sign that was lawfully erected in compliance
with all standards then in effect or lawfully in place at the time it was
annexed into the City may be awarded credit for removing such sign.
b. One credit will be awarded for each face that is removed from a lawfully
existing off-premise sign. In order to receive a Sign Permit for the erection of
an off-premise sign, 1.25 credits must be used per new face.
c. The Chief Building Official may issue a Sign Permit to any person holding
sufficient credits, for erection of an off-premise sign in an eligible location as
set forth in paragraph B.1 above, in his or her sole discretion. The Sign
Permit must state the number of faces to be erected.
d. Credits are transferable.
e. Credit is received when a permittee removes a sign voluntarily, even if the
reason is loss of the lease. Credit may not be awarded for the removal of an
off-premise sign that was in violation of federal, state or City laws when
erected.
f. To be awarded a credit under the incentive program, a sign owner or
operator must notify the City within 60 days of the removal of an offpremise
sign and receive a letter from the City awarding a credit. Failure to
apply for a credit within 60 days from removal of a sign bars the awarding of
credit for that sign. Any unused credits will be held in reserve indefinitely, in
order to give incentive for immediate removal of current faces.
g. The Director of Planning must provide to the Planning and Zoning
Commission, as part of the Commission’s annual report, an accounting of
unused credits. The Commission’s annual accounting is final if not appealed
in writing to the Commission within 30 days from the date that the
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-58
accounting is presented to the Commission. In making a final determination,
the Commission will consider evidence that the appellant, Director of
Planning or any other interested person presents.
E. Residential Zoning Districts
An off-premise sign is not permitted if residentially-zoned property is located between
the sign location and the roadway toward which the sign would be oriented.
F. Consent
A part, foundation or support of any off-premise sign may not be placed on, in or over
any private property without the written consent of the property owner.
G. Protected Vegetation
Notwithstanding any other provision or other applicable law or regulation, a person may
not remove, cut or otherwise alter any vegetative screening on public property or
private landscaping required in Sec. 7.4 in order to improve the visibility of a nearby offpremise
sign. Should such an alteration occur, any off-premise sign so benefited is
deemed nonconforming and must become the next nonconforming off-premise sign
relocated.
H. Identification
An off-premise sign must be permanently identified with the name of the sign owner or
operator with letters of sufficient size to be easily read from the nearest roadway.
I. Alteration
An off-premise sign may not be altered with regard to size, shape, orientation, height or
location without the prior issuance of an alteration or relocation permit. Ordinary and
necessary repairs that do not change the size, shape, orientation, height or location of an
inventoried off-premise sign do not require an alteration permit, An alteration permit
expires if the approved modifications are not completed within 90 days of permit
issuance.
J. Demolition
A demolition permit is required prior to removal of an existing off-premise sign.
Demolition must be completed within 90 days from permit issuance. The permit must
state the number of faces to be demolished.
K. Maintenance
If the Director of Planning finds that any off-premise sign on the authorized list is not
maintained in good repair and has not deteriorated more than 50 percent of its
replacement value, the Director of Planning will notify and order the owner to repair
the sign within 30 calendar days. If the Director finds that an off-premise sign has
deteriorated more than 50 percent of its replacement value, or is not repaired within 30
calendar days, the Director of Planning must notify the owner of the off-premise sign
and the owner of the real property on which the off-premise sign is located to remove
the off-premise sign or poster panel from the property within a specified time. All offArticle
7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-59
premise signs ordered to be removed must be stricken from the authorized list when
the time limit is set and the removal notice ends.
L. Relocation
If a sign located within the proposed public street right-of-way of a state highway is to
be relocated to accommodate a regulated highway project and the Texas Department
of Transportation issues a permit for relocation of the sign, the Chief Building Official
may also issue a Sign Permit if the sign meets all current City standards, except that the
relocated sign:
1. Does not require payment of a permit fee;
2. May be erected a minimum of five feet from any highway right-of-way line;
3. May be constructed with the same number of poles and same type of materials as
the existing sign; and
4. May be erected without enlarging the sign face.
5. If the proposed off premise sign does not meet all city standards including
minimum spacing, area, height and setback, an applicant must receive approval of a
Conditional Use permit for the new location.
[Ord. 2012-4553]
7.6.12 Central Avenue Corridor Standards
A. Purpose
These standards describe distinctive on-premise sign standards for this unique location
in the community, intended to preserve the visual character of this important entry
corridor into downtown Temple. Incentive and encouragement are given to low profile
signage, with high profile and wall signs also allowed. Signs are limited to advertisement
for land use activities occurring on the site.
B. Jurisdiction
The standards of this Section apply to signs oriented to Central Avenue for all land uses
within the Central Avenue Corridor, bounded on the west by IH-35 and on the east by
3rd Street, as indicated on the boundary map in the appendix of this UDC. This
jurisdiction includes all properties adjacent to or abutting Central Avenue, and all
properties situated 240' north and south of the centerline of Central Avenue.
C. Prohibited Signs
1. In addition to the sign types prohibited citywide in Sec. 7.6.4, the following sign
types are prohibited within the Central Avenue Corridor:
a. Trash receptacle signs;
b. Flashing signs;
c. Temporary non-affixed signs;
d. Satellite dish signs; and
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-60
e. Roof signs.
2. Flashing and moving signs are prohibited, except that time and temperature and
digital scroll displays are permitted in accordance with the standards in the table in
Sec. 7.6.8.
D. Illumination
Signs may be illuminated internally or externally. Illumination must be constant and
represent no traffic hazard.
E. Materials
Signs must be constructed from environmentally sound materials and meet all City
building, electrical and other safety codes.
F. Maintenance
In addition to the standards in subsection 7.6.3H, all signs and supports must be
maintained in good condition to prevent deterioration, oxidation, rust and other
unsightly conditions. All abandoned signs and supports must be removed within 90 days
of abandonment. All damaged signs must be repaired or removed within 90 days of
damage.
G. Nonconforming Central Avenue Signs
A permanent, on-premise sign not in conformance with this Section that was lawfully
erected prior to April 6, 1989, is a nonconforming sign. Nonconforming signs in the
Central Avenue Corridor are exempted from the nonconforming sign provisions in Sec.
9.3. A permit for reconstruction of a nonconforming sign in the Central Avenue
Corridor requires that the sign be reconstructed within six months of substantial
deterioration or destruction, in place, without increasing any nonconforming
characteristic of the previous sign.
H. Easement Encroachment Prohibition
A sign may not conflict with the operation of utilities located within an easement area.
I. Setback Requirements
1. In addition to the setback requirements for permitted sign types below, the sign
must observe the intersection visibility triangle established in Sec. 4.4.8 at each
street corner intersection, each driveway opening and each street or alley
intersection.
2. Along Central Avenue, the sign setback is measured as the perpendicular distance
between the nearest curb line parallel to Central Avenue and the leading edge of
any portion of a sign.
J. Signs Not Requiring a Permit in Central Ave Corridor
A Sign Permit is not required for signs in the Central Avenue Corridor exempted in
subsection 7.6.3G and Sec. 7.6.8, unless another City ordinance or regulation requires a
permit. Such signs not requiring a sign permit must conform in all respects to the
maximum height, maximum size, minimum curb line setback of 16 feet and all other
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-61
provisions stated for low profile, high profile and wall signs. Signs Requiring a Permit in
Central Avenue Corridor
K. Signs Requiring a Permit in Central Ave Corridor
The following descriptions and illustrations define the types of signs that require a Sign
Permit in accordance with Sec. 3.14 to be erected in the Central Avenue Corridor. The
standards applicable to each type of sign are set forth in the table below.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-62
SIGN TYPE/DEFINITION ILLUSTRATION
Low-Profile Sign
An on-premise sign in the Central Avenue Corridor
meeting the standards below. Signs on accessory
structures, free-standing service facilities or fences
not exceeding eight feet in height, are deemed
low-profile signs.
Standards
1. A low-profile sign must not exceed 50 square
feet in area unless sign area is increased by
one or more of the provisions in paragraph L
below.
2. Such sign must have a maximum height of
eight feet.
3. Such sign must have a minimum setback of 16'
from the curb and must not encroach in the
public street right-of-way.
4. One low-profile sign is permitted per building in
addition to permitted wall signs.
5. One low-profile or one high-profile sign may
be used per building but not both.
6. One low-profile or one high-profile sign may
be located per street frontage on A property
located at an intersection of a major or minor
arterial and another street in addition to
allowable wall signs.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-63
SIGN TYPE/DEFINITION ILLUSTRATION
High-Profile Sign
An on-premise sign in the Central Avenue Corridor
meeting the standards below.
Standards
1. A high-profile sign must not exceed 35 square
feet in area, unless sign size is increased by
one or more of the provisions in paragraph L
below.
2. Such sign must have a minimum height of
eight feet.
3. Such sign must have a maximum height of 15
feet unless sign height is increased by one or
more of the provisions in paragraph L below.
4. Such sign must have a minimum setback of 16
feet from the curb and must not encroach in
the public street right-of-way.
5. One such sign is permitted per building in
addition to permitted wall signs.
5. One low-profile or one high-profile sign may
be used per building but not both.
6. One low-profile or one high-profile sign may
be located per street frontage on a property
located at an intersection of a major or minor
arterial and another street in addition to
allowable wall signs.
7. A minimum 20 feet separation is required
between signs on a lot or tract.
Wall Sign
A sign affixed to, or painted on, the façade of a
building such that the wall is the supporting
structure for, or forms the background surface of
the sign. The term “wall sign” includes canopy
signs associated with gasoline service stations. A
fence sign is deemed a wall sign.
Standards
1. A wall sign must not exceed 10 percent in
area of each tenant’s store front wall area
oriented to the street.
2. The maximum height of such sign is 18 inches
above the building if no supports are needed
or utilized for the sign.
3. One such sign is permitted per business
façade. Number/letters indicating property
address are not be counted in this
calculation. A wall sign may be used in
conjunction with either a low-profile or highprofile
sign.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.6. Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-64
L. Sign Area or Height Increase
1. The maximum area of a low- or high-profile sign may be increased subject to the
following conditions.
a. A separate changeable copy message board may be a maximum of 15 square
feet if used.
b. The maximum area of the sign may be increased two square feet per tenant
over one tenant in a single building;
c. The maximum area of the sign may be increased one square foot for each
one foot setback in addition to 16 feet from the curb.
d. The cumulative effect of the area increase provisions in paragraphs 1 through
c above may result in a maximum sign area increase not exceeding 75 square
feet for a low-profile sign and 100 square feet for a high-profile sign.
2. The maximum height of a high-profile sign may be increased subject to the
following conditions.
a. Such signs on properties located west of the west public street right-of-way
line of 31st Street may be a maximum height of 35 feet for visibility from IH-
35.
b. Signs located east of the centerline of 21st Street and west of the centerline
of 11th Street, in the vicinity of the Central Avenue grade separation, must
be no higher than the higher of either:
i. 15 feet above the nearest natural grade; or
ii. The top of the nearest curb of Central Avenue where such curb
exceeds 15 feet above the natural grade.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.7. Screening and Buffering
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-65
Sec. 7.7. Screening and Buffering
7.7.1 Applicability
Where a fence, wall, screen, buffer or enclosure is erected, the following standards apply.
7.7.2 Site Plan and Landscape Plan Required
A site plan and landscape plan must be submitted with the Building Permit application
demonstrating compliance with the standards of this Section.
7.7.3 Fence and Wall Regulations for Single- and Two-Family Dwellings
A. Front Yard
A fence, wall, screen, enclosure or similar barrier erected in the front yard setback of a
single- or two-family dwelling as set forth in Sec. 4.5 must not exceed 48 inches in
height above the adjacent grade. A barrier that does not exceed 36 inches in height may
be made of a solid allowed material listed in Sec. 7.7.5. A barrier that is higher than 36
inches must have an open design, with a minimum of 50 percent opacity or visibility, so
as not to impose a visual barrier within 10 feet from the back-of-curb or edge of
pavement of a street.
B. Behind Front Yard Setback
A fence, wall, screen enclosure or similar barrier behind the front yard setback of a
single- or two-family dwelling must not exceed eight feet in height above the adjacent
grade.
7.7.4 Buffering
A. Location
Continuous buffering is required along the common boundary between nonresidential
or multiple-family uses and an agricultural or residential zoning district or use, except
where a public street provides buffering. Buffering is also required along the perimeter
of a nonresidential or multiple-family use located across an alley from a residential
zoning district or use.
B. Design
Buffering must meet one or a combination of the following design standards:
1. Buffering may consist of evergreen hedges composed of plants purchased in fivegallon
or larger containers, with a minimum planted height of six feet, placed on
36-inch centers.
2. Buffering may consist of fences or walls constructed of wood, masonry, stone or
pre-cast concrete, with integrated color, texture and pattern. Structural buffering
must be from 6 to 8 feet in height above the adjacent grade. Fences or walls used
for buffering must not contain openings of more than 20 square inches in each
square foot of wall or fence surface. Gates must be equal in height and screening
characteristics to the fence or wall in order to create a visual barrier.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.7. Screening and Buffering
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-66
7.7.5 Materials for Fences, Walls, Screens and Enclosures
A. Allowed Materials
Fences, walls, screens, enclosures and gates must be constructed of one or a
combination of the following materials:
1. Plain or coated chain link (installed as manufactured, without affixing materials
such as slats and tarps);
2. Exterior Insulation and finish systems (EIFS);
3. Fiberglass composite (manufactured for fencing);
4. Fired brick;
5. Latticework that does not exceed 2 feet in height and is anchored as a design
element at the top of a 6-foot tall fence;
6. Natural stone;
7. Pre-cast concrete;
8. Split faced block;
9. Smooth faced block;
10. Support poles made of metal or wood;
11. Stucco;
12. Tubular aluminum;
13. Tubular steel;
14. Wood planks; or
15. Wrought iron.
B. Prohibited Materials
Permits must not be issued for materials not manufactured specifically for fencing, such
as fibrous masonry products, landscape timbers, railroad ties, latticework panels,
plywood, corrugated steel panels or fiberglass panels.
C. Electric Fences
1. An electric fence is allowed in the Agricultural zoning district, with proof
submitted to the electrical inspector that the fence will be designed to retain
animals, be inaccessible to the general public and not pose a hazard to life.
2. An electric fence is allowed in association with a permitted nonresidential outdoor
storage area in the Commercial, Light Industrial and Heavy Industrial zoning
districts subject to the following standards.
a. Unless otherwise specified in this Section, electric fences must be installed in
conformance with the specifications set forth in the City’s electrical code and
the International Electroctechnical Commission Standard No. 60335-2-76. In
addition, the electric fence controller must meet the requirements of
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.7. Screening and Buffering
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-67
Underwriters Laboratories Standard UL69, Electric-Fence Controller, and
labeled as such.
b. The electric fence controller and emergency entry key safe for the electric
fence must be located in a single accessible location for the entire fence.
c. The electric fence must be surrounded by a non-electrical fence or wall six
to eight feet in height.
d. The electric fence must be installed a minimum of one foot from the
surrounding non-electric fence or wall, except along the gate. Along the gate,
the electric fence must be installed a minimum of three inches from the
surrounding non-electric fence or wall.
e. The electric fence must be clearly identified with warning signs at intervals of
not less than 60 feet.
f. The electric fence must only be energized during hours when the public
does not have legal access to the protected property.
[Ord. 2011-4476]
D. Barbed Wire Fences
Barbed wire fences and other structures composed or partially composed of barbed
wire are allowed only in the AG, Agricultural, LI, Light Industrial and HI, Heavy Industrial
zoning districts. A fence permit is required. Security fencing for utility facilities such as
electrical substations and water and sewer pumping stations may be topped with barbed
wire that is not closer than six feet to the ground.
E. Razor Wire Fences
Razor wire fences are allowed only in the Light Industrial and Heavy Industrial zoning
districts. A fence permit is required. The razor wire must not be closer than six feet to
the ground.
F. Construction
Fence framing and posts on fences visible from a public street must be placed to the
interior of the lot so that they are not visible from the street. Unless a continuous
masonry beam extends beneath a wooden privacy fence, rot board must be used and
attached to the base of wooden privacy fence pickets to prevent warping of materials.
7.7.6 Refuse Containers
A. Refuse container storage areas must be located in a rear or side service area, or alley
where available, for all uses other than single-family and two-family dwellings.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.7. Screening and Buffering
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-68
B. A solid wood or masonry fence must screen from public view refuse container storage
areas located within 50 feet of the curb line of a public street or visible from the public
street Such fence must be at least one foot higher than the refuse container on all sides
except the side used for servicing the container.
C. Placement of refuse container storage areas must allow the collection vehicle
maneuvering room to avoid backing into a street or other traffic area.
D. Refuse container storage areas and gates must be built in accordance with specifications
in the Design and Development Standards Manual.
7.7.7 Outdoor Retail Display
A. Display Consistent with Classification
Commodities, materials or equipment may not be displayed for sale or lease in a zoning
district where such sale or lease is not an allowed land use.
B. Commercial Districts
Commodities, materials or equipment may not be displayed for sale or lease outside a
building in the Mixed Use, Office, Neighborhood Service, General Retail, Central Area
or Commercial zoning district, except as exempted below:
1. Auto sales, new or used or auto leasing or rental;
2. Boat sales or rental;
3. Motorcycle or scooter sales or rental,
4. Recreational vehicle sales or rental;
5. Agricultural and horticultural temporary seasonal product sales in accordance with
the general and specific conditions set forth in Sec. 5.6.
6. Farmers’ markets in accordance with the general and specific conditions set forth
in Sec. 5.6.
7. Greenhouse or nursery (retail) or produce stand;
8. Farm and garden equipment sales or rental;
9. Outdoor patio and garden furniture sales or rental;
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.7. Screening and Buffering
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-69
10. In the O-1, O-2, NS, C and GR zoning districts, temporary display for a sidewalk
sale that does not extend more than 10 feet from front façade and reserves at
least five feet of sidewalk or walkway for pedestrian use;
11. In the CA zoning district, temporary display for a sidewalk sale that does not
extend more than five feet from front façade and reserves at least five feet of
sidewalk or walkway for pedestrian use; or
12. Other uses not listed above where the display for sale or lease area is situated
behind the principal structure and does not exceed a maximum of 10 percent of
the gross floor area of the business.
[Ord. 2015-4701]
C. Industrial Districts
Commodities, materials and equipment may be displayed for sale or lease with a
Conditional Use Permit issued in accordance with Sec. 3.5 in the Commercial zoning
district, and by right in the Light Industrial and Heavy Industrial zoning districts.
7.7.8 Outdoor Storage
Outdoor storage of commodities, materials and equipment are permitted as follows.
A. Residential and MU Districts
Outdoor storage is not permitted.
B. CA, O-1, O-2 GR, NS, C, LI and HI Districts
Outdoor storage is permitted as follows.
1. Screening in NS, GR, O-1, O-2 and CA
Outdoor storage is permitted where the storage area is situated behind the
principal building in the rear half of the property and where a solid wood or
masonry fence screens the outdoor storage from public view. Such wood or
masonry fence must be at least one foot higher than the stored material. In the
event of conflict between the standards of this Section and the specific use
standards in 0, the more restrictive standard controls.
2. Screening in C and LI
In the Commercial and Light Industrial zoning district, a solid wood or masonry
fence must screen outdoor storage from public view. Such wood or masonry
fence must be at least one foot higher than the stored material.
3. Screening in HI
In the Heavy Industrial zoning district, a solid wood or masonry fence must screen
outdoor storage from public view if such storage is adjacent to or across the street
from a residential district or use. Such wood or masonry fence must be at least
one foot higher than the stored material.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.7. Screening and Buffering
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-70
4. Business Park Exception
Screening of outdoor storage is not required on land located in a public or quasipublic
business park in existence before November 20, 2008.
C. Outdoor Collection Boxes
1. Where Permitted
Outdoor collection boxes are permitted in all nonresidential zoning districts, in
accordance with the following standards.
2. Number Permitted and Location
a. A maximum of one collection box is permitted per any 500 linear feet of
street frontage, regardless of property ownership.
b. Permitted collection boxes must be placed at least 50 feet from all public
right-of-way.
c. Collection boxes are not permitted in required parking spaces.
d. Collection boxes are not permitted in landscaped areas.
3. Dimensions and Specifications Maintenance
a. The maximum dimensions for a permitted collection box are four feet in
length, six feet in height or six feet in width.
b. Permitted collection boxes must be maintained in repaired and painted
condition.
c. Permitted collection boxes must be emptied regularly and not allowed to
overflow.
d. Items deposited outside a collection box must be removed within 24 hours
from deposit.
4. Permits Required
a. An applicant must apply for and receive a permit for the placement of a
collection box.
b. The permittee must have written authorization from the property owner
allowing placement of the collection box.
c. Placement of a collection box without a permit is a violation by the person
who places the box, owns the box, or owns the property where the box is
placed.
d. The permittee placing or maintaining the collection box must display current
information including street address and telephone number on the collection
box. This information must be readable and clearly visible to the public.
e. The permittee and property owner are jointly and severally liable and
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.7. Screening and Buffering
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-71
f. The maintenance, upkeep, and servicing of the container and cleanup and
removal of donations left on the property outside of the container.
g. The permit expires 365 days after approval. The permittee must apply for
and receive another permit prior to the expiration of the original permit.
There is no limit on the number of renewals.
[Ord. 2011-4490]
7.7.9 Maintenance
The maintenance of items permitted under this Section is the responsibility of the property
owner. Such items must be maintained in the condition presented in the original approved
Building Permit application from the development.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.8. Building Exterior Materials
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-72
Sec. 7.8. Building Exterior Materials
7.8.1 Applicability
These standards do not apply to the Draughon-Miller Central Texas Regional Airport.
[Ord. 2015-4707]
7.8.2 Building Elevations Required
Building elevations must be submitted with the Building Permit application demonstrating
compliance with the standards of this Section.
7.8.3 Residential Uses
A. Definition of a Metal Façade Residential Primary or Accessory Building
A primary or accessory residential building in which 25 percent or more of the area of
each of the building’s exterior walls, bearing or nonbearing, that is used as enclosing wall
for a building, other than a fire wall is made with formed steel, structural steel or
lightweight metal alloys applied on the exterior side of exterior walls for the purpose of
providing a weather-resistant barrier, insulation or aesthetics, siding, exterior insulation
and finish systems, architectural trim and embellishments such as cornices, soffits,
fascias, gutters, and leaders. For purposes of calculating whether 25 percent or more of
the area of each of the building’s exterior walls are metal, doors, windows and roofs are
exempt from the percentage calculation and the percentage is calculated per side of the
building.
B. Metal Façade Residential Accessory Buildings Allowed by Right
1. For lots of less than two acres, a new or remodeled metal façade residential
accessory building is allowed by right if:
a. A Building Permit is approved in accordance with Sec. 3.13;
b. The metal façade residential accessory building is placed on the same lot as
the primary residential building;
c. The square footage of the metal façade residential accessory building does
not exceed 15 percent of the primary residential building, or a maximum
gross floor area of 320 square feet;
d. The metal façade residential accessory building has a maximum vertical wall
height of eight feet;
e. There is only one accessory building per lot; and
f. The metal façade residential accessory building is located in the rear half of
the lot, and meets all yard setbacks and coverage maximums established in
Article 4.
2. For lots of two acres or more, a new or remodeled metal façade residential
accessory building is allowed by right if:
a. A Building Permit is approved in accordance with Sec. 3.13;
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.8. Building Exterior Materials
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-73
b. The metal façade residential accessory building is placed on the same lot as
the primary residential building;
c. The square footage of the metal façade residential accessory building does
not exceed 5,000 square feet;
d. The metal exterior accessory building has a maximum vertical wall height of
sixteen feet;
e. There is only one accessory building per lot; and
f. The metal façade residential accessory building is located in the rear half of
the lot, and meets all yard setbacks and coverage maximums established in
Article 4.
C. Metal Façade Primary Residential Buildings Allowed by Right
A Special Permit as described in subsection D below is not required for a metal façade
residential principal building under the following circumstances:
1. A Building Permit is approved in accordance with Sec. 3.13;
2. It is the first structure placed on a lot;
3. The metal façade primary residential building contains an exterior siding material
of an approved steel or a vinyl siding, and applied in a horizontal lap joint
treatment as the City adopted International Residential Code requires;
4. The Director of Planning determines that the metal façade primary residential
building is complimentary to the character of the residential neighborhood served,
taking into consideration the review criteria set forth in subsection E below; and
5. The metal façade primary residential building meets all yard setbacks and coverage
maximums. Established in Article 4.
D. Metal Façade Residential Accessory or Principal Buildings Allowed by
Special Permit Only
1. In situations where a metal façade primary or accessory residential building is not
allowed as a matter of right, a Special Permit is required to place a metal exterior
primary or accessory residential building on a residential lot.
2. The Director of Planning may approve a Special Permit as part of the Building
Permit review process. If the Director of Planning denies a request for a Special
Permit, the property owner may appeal the decision to the City Council, who may
grant a Special Permit.
E. Special Permit Review Criteria
In considering whether to approve a Special Permit for a metal façade primary or
accessory residential building, the Director of Planning or City Council, as applicable,
must consider:
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.8. Building Exterior Materials
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-74
1. Current and future uses of the property and adjacent property for which a Special
Permit for a metal façade primary or accessory residential building is sought in
keeping with the City’s Comprehensive Plan;
2. Whether other metal exterior primary or accessory residential buildings are
currently found within 200 feet of the subject building location;
3. The visibility of metal sides of proposed metal exterior primary and accessory
residential building from public streets or adjoining properties;
4. Whether 25 percent or more of any exterior wall of the metal façade primary or
accessory residential building is made of metal and visible to the surrounding
properties or public streets;
5. The extent to which the appearance of the metal façade mimics the appearance of
wood or masonry products for which no Special Permit is required; and
6. Whether existing or proposed semi-permanent screening (e.g., topography,
landscaping, masonry walls, etc.) would shield the metal façade from adjoining
properties or public streets from view.
F. Documentation
The Director of Planning may require that a person asserting the right to place or
construct a metal façade residential building by right or an applicant for a Special Permit
for a metal façade residential building submit reasonable documentation in support of his
or her assertion or application and to address the criteria established in this Section.
7.8.4 Nonresidential and Multiple-Family Uses
A. Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to apply standards for the exterior of buildings as part of
the Building Permit process. Certain exceptions listed in this Section are allowed by
right based on certain locations, uses and zoning districts.
B. Applicability
1. The standards of this Section apply to building construction that occurs after April
17, 2008. Buildings in existence or permitted before April 17, 2008, may continue
to utilize materials other than those listed as approved materials so long as any
replacement of unapproved materials is made for repair purposes or
reconstruction of buildings impacted by natural or man-made disaster or
condemnation or threat of condemnation for governmental acquisition.
2. The standards of this Section apply to the first two stories or first 25 feet of
vertical height, whichever is lower, of the following types of construction:
a. New nonresidential or multiple-family buildings; or
b. Additions to such buildings, whether connected or not, that are determined
to be a single building plot.
3. The standards of this Section apply to primary, secondary and accessory buildings.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.8. Building Exterior Materials
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-75
C. Exceptions
The standards of this Section do not apply to the following types of construction:
1. Residential buildings other than multiple-family dwellings;
2. Buildings in a public or quasi-public business park in existence before April 17,
2008;
3. Buildings located in the AG, Agricultural zoning district; or
4. Buildings located in the LI, Light Industrial or HI, Heavy Industrial zoning district, if
the buildings are more than 500 linear feet away from residentially zoned property
(measured starting from the closest edge of the residentially zoned property to the
nearest part of nonresidential structure) and are not located in a Strategic
Corridor as designated in subsection D below.
D. Designation of Strategic Corridor Streets for Properties Zoned LI or HI.
The following public streets and highways are designated strategic corridor streets for
purposes of masonry standards for properties zoned LI, Light Industrial or HI, Heavy
Industrial:
a. IH-35;
b. South 1st Street from South H. K. Dodgen Loop to intersection with South
3rd Street;
c. South 5th Street from SH 93 to the intersection of West Avenue M;
d. Central Avenue from IH 35 to Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard;
e. FM 2305;
f. FM 1741 (31st Street) from FM 93 to IH 35;
g. FM 93;
h. SH 317;
i. Outer Loop;
j. Loop 363 (H. K. Dodgen Loop);
k. SH 53;
l. FM 2271;
m. Canyon Creek Drive from South 5th Street to South 31st Street;
n. Marlandwood Drive, from South 5th Street to South 31st Street;
o. Lowes Drive;
p. Raleigh Drive;
q. Kegley Road;
r. Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard;
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.8. Building Exterior Materials
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-76
s. Avenue M;
t. Avenue G;
u. Avenue H;
v. 3rd Street;
w. 57th Street;
x. 25th Street; and
y. SH 36
E. Extent of Strategic Corridors
Strategic corridors include the following:
1. Tracts of land that abut or adjoin a public street or highway designated as a
strategic corridor;
2. Tracts of land that are developed, used, managed or marketed as a group that
includes a tract of land that abuts or adjoins a public street or highway designated
as a strategic corridor; or
3. Tracts of land that share parking space with a tract of land that abuts or adjoins a
public street or highway designated as a strategic corridor.
F. Standards
1. Façade
A minimum of 70 percent of the surface area of each façade must consist of one or
more approved materials:
a. Natural stone;
b. Fired brick;
c. Split-faced block;
d. Tile;
e. Granite;
f. Marble;
g. Stucco;
h. Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems;
i. Tilt-wall concrete, including, but not limited to smooth faced, patterned and
aggregate materials, and other concrete products, such as thin-set masonry,
that simulate brick, stone, marble, granite or tile to appear being laid up unit
by unit;
j. Fibrous masonry product that simulates a wood or stucco material to appear
being laid up unit by unit that is equal to or less than 45 percent of the 70
percent minimum coverage; or
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.8. Building Exterior Materials
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-77
k. Smooth-faced block that appears to be laid up unit by unit that is equal to or
less than 45 percent of the 70 percent minimum coverage.
2. Combinations
Combinations of fibrous masonry product and smooth-faced block must not
exceed 45 percent of the 70 percent minimum coverage required in paragraph 1
above.
3. Measurement
The percentage of surface area of each façade is measured per side of building.
Doors, windows, overhead doors and roofs are exempt from the percentage
calculation.
4. Integration
The color, texture and pattern of an approved material must be integrated in the
material (not painted on or affixed to the material), except that fibrous masonry
product and smooth-faced block may be painted.
5. Multiple-Family Dwellings
Façades of multiple-family dwellings may be completely covered using fibrous
masonry product.
6. Rear Façade
Non-masonry materials are allowed on the rear façade of buildings if the façade is
not visible from the public street right-of-way or if one of the following methods
screen the façade:
a. Permanent evergreen plantings, a minimum of five feet planted height,
spaced 48 inches on center;
b. Masonry or wood fences or walls, a minimum of six feet in height; or
c. Alternative screening materials and methods that the Director of Planning
approves.
G. Additional Standards Based on Building Square Footage
The following additional standards apply to a building or set of buildings of 10,001 or
greater square feet and are cumulative of the standards above. One of the following two
options must be used to enhance façades.
1. A portion of the façade must consist of fired brick or natural stone laid up unit by
unit to meet the following proportions in relation to building square footage:
Gross Floor Area of Building (Sq. ft.)
Brick or Stone
Requirement (min. % of
façade surface area)
10,001 to 20,000 10
20,001 to 100,000 20
100,001 or greater 25
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.8. Building Exterior Materials
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-78
2. The façade must incorporate articulation consisting of a minimum of two of the
following design elements spaced every 45 linear feet for the front façade plus one
design element spaced every 45 linear feet for the other façades, excluding the
rear façade:
a. Columns;
b. Canopies;
c. Arches; or
d. Awnings.
3. For buildings less than or equal to 100,000 square feet in area, articulation must
project a minimum of two feet from the vertical wall.
4. For buildings greater than 100,000 square feet in area, articulation must project a
minimum of five feet from the vertical wall.
H. Exceptions
1. Review Criteria
The Director of Planning may approve exceptions to the masonry standards,
considering the following criteria:
a. Visibility from the public street right-of-way and adjoining properties;
b. Percentage exception requested;
c. Existing or proposed permanent screening (topography, permanent
evergreen landscaping, masonry walls, berms, other screening techniques);
d. Extent to which façades have building articulation, fenestration or
architectural relief, contrasting complementary colors, columns, canopies
and arches; and
e. Whether the material sought furthers an architectural theme.
2. Material Samples
Applicants requesting an exception to the standards of this Section must submit
material samples and concept drawing depicting the criteria listed above.
3. Technological Advances
The Director of Planning may approve other masonry products based on
technological advances.
Article 7: General Development Standards
Sec. 7.8. Building Exterior Materials
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
7-79
[This page intentionally left blank]

Article 8 – Subdivision Design and Improvements
Table of Contents
Sec. 8.1. General Provisions ........................................................................................................... 8-1
Sec. 8.2. Design Standards .............................................................................................................. 8-4
Sec. 8.3. Park Land Dedication ..................................................................................................... 8-18
Sec. 8.4. Improvement Guarantees .............................................................................................. 8-22
Sec. 8.5. City Participation ............................................................................................................ 8-23
[This page intentionally left blank]
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.1. General Provisions
8.1.1 Authority
The provisions of this Article are adopted pursuant to the City Charter and under the
authority of Chapters 211 and 212 of the Local Government Code. Subdivisions located in
whole or in part in extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the City are subject to an interlocal
agreement with Bell County under Chapter 242 of the Local Government Code.
8.1.2 Applicability
A. Unless otherwise stated, the standards of this Article apply if a property is proposed to
be subdivided in accordance with the procedures set forth in Sec. 3.6, Sec. 3.7 or Sec.
3.8.
B. This Article is administered in coordination with all other applicable local, state or
federal ordinances, codes, standards and regulations. The provisions in this Article are
also administered in conjunction with the Comprehensive Plan, Design and
Development Standards Manual, Drainage Criteria Manual, Citywide Trails Master Plan
and the Water and Sewer Master Plan.
C. Plat approval is not required for a division of land into two or more parts for the sole
purpose of securing a loan, so long as all of the land remains in the same ownership.
8.1.3 Type of Improvements Required
A. The applicant must provide the following improvements, of adequate width and size, in
accordance with the standards of this UDC, the Design and Development Standards
Manual, The Drainage Criteria Manual, City Code Chapter 12 (Fire prevention and
Protection), and any applicable local, state or federal requirements:
1. Building setback lines;
2. Public streets and alleys;
3. Sidewalks;
4. Easements;
5. Blocks and lots;
6. Water, wastewater and drainage facilities;
7. Fire hydrants;
8. Street lights;
9. Parks;
10. Other public places or facilities.
B. Fire hydrants in the extraterritorial jurisdiction
Fire hydrants will not be required in the City’s Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) when all
of the following circumstances exist:
Article 8: Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.1. General Provisions
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
8-2
1. The proposed plat is not within the City’s fire district;
2. The City does not provide water service to the area proposed for platting; and
3. The City has not set forth plans to annex the area proposed for platting in the
City’s Municipal Annexation Plan.
Other exceptions to the requirement to provide fire hydrants in the ETJ will be
considered in accordance with the requirements and procedures provided in Sec. 3.6.6.
C. The applicant must coordinate street layouts and street planning with the
Comprehensive Plan, with other municipalities, and with county, state and federally
designated highways, as applicable review bodies may deem in the best interest of the
general public.
[Ord. No. 2013-4580]
8.1.4 Compliance with Exceptions
If a subdivision has been granted an exception to the standards in this Article in accordance
with the procedures set forth in Sec. 3.6.7 then the subdivision must comply with all
conditions and requirements of the exception where these vary with this Article. In all other
instances the subdivision must comply with the requirements of this Article. No City
Maintenance
A. The City does not repair, maintain, install, provide , or issue permits for any streets or
public services in any subdivision for which a Final Plat has not been approved and filed
for record in accordance with Sec. 3.6.6, nor in which the standards contained in or
referred to in this Article have not been complied with in full. If an exception to the
standards in this Article has been granted in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Sec. 3.6.7 then the repairs, maintenance, installation and provision of streets or public
utility services must be in accordance with the specific requirements of the exception as
set forth in the resolution granting the exception.
B. The City does not repair, maintain, install or provide private streets, facilities or
improvements.
8.1.5 Requirements for Recorded Plat to Obtain Permits
A building, repair, plumbing or electrical permit may not be issued for any structure in any
subdivision for which a Final Plat has not been approved and filed for record in accordance
with Sec. 3.6.6.
8.1.6 Utility Services
A. The City does not sell or supply any water or wastewater services to or within any
subdivision platted after October 6, 1994, for which a Final Plat has not been approved
and filed of record in accordance with Sec. 3.6.6. If an exception to the standards of this
Article has been granted in accordance with the procedures set forth in Sec. 3.6.7 then
the City may sell and supply water or wastewater services in accordance with the
specific requirements of the exception as set forth in the resolution granting the
exception.
Article 8: Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.1. General Provisions
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
8-3
B. The City will not make a water or wastewater connection until City inspection confirms
that the requirements as to the installation of water and wastewater mains have been
met within the block facing the street on which the property is situated. This includes
chlorination and satisfactory testing of lines serving the property for which a connection
request is made.
8.1.7 Dedication of Land for Public Use
The applicant must dedicate or convey title to the land needed for improvements required for
a subdivision.
8.1.8 Planned Developments
A. Submittal and Review Provisions
All Planned Developments, as defined in Article 11, must conform to the provisions of
this Article. The plats for such developments must be submitted for review in the same
manner as any other plat.
B. Instruments of Covenants
The City Attorney must review instruments of covenants governing the proposed
Planned Development, to include maintenance and operation, to insure compliance with
the City Code.
8.1.9 Private Streets, Facilities or Improvements
If an applicant proposes that part of a subdivision include any private parks, private streets or
such private improvements normally dedicated to the City, a property owner's association (or
comparable mechanism) must be created, whereby:
A. The association bears total responsibility for maintenance in perpetuity of private
improvements; and
B. A program is established that requires the maintenance of private facilities.
8.1.10 City Coordinates
A subdivision plat must use grid bearings and horizontal distances in feet, referenced in NAD
1983 Central Texas State Plane using Lambert Conformal Conic projection. The subdivision’s
point of beginning must be referenced to a published City monument by bearing and distance.
The description must close and be based on an actual field survey with an adjusted closure of
a minimum of one part in 10,000.
Article 8: Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.2. Design Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
8-4
Sec. 8.2. Design Standards
8.2.1 Streets
A. Street Classifications
The following street classifications are adopted for streets in the City and the ETJ.
1. Rural Local Street;
2. Local Street;
3. Rural Collector Street;
4. Collector Street;
5. Arterial Street; and
6. Major Thoroughfare.
B. Street Proposed in Comprehensive Plan
Where a subdivision encompasses a street shown on the Comprehensive Plan, such
street must be platted consistent with the location, purpose and width indicated in the
Comprehensive Plan.
C. Right-of-Way and Pavement Dimensional Standards
1. The minimum standards for public street right-of-way and street pavement width
are as follows:
Street Type Pavement Width (ft.) Right-of-Way Width (ft.)
Rural Local Street 22 50
Local Street 31 50
Rural Collector Street 26 55
Collector Street 36 55
Arterial Street 49 70
Major Thoroughfare 60 80
2. Pavement width of a street with curbs and gutters is measured from back-of-curb
to back-of-curb. Pavement width of a rural street with concrete ribbon edging is
measured from outer edge of asphalt to outer edge of asphalt.
3. Where the Director of Public Works has specifically determined that no substantial
problems are created, a maximum of 10 feet on either side of a roadway may be
required to be dedicated as utility easement in lieu of a comparable number of feet
in required public street right-of-way; however, the minimum acceptable public
street right-of-way is 50 feet.
4. Depending on traffic patterns, densities, needs and other related factors, the City
may require:
Article 8: Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.2. Design Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
8-5
a. Additional pavement width or public street right-of-way width for major
thoroughfares;
b. Additional public street right-of-way in vicinity of intersections of collector,
arterial and major thoroughfares to adequately accommodate turning
movements or access; and
c. Additional easements needed to provide for utilities.
D. Street Layout
1. General
The subdivider must provide adequate streets and the arrangement, character,
extent, width, grade and location of each street must conform to the
Comprehensive Plan and must be considered in their relation to existing and
planned streets, to topographical conditions, public safety and convenience, and in
their appropriate relationship to the proposed uses of land to be served.
2. Relation to Adjoining Street System
Where necessary to the neighborhood's circulation pattern, existing streets in
adjoining areas must be continued and must be at least as wide as and in alignment
with such existing streets. Practical down-sizing of streets may be permitted only
where obvious transition is from high to low traffic frequency and there are no
Comprehensive Plan thoroughfare requirements.
3. Residential Subdivision Entrances
Residential subdivisions must comply with the Residential Subdivision
Entrance/Access Design Standards in the Design and Development Standards
Manual.
4. Projection of Streets
a. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in the
subdivision must make provisions for the future projection of streets into
such unsubdivided areas, unless the Comprehensive Plan provides
otherwise.
b. Subdivisions must provide for the location of a reasonable number of street
openings to adjoining properties. Such an opening must occur a minimum of
every 1,000 feet or in alignment with existing or proposed subdivision streets
along each boundary of the subdivision. An exception in accordance with the
procedure set forth in 3.6.7 may be granted to this requirement if a natural
or manmade barrier, such as a thoroughfare or railroad prevents its
implementation.
c. The developer must convey or dedicate land to the appropriate public entity
for the future projection of collector and larger streets into adjoining,
unsubdivided areas. For the future projection of local streets, the developer
must either dedicate land or convey to the City, by general warranty deed, a
Article 8: Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.2. Design Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
8-6
fee simple on condition subsequent estate in one or more lots. If the City
Council determines that the property will not be needed for street
extension, the grantor (or successor) has the right to reenter and assume
ownership of the property.
5. Prohibition of Reserve Strips
Reserve strips of land controlling the access to public ways or adjoining properties
are prohibited unless such strips are in compliance with the law and are not
detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.
6. Local Streets
Local streets must be laid out to discourage through traffic.
E. Curvilinear Streets
1. Curvilinear streets must meet the following standards.
Street Classification
Min. Curve Radius to
Centerline of Street (ft)
Local 200
Collector 375
Arterial 725
Major thoroughfare 1,000
2. The City Council may approve local streets with smaller radii than required above
in accordance with the exception provisions in Sec. 3.6.7. In the case of such an
approval, the applicant must pay the additional cost of installing water and
wastewater lines necessitated by the smaller radii.
F. Half Streets and Adjacent Streets
Where public street right-of-way is available, a new half-street must not be platted
except in the case where such a street is to be a major thoroughfare as called for and
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
G. Street Intersections
1. Subdivision layout must provide for a minimum practical number of intersections
with arterials, and those intersections should be with collector streets at intervals
of a minimum of 800 feet.
2. Off-center street intersections will not be approved; however, street jogs with
centerline offsets of more than 180 feet may be submitted for consideration in
accordance with the exception provisions in Sec. 3.6.7.
3. More than two streets intersecting at one point is not permitted.
4. A street may not intersect any other street at an angle of less than 60 degrees and
curb radii at the corner must be adjusted accordingly.
Article 8: Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.2. Design Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
8-7
5. Major thoroughfare intersections must have property line corner chords with a
minimum tangent distance of 30 feet.
6. Curb radii at intersections, including alley openings, must be a minimum of 15 feet,
measured from face of curb, except in nonresidential developments where the
radii must be a minimum of 20 feet. Curb radii for drive approaches are set forth
in Sec. 7.2.
H. Cul-de-Sacs
Streets ending in a cul-de-sac must comply with the standards in the Design and
Development Standards Manual.
I. Typical Street Section
Typical street sections must be based upon projected traffic volume, existing soil
conditions and drainage condition and requirements. The street sections must be based
on a twenty-year life and with the following loading requirements.
Street Type Equivalent Single Axle Loads Single Axle Loading Basis
Alley 20,000
18 kip axle repetitions
Local Street 20,000
Collector Street 100,000
Arterial Street 400,000
Major thoroughfare 500,000
J. Street Grade
1. Streets other than local streets must have a maximum grade of five percent, unless
the natural topography requires steeper grades, in which case a seven and one-half
percent grade may be used, if the site distance is adequate and there are no
intersections at the top or bottom of the grade within the calculated stopping
distance based upon the speed limit.
2. Local streets may have a maximum grade of seven and one-half percent.
3. All streets must have a minimum grade of five-tenths of one percent.
4. Centerline grade changes with an algebraic difference of more than two percent
must be connected with vertical curves of sufficient length to provide a minimum
of 600 feet sight distance on collectors, arterials and major thoroughfares. A
minimum sight distance of 400 feet is required on local streets.
5. If a cross slope is necessary or desirable from one curb to the opposite curb, such
cross slopes must not exceed 12 inches in 30 feet.
K. Curbs and Gutters
1. Streets must be edged with curbs and gutters and designed in accordance with the
Design and Development Standards Manual. Rural local and rural collector streets
must be edged with 12-inch wide concrete ribbons.
Article 8: Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.2. Design Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
8-8
2. Radial curbs and gutters must be constructed at each corner upon each block to
which curbs and gutters are constructed.
3. Lay-down curbs must be constructed across all alleys with street intersections.
4. State specifications govern construction and alteration of state highways.
L. Street Construction by Bonded Contractor
A bonded contractor must perform all street construction.
M. Street Post and Markers
The developer must pay the cost of purchasing and installing street posts and markers at
each street intersection. Such posts and markers must be of the same type used
throughout the City.
N. Monuments
The registered professional land surveyor responsible for preparing the plat must place
permanent monuments in accordance with survey and monumentation standards in the
Design and Development Standards Manual.
O. Streets Within Planned Developments
Private interior streets to be used only as local or collector streets within a Planned
Development must have a minimum pavement width of 26 feet. These private streets
must not conflict with streets identified in the Comprehensive Plan. If a potential exists
for a private street to become a public street, the easement created for the private
street must be the same width as the public street right-of-way required for a local
street.
P. Provision for Replatting Subdivisions
If a tract is subdivided, lots must be arranged to allow for the opening of future streets in
accordance with the standards of this Section.
8.2.2 Alleys
A. Generally
Alleys need not be provided unless the Planning & Zoning Commission requires them.
Where alleys are required in residential blocks, the minimum public street right-of-way
width of such alleys is 20 feet.
B. Intersection of Alleys
Where two alleys intersect or turn at right angles, a diagonal of not less than 10 feet
from the normal intersection of the property line is required. At other angles the
Director of Public Works must review the diagonal length.
C. Dead-End Alleys
Dead-end alleys are not permitted except if a Preliminary Plat provides for the
extension of the alleys, in which case temporary turnarounds that meet the
Article 8: Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.2. Design Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
8-9
requirements set forth in the Design and Development Standards Manual must be
provided.
8.2.3 Sidewalks and Trails
A. Purpose
The purpose of this subsection is to provide safe, continuous pedestrian access along
arterial and collector streets, for linking residential areas, neighborhood services, retail
services and public facilities.
B. Where Required
1. Sidewalks must be provided in the public street right-of-way, along both sides of
arterial streets and along one side of collector streets.
2. The location of new sidewalks along a collector street must be in the established
pattern, or as the Director of Planning determines, considering available public
street right-of-way and existing or future infrastructure, or, all factors being equal,
along the north and east sides of the collector. Sidewalks must be built in
accordance with the Design and Development Standards Manual.
C. Dimensional and Construction Standards
Except as modified for Industrial Parks in subsection D below, the following standards apply
to sidewalks citywide.
1. Sidewalks along local (if provided) and collector streets must be a minimum of four
feet wide.
2. Sidewalks along arterial streets must be a minimum of six feet wide.
3. Sidewalks must be built in line with existing sidewalks. In the absence of an
adjoining sidewalk, the edge of the sidewalk closest to the street must be a
minimum of two feet from the curb. This section should not be construed to
prohibit paving the area between the sidewalk and the street.
4. Sidewalks must be built in accordance with the Design and Development
Standards Manual.
5. Construction plans must be submitted with the Building Permit application.
Required sidewalks must be constructed before the Chief Building Official issues a
Certificate of Occupancy.
6. Obstructions including, but not limited to utility poles and signs are not permitted
in sidewalks.
[Ord. 2012-4516] [Ord. 2013-4580]
D. Sidewalk Not Required
Sidewalks are not required:
1. Where the subject property is proposed for single-family residential use in the UE
(Urban Estates) zoning district.
Article 8: Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.2. Design Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
8-10
2. Where the subject property is located along streets within Industrial Parks
described below:
a. Northwest Industrial Park – for the purposes of this Section the Northwest
Industrial Park consists of properties within or fronting on the boundary
depicted below and formed by:
i. Moore’s Mill Road from Wendland Road to Pegasus Drive;
ii. Pegasus Drive from Moore’s Mill Road to North General Bruce Drive;
iii. North General Bruce Drive from Pegasus Drive to Enterprise Road;
iv. Enterprise Road from North General Bruce Drive to Eberhardt Road;
v. Eberhardt Road from Enterprise Road to Industrial Boulevard;
vi. Industrial Boulevard from Eberhardt Road to Wendland Road; and
vii. Wendland Road from Industrial Boulevard to Moore’s Mill Road.
b. Southeast Industrial park – for the purposes of this Section, the Southeast
Industrial park consists of properties within or fronting on the boundary
depicted below and formed by:
Article 8: Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.2. Design Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
8-11
i. East Avenue H from one-half mile west of the western H.K. Dodgen
Loop right-of-way line to easternmost city limit line;
ii. The easternmost city limit line from East Avenue H to Farm to Market
Road 3117;
iii. Farm to market road 3117 from the easternmost city limit line to the
eastern State Highway 36 right-of-way line;
iv. The eastern State Highw36 right-of-way line from the southern city
limit line to the eastern H.K. Dodgen Loop right-of-way line;
v. A straight line from the eastern State Highway 36 right-of-way line to
one-half mile west of the western H.K. Dodgen Loop right-of-way line.
Article 8: Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.2. Design Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
8-12
E. Cost Sharing for Sidewalks
1. On portions of property developed for single-family residential use that adjoin an
arterial street, or a County, State, or Federally maintained highway, the developer
shall build an arterial width sidewalk, and the City shall bear the cost of sidewalk
construction of those portions of sidewalk adjoining an arterial street or a County,
State, or Federally maintained highway. The city shall reimburse the developer at
the time the sidewalk improvements are accepted by the city.
F. Waiver of Sidewalk Requirements
The Director of Planning may exercise discretion to waive sidewalk requirements in
accordance with the procedures in Sec. 3.10.
[Ord. No. 2013-4580]
8.2.4 Utility Easements
A. Each block that does not contain an alley must contain or have access to a utility
easement at the rear of all lots, or at other appropriate locations as determined by utility
providers or the City Engineer, reserved for the use of all public utility lines, conduits
and equipment. In the case of rear lot or side lot locations, the utility easements must be
a minimum of 15 feet in width.
B. Required drainage easements must allow for a minimum of 15 feet in width in addition
to any width required for a drainageway structure. This easement may be split between
drainageway sides but one side (easement) must be a minimum of 10 feet in width
unless other dedicated public street right-of-way provides access and maintenance.
C. The developer must arrange with the appropriate utility provider for the payment or
refund of construction costs of each utility involved.
D. Where two utility easements intersect or turn at right angles, a diagonal of not less than
10 feet from the normal intersection of the easement line is required. At other angles
the Director of Public Works must review the diagonal length.
8.2.5 Blocks
A. Intersecting streets determining block lengths must be provided at such intervals as to
serve cross traffic adequately and to meet existing streets or contemporary and
accepted subdivision practices.
Article 8: Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.2. Design Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
8-13
B. Blocks must be designed with the standards in the Design and Development Standards
Manual.
C. A plat must demonstrate reasonable provisions in the street layout for the public health
and safety, particularly the circulation of emergency vehicles and anticipated truck
traffic.
8.2.6 Lots
A. General Requirements
Lot area, width, setback line, side yard and rear yard requirements must be provided as
required in this UDC.
B. Access to Lots
Each lot must front upon a public street or have access to a public street by private
access easement sufficient to meet the requirements of Chapter 12, Fire Prevention and
Protection, of the Code of Ordinances, governing fire apparatus access to buildings.
C. Side Lot Lines
Side lot lines must be at right angles to straight street lines and radial to curved street
lines.
D. Extra Depth and Width in Certain Cases
1. Where a lot in a residential area backs up to a railroad right-of-way, a high
pressure gasoline, oil or gas line, an industrial area or other land use that has a
depreciating effect on the residential use of property, and where no marginal
access street or other street is provided, the Planning and Zoning Commission
may require additional lot depth.
2. In no case may a residential lot depth in excess of 175 feet be required. Additional
lot width, up to 100 feet may be required where a residential lot sides to the
conditions described in paragraph 1 above.
E. Lot Arrangement
Lots for residential use must not front on or be contiguous at a side lot line to major
thoroughfares or expressways. Lot arrangement in case of nonresidential uses is subject
to the review and approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission so that traffic
congestion and movement problems are prevented wherever possible. Double fronting
lots or lots with a side lot line contiguous to major thoroughfares or expressways may
be allowed, following recommendation of the Director of Planning and after evaluation
of the resulting exposure (i.e., fence, berm, wall) adjacent to the street.
F. Subsequent Platting
At the option of the subdivider and with the approval of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the subdivider may preliminarily plat all streets, easements and minimum
building lines, and at a subsequent date, plat the blocks and lots as individual Final Plats
consistent with the initial platting of streets and utilities.
Article 8: Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.2. Design Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
8-14
8.2.7 Water and Wastewater
A. Size of Water Mains
Water mains must be a minimum of six inches in diameter. The following items will be
taken into account in determining if a larger water main is needed:
1. The recommendation of the design engineer for the developer;
2. Peak demands for domestic and irrigation use of water;
3. Fire protection and hydrant coverage; and
4. Growth and development possibilities for the area.
B. Size of Wastewater Lines
Wastewater lines must be a minimum of six inches in diameter. The following items will
be taken into account in determining if a larger wastewater line is needed:
1. The recommendation of the design engineer for the developer;
2. Peak demands; and
3. Growth and development possibilities for the area.
[Ord. 2012-4545]
C. Wastewater Clean Outs
1. Full-size clean outs may be used in place of manholes at the end of cul-de-sacs
where
a. Wastewater mains run in a straight line;
b. A maximum of three service lines converge at one point; and
c. The distance from the proposed cleanout to the nearest manhole is less than
500 feet.
2. Each home or building drain must be provided with a clean out near the junction
of the building drain and building sewer, in accordance with Chapter 7, Article 21,
Plumbing Code, of the Code of Ordinances and the Design and Development
Standards Manual. A wastewater yard line clean out must be installed at the
junction of the wastewater yard line and the City service line.
D. Time of Construction
Water and wastewater lines, including short and long taps, must be installed during the
construction phase of the subdivision. The subdivider must bring all valves and manholes
within the subdivision boundary to grade prior to final acceptance.
E. Fire Hydrants
Fire hydrants may be used in lieu of flushing valves at the end of cul-de-sacs so long as
there are sufficient hydrants located at intersections to meet the spacing criteria in
Chapter 12, Fire Prevention and Protection, of the Code of Ordinances.
Article 8: Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.2. Design Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
8-15
F. On-Site Sewage Facilities
1. A subdivision with a proposed on-site sewage facility must not be approved if
adequate wastewater service is available within 500 feet of the property line of the
subdivision or if the subdivision contains one or more lots that are less than 22,500
square feet in area.
2. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve a subdivision with on-site
sewage facilities containing lots that are less than 22,500 but more than 15,000
square feet in area if:
a. Such subdivision predominantly contains either the Altoya, Bastrop,
Lewisville, Mendard or Venas soil series; and
b. The owner or developer of the subdivision demonstrates by convincing
evidence that due to soil type, volume of sewage, topography, building size,
density, percolation tests, design of the on-site sewage facility and other
relevant factors that a smaller lot area will create no public health, safety or
welfare problems to residents of the subdivision or to surrounding property
owners or residents.
3. In no event may such a subdivision be approved containing lots which that are less
than 15,000 square feet in size.
8.2.8 Drainage and Storm Sewers
A. Drainage structures must be designed and constructed in accordance with the Drainage
Criteria and Design Manual and in such locations and of such size and dimensions to
adequately serve the subdivision and associated drainage area as demonstrated on a
submitted Drainage Plan. The developer is responsible for all costs for the installation of
the drainage system required to accommodate the needs of the subdivision being
developed, to include the carrying of existing water entering or leaving the subdivision.
B. In new subdivisions, the developer must provide all the necessary easements and rightsof-
way required for drainage structures, including storm sewer and open or paved
channels.
8.2.9 Flood Damage Prevention
All subdivisions must comply with Ordinance No. 1376 (Chapter 13 of the Code of
Ordinances) known as the "Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance of the City of Temple."
8.2.10 Street Lights
Installation of street lights in new subdivisions that are within the City limits or pending
annexation by petition of the property owners must conform to the City's current Street Light
Policy.
8.2.11 Subdivision Construction Standards
All construction plans and accepted subdivision improvements must conform to the following
standards, unless an exception to the standards of this Article has been granted in accordance
with the procedures set forth in Sec. 3.6.7.
Article 8: Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.2. Design Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
8-16
A. Inspection of Construction Work
The Director of Public Works has the authority to inspect all construction work, such as
street grading, street paving, storm sewers, curbs and gutters, wastewater or water
mains, that the owner, developer or contractor performs. Inspections may occur during
construction work and after work is completed. All construction must comply with the
Design and Development Standards Manual.
B. Addressing, Street Naming and Subdivision Naming
Standards for addressing (odd-even), street naming (avoiding duplication), subdivision
naming and related matters are adopted as the street renaming and addressing policy.
C. Administration of Construction Standards
The Director of Public Works must publish and maintain construction standards,
specifications and other provisions in the Design and Development Standards Manual. A
copy of this manual is available in the office of the Director of Public Works.
D. Costs of Installation
All required improvements must be constructed at the developer's cost, with no
contribution from the City, except as specified in this Article and Chapter 38 of the City
Code, Water and Wastewater.
8.2.12 Avigation Release
The Planning and Zoning Commission may require the execution of an avigation easement or
release as a condition precedent to approval of a subdivision plat.
8.2.13 Development on H. K. Dodgen Loop
A. Provision of Loop and Frontage Road Right-of-Way
1. Any property subdivided or upon which a Building Permit is requested, that fronts
on H.K. Dodgen Loop, must be built upon or subdivided in such a manner so as to
provide for the main lanes for H.K. Dodgen and frontage road, where necessary,
that conform to the plans for the main lanes and frontage roads as the Texas
department of Transportation (TxDOT) has approved or adopted for H.K.
Dodgen Loop. Where this Section requires main lanes or frontage roads, it is the
responsibility of the developer or property owner to provide adequate public
street right-of-way for one-half of the main lanes of H. K. Dodgen Loop and a
frontage road.
2. An owner or developer of property fronting H.K. Dodgen Loop desiring to
subdivide, or obtain a Building Permit on said property must submit a plat or site
plan to the City for approval. The plat must address public street right-of-way for
the main lanes and frontage road, access to the Loop, and internal circulation for
the platted property.
Article 8: Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.2. Design Standards
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
8-17
B. Access Standards
1. General Requirements
a. Temporary Access
The City must allow temporary access from the platted property to H. K.
Dodgen Loop in appropriate cases. The City must require that temporary
access ramps be located not closer than 200 feet from the nearest adjacent
access ramp to the Loop. The developer or owner of the platted property
must build the temporary access ramp at his or her own expense and in
conformance with City and state standards for access ramps. At such time as
the state or City constructs permanent access ramps from the frontage road
to H. K. Dodgen Loop, the current owner of the property that the
temporary access ramp serves must remove at his or her own expense, the
temporary access ramp.
b. Shared Access
Shared access for adjacent development parcels is required wherever
possible. The burden is on the developer or owner to show that shared
access is not practical.
c. Internal Circulation
The plat must address internal circulation within the property, as opposed to
on the frontage roads. Internal circulation streets that the developer must
provide and pay for, may parallel the frontage road. Internal circulation
streets may be two-way.
d. Temporary Deceleration Lane
The City may require, in appropriate cases, that developers or owners
construct a temporary deceleration lane at their own expense if the platted
property is likely to generate a high volume of traffic.
e. New Crossovers
The City may not authorize new crossovers on H.K. Dodgen Loop unless
the Texas Department of Transportation approves such crossovers.
2. Standards and Specifications
Frontage roads and ramps must be constructed in accordance with the plans that
the Texas Department of Transportation and the City have approved or adopted.
Article 8: Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.3. Park Land Dedication
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
8-18
Sec. 8.3. Park Land Dedication
8.3.1 Requirements for Park Land Dedication
A. General Requirements
1. Whenever an approved residential Final Plat is filed of record with the County
Clerk of Bell County, such plat must contain a clear fee simple dedication of an
area of land to the City for park purposes. Such area must equal one acre for each
133 proposed dwelling units. As far as practical, all dedications of lands must be in
a single parcel.
2. All plats must show the area proposed to be dedicated under this Section. The
payment of cash may meet the parkland dedication that this Section requires when
this Section permits or requires.
3. The City Council declares the development of an area smaller than three acres for
the public park purposes as impractical. Therefore, if a Preliminary Plat proposes
fewer than 399 units resulting in a required dedication of less than three acres, the
developer is required to pay cash instead of dedicating land. A plat showing
dedication of less than three acres must not be approved unless the City Council,
upon recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, approves an
exception to this requirement in accordance with Sec. 3.6.7.
4. Where an area of less than five acres is required to be dedicated, the Planning and
Zoning Commission may accept the dedication or require payment of cash
instead of land dedication in the amount that Sec. 8.3.2 requires if it determines
that sufficient park area is already in the public domain and in the area of the
proposed development, or if it determines that expanding or improving existing
parks would better serve the parkland recreational needs of the area.
5. The dedication that this Section requires must be made by the filing of the Final
Plat clearly showing such parkland dedication or contemporaneously by separate
instrument unless additional dedication is required subsequent to the filing of the
Final Plat. If the actual number of completed dwelling units exceeds the figure
upon which the original dedication is based, such additional dedication is required,
and must be made by payment of cash instead of the land dedication in the amount
provided that paragraph 1 requires above, or by the conveyance of an entire
numbered lot to the City.
6. Before any dedication of parkland or payment of cash instead of land dedication
may be required, the Planning and Zoning Commission must find at the public
meeting at which the subdivision is considered for final approval, that the
dedication of park land or payment of cash instead of land dedication for future
development of parks bears a substantial relation to the health, safety and general
welfare of the community and that the subdivision causes a need for the park
improvement. In order to determine whether or not the need or benefit is
sufficient to require the dedication, such factors as the size of lots in the
subdivision, the economic impact of the subdivision, density of population, the
amount of private parkland contained in the subdivision, and the amount of open
Article 8: Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.3. Park Land Dedication
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
8-19
land that the subdivision consumes must be considered. The Director of Parks and
Leisure Services must be informed of all new subdivisions that are submitted for
approval and of all existing subdivisions that are submitted for replatting, expansion
or redevelopment. The Planning and Zoning Commission must seek the advice of
the Director of Parks and Leisure Services, or may refer the matter to the Parks
and Leisure Services Board before considering the subdivision for final approval
and passing on the need for park dedication.
7. If payment of cash instead of land dedication is determined to be appropriate, the
Director of Parks and Leisure Services must determine the location of the park
where the funds will be spent within 90 days of the final acceptance of the
completed subdivision.
8. When the Temple Housing Authority or Habitat for Humanity is the developer of
a subdivision, park dedication requirements (land or cash) may be waived, and the
City must provide or obtain park land, or fund the park fee, to assure provision of
neighborhood park facilities for the subdivision.
B. Prior Dedication or Absence of Prior Dedication
1. Credit may be given for dedication of land or cash paid instead of land dedication
that was dedicated or paid pursuant to the previously existing zoning ordinance or
subdivision ordinance of the City.
2. If a dedication requirement arose prior to the passage of this section, the
ordinance in effect at the time such obligation arose controls that dedication
requirement, except that additional dedication is required if the actual density of
the dwelling units constructed on the property is greater than the former assumed
density. Additional dedication is required only for the increase in density and must
be based on the ratio set forth in paragraph A.1of this subsection.
At the discretion of the Planning and Zoning Commission, any former gift of
parkland to the City that any provision of the City Code, the previously existing
zoning ordinance or other applicable laws did not require, may be credited on a
per acre basis toward eventual parkland dedication requirements imposed on the
donor of such land. The Planning and Zoning Commission may, if requested,
consider the recommendation of the Parks and Leisure Services Board, in
exercising its discretion under this Section.
C. General Requirements in the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ)
Park land dedication will not be required in the City’s extraterritorial jurisdiction if all of
the following circumstances exist:
1. The area proposed for development is more than one mile from the existing city
limits’
2. The proposed subdivision will create fewer than nine lots; and
Article 8: Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.3. Park Land Dedication
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
8-20
3. The City has not set forth plans to annex the area proposed for development in
the City's Municipal Annexation Plan.
Other exceptions to the requirement to provide fire hydrants in the ETJ will be
considered in accordance with the requirements and procedures provided in Sec. 3.6.6.
[Ord. No. 2013-4580]
8.3.2 Cash Instead of Land Dedication
Subject to the approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission:
A. A land owner responsible for dedication under this Section may elect to meet the
requirements of Sec. 8.3.1 in whole or in part by cash payment instead of land
dedication in the amount set forth in subsection B below. Such payment instead of land
dedication must be made prior to the time the City accepts the subdivision
improvements.
B. The dedication requirement may be met by a payment of cash instead of land dedication
sufficient to acquire land and provide for adjacent streets and utilities for a
neighborhood park to serve the area in which such development is located. Such perunit
price is computed on the basis of $225.00 per dwelling unit. Cash payment may be
used only for land acquisition or development of a neighborhood park located within the
same area as the development or in close proximity to the development. The Director
of Parks and Leisure Services must determine this location within 90 days of the final
acceptance of the completed subdivision. Examples of land acquisition or development
costs include but are not limited to land purchases; design and construction of
landscaping, utilities, structures, sidewalks and trails; and purchase and installation of
new equipment such as playscapes, outdoor furniture and lighting fixtures. Cash paid
instead of dedicating park land may not be used for costs of operation, maintenance,
repair or replacement.
C. The City Council, following a recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission,
may reduce the per dwelling unit contribution for multiple family dwellings and
manufactured home land lease community by a maximum of one half if they are satisfied
that onsite recreational amenities will substantially meet the needs that the development
generates. Examples of onsite recreational amenities include but are not limited to trails,
accessible open space, pool, recreational fields, playground, playground equipment,
clubhouse, or community room.
D. The Director of Parks and Leisure Services may reduce the per dwelling unit
contribution for a land lease community by one-half to credit the development for
required onsite recreational amenities.
8.3.3 Comprehensive Plan Considerations
Land show on the Future Land Use and Character Map, Parks, Recreation and Open Space
Master Plan or Citywide Trails Master Plan that is designated as being suitable for
development for a major recreational center, school site, park or other public use, must be
reserved for a period of one year after the Preliminary Plat is approved if, within two months
after such approval, the City Council advises the subdivider of its desire to acquire the land or
Article 8: Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.3. Park Land Dedication
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
8-21
of the interest of another governmental unit to acquire the land, for purchase by the
interested governmental authority, at land appraisal value of at the time of purchase. The City
Council’s failure to so notify the subdivider constitutes a waiver of the right to reserve the
land. Any waiver of the right to reserve the land is no longer effective if the Preliminary Plat
expires without approval of a Final Plat.
8.3.4 Special Fund and Right to Refund
A. There is hereby established a special fund for the deposit of all sums paid instead of land
dedication under this section. The fund is known as the Parkland Dedication Fund. All
monies set aside in the fund must be used exclusively for park and recreational
improvements in new or existing parks in the subdivision that contributes the cash, or as
close to the subdivision as practical to ensure that the subdivision's residents gain the
benefit of the improvements.
B. The City must account for all sums paid instead of land dedication under this Section
with reference to the individual plats involved and the contributing developer. Funds
designated for development of an existing neighborhood park must be spent within two
years from receipt.
C. Funds designated for land acquisition and development of a new neighborhood park
must be spent within five years from receipt.
D. When funds from several different subdivisions are being accumulated to develop a
neighborhood park serving several different subdivisions they must be segregated in an
account earmarked for that particular project within the parkland dedication fund. Such
funds must be spent on a first in, first out basis. Provided, however, that access to an
acquired or dedicated park or acquired or dedicated park site is granted to the City or
its agent for the purposes of park development. If not so expended, the contributing
developer on the last day of such period must be notified of and entitled to a pro rata
refund of such sum, computed on a square footage of area basis. Registered mail to
three addresses that the contributing developer provides constitutes diligent effort to
locate and if unanswered in writing, requesting refund within 365 days of such mailing,
such right to refund is barred.
E. The placing of a parkland dedication fund in a "treasury fund" that the Director of
Finance has established is not deemed a violation of this Section, so long as the Director
of Finance maintains a separate account for these proceeds for the purposes set forth in
this Section and assures that funds will not be disbursed for any purposes not set forth in
this Section. The quarterly report of the Director of Finance to the City Council must
include a current summary of parkland escrow funds.
8.3.5 Additional Requirements
A. Any land dedicated to the City under this section must be suitable for recreational
purposes, such as for parks, playgrounds and usable open space.
B. The following characteristics of proposed parkland areas are generally unsuitable:
1. Any area is primarily, (more than 50 percent), located in the hundred year
floodplain.
Article 8: Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.4. Improvement Guarantees
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
8-22
2. Any areas are of unusable topography or slope that render more than 25 percent
of the area unusable for organized recreational activities.
3. Due to unusual circumstances relating to subsoil, slope or topography, the
development of the property for park or recreational purposes would be
extremely difficult or expensive as the Director of Public Works and the Director
of Parks and Leisure Services determine.
C. The above characteristics of a park land dedication area may be grounds for denial of
any Preliminary or Final Plat.
D. Drainage areas may be accepted as a part of a park if the channel is constructed in
accordance with the Design and Development Standards Manual, and if the channel cuts
off no significant area of the park from public access. Provided, however, that the
developer may provide vehicular access by a bridge or similar structure that the
Director of Public Works approves. The land dedicated for of park land may include 50
feet on each side of any well-defined creek or waterway.
E. Each park must have ready access to an improved public street so as to provide visual
access to a majority of the park area.
Sec. 8.4. Improvement Guarantees
[Reserved]
Article 8: Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.5. City Participation
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
8-23
Sec. 8.5. City Participation
8.5.1 Perimeter Streets
A. Local and Collector Streets
Where a subdivision is adjacent to an existing street or future street classified as a local
or collector street on the Thoroughfare Plan and the existing street is not built
according to the design standards for such street classification or the future street is not
yet constructed, the developer must dedicate the additional right-of-way for the existing
street or future street. The developer must dedicate one-half of the land required for an
existing street to be upgraded or one half of the land required for a future street to be
constructed.
B. Arterial and Larger Streets
Where a subdivision is adjacent to an existing street or future street classified as a major
or minor arterial street on the Thoroughfare Plan and the existing street is not built
according to the design standards for such street classification or the future street is not
yet constructed, the developer must dedicate the additional right-of-way for the existing
street or future street. The developer must dedicate a proportional share of the land
required for an existing street to be upgraded or a proportional share of the land
required for a future street to be constructed.
[Ord. 2012-4545]
8.5.2 Internal Streets
The developer must pay all costs for the installation of streets in a subdivision, including those
streets, special access arrangements and related drainage structures required because:
A. A substantial amount of traffic will be generated from, to or through the subdivision
because of existing or future conditions; or
B. The Comprehensive Plan indicates a need for certain major thoroughfares through or
adjacent to the subdivision.

Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
[This page intentionally left blank]
Article 8: Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.5. City Participation
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
Article 9 - Nonconformities
Table of Contents
Sec. 9.1. General ............................................................................................................................. 9-1
Sec. 9.2. Nonconforming Uses and Structures ............................................................................... 9-1
Sec. 9.3. Nonconforming Signs ....................................................................................................... 9-2
Article 8: Subdivision Design and Improvements
Sec. 8.5. City Participation
[This page intentionally left blank]
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
9-1
Article 9 Nonconformities
Sec. 9.1. General
9.1.1 The provisions of this Article are adopted pursuant to Local Government Code Chapters 43,
211 and 212.
9.1.2 Nonconformities are those land uses, structures, signs or lots of record that do not conform
with the requirements of this UDC. The adoption of this UDC does not make
nonconformities illegal; however, nonconformities must not be modified except in
accordance with this Article.
9.1.3 Nothing in this Article prohibits the ordinary repair and maintenance of a nonconformity.
Sec. 9.2. Nonconforming Uses and Structures
9.2.1 A nonconforming status for a use or structure exists when:
A. On September 19, 1991, the use or structure was in existence and lawfully constructed,
located and operating in accordance with the provisions of the previously existing zoning
ordinance; or
B. As a result of amendments to this UDC, the use or structure does not comply with the
standards of this UDC.
9.2.2 A nonconforming use or structure lawfully existing and operating prior to the adoption of this
UDC may not be increased, enlarged or expanded beyond that, as it existed on September
19, 1991, except in the following circumstances.
A. To provide off-street loading or off-street parking spaces upon approval of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment; or
B. To remodel or build an addition to an existing residential structure in a LI, Light
Industrial or HI, Heavy Industrial district, in conformance with the Area Regulations for
Single-Family Dwelling-3 districts.
C. To replace a mobile home with a HUD-Code manufactured home or a HUD-Code
manufactured home with a different HUD-Code manufactured home, on property
where the existing mobile home or HUD-Code manufactured home was in existence
and lawfully located before annexation. The one-time replacement that this paragraph
authorizes must occur within five years from the effective date of the annexation.
9.2.3 Any nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use and once such change is made,
the use must not be changed back to a nonconforming use.
9.2.4 If a nonconforming use is abandoned, all nonconforming rights cease and the use of the
premises must, from that point on, be in conformity with this UDC. Abandonment involves
the intent of the user or owner to discontinue a nonconforming operation and the actual act
of discontinuance. Discontinuance of a business or the vacancy of a building or premises that
a nonconforming use occupies is construed as conclusive proof of intent to abandon the
nonconforming use. Any nonconforming use that, not involving a permanent structure, is
moved from the premises must be deemed to have been abandoned.
Article 9: Nonconformities
Sec. 9.3. Nonconforming Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
9-2
9.2.5 If a nonconforming structure or a structure occupied by a nonconforming use is destroyed by
fire, the elements or other cause, it may not be rebuilt except to conform to the provisions
of this UDC. In the case of partial destruction of a nonconforming use not exceeding 60
percent of its reasonable value, reconstruction may be permitted after a hearing and
favorable action by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, but the size and function of the
nonconforming use must not be expanded, unless the nonconforming use is a residential use
in a LI, Light Industrial or HI, Heavy Industrial zoning district.
9.2.6 Where a lot, tract or parcel is occupied by a lawful structure, and where the acquisition of
public street right-of-way by a City, county, state or federal agency causes such structure to
become nonconforming regarding any requirement of this UDC, such structure must be
deemed a conforming structure. Such designation applies only to nonconformity resulting
directly from the acquisition of public street right-of-way. In the event that such structure is
expanded or is partially or totally destroyed by natural or accidental causes, the structure
may be expanded or rebuilt upon approval of a Building Permit.
9.2.7 The Zoning Board of Adjustment may require the discontinuance of nonconforming uses or
structures under any plan whereby the full value of the structure and facilities can be
amortized within a definite period of time, taking into consideration the general character of
the neighborhood and the necessity of all property to conform to the regulations of this
UDC. All actions to discontinue a nonconforming use or structure must be taken with due
regard to the property rights of the persons affected when considered in the light of the
public welfare and the character of the area surrounding the designated nonconforming use
or structure and the conservation and preservation of the property. The Zoning Board of
Adjustment may from time to time on its own motion or upon cause presented by interested
property owners, inquire into the existence, continuation or maintenance of any
nonconforming use or structure within the City.
9.2.8 The Zoning Board of Adjustment may permit an extension of the two-year amortization
period for nonconforming use as a sexually oriented business under the terms of the City’s
regulations governing sexually oriented businesses. The applicant must attach sufficient
documentary evidence to the application demonstrating the following:
A. The full amortizable value of structures and fixtures attached such structures if the
applicant made such investments prior to September 19, 1991 or prior to the first
required public notice by the City Council of its intent to annex the land when the
sexually oriented business is located;
B. The net profits and depreciation realized during the two-year amortization period; and
C. Any incidental costs associated with termination of the nonconforming use, such as
structural demolition expenses or moving expenses of nonfixture property.
9.2.9 After examining such evidence and hearing discussion by City staff and the applicant, the
Zoning Board of Adjustment may, if necessary, grant any extension that the applicant is due
under the terms of this subsection.
Sec. 9.3. Nonconforming Signs
Nonconforming signs are exempted from the provisions of Sec. 7.6, unless damaged by natural causes or
otherwise destroyed or taken down, or removed for any purpose other than maintenance operation that
Article 9: Nonconformities
Sec. 9.3. Nonconforming Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
9-3
is allowed. It may not be re-erected, reconstructed or rebuilt, except in full compliance and conformance
with Sec. 7.6. Any nonconforming sign that is damaged or is deteriorated to a point where its restoration
cost exceeds 60 percent of its replacement value must be removed, unless otherwise authorized to
remain.
Article 10 – Enforcement, Violations and Penalties
Table of Contents
Sec. 10.1. Enforcement .............................................................................................................. 10-1
Sec. 10.2. Violations ................................................................................................................... 10-1
Sec. 10.3. Penalties ..................................................................................................................... 10-1
Article 9: Nonconformities
Sec. 9.3. Nonconforming Signs
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
5
[This page intentionally left blank]

Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
10-1
Article 10 Enforcement, Violations and Penalties
Sec. 10.1.Enforcement
10.1.1 See Sec. 1.4 of the UDC. Administration, interpretation and enforcement of this UDC is the
shared responsibilities of the Director of Planning and the Chief Building Official, in
coordination with the Director of Public Works. Administration of the Zoning Ordinance is
the responsibility of the Director of Planning. Interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance is the
responsibility of the Director of Planning and the Chief Building Official and Services. The
City Manager may make a final staff ruling, if necessary, concerning any administration,
interpretation or enforcement of this UDC.
[Ord. No. 2013-4580]
10.1.2 See Sec. 1.4 of the UDC. The City Attorney may institute appropriate action in a court of
competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this UDC with respect to any applicable
violation that occurs within any area subject to the provisions of this UDC.
Sec. 10.2.Violations
See Sec. 1-9 of the City Code.
Sec. 10.3.Penalties
See. Sec. 1-9 of the City Code.
Article 10: Enforcement, Violations and Penalties
Sec. 10.3. Penalties
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
10-2
[This page intentionally left blank]
Article 11 – Definitions
Table of Contents
Sec. 11.1. Abbreviations ............................................................................................................. 11-1
Sec. 11.2. Defined Terms ........................................................................................................... 11-2
[This page intentionally left blank]
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
11-1
Article 11 Definitions
Sec. 11.1.Abbreviations
Abbreviation Term
AG Agricultural zoning district
Ac. Acres
ANSI American National Standards Institute
C Commercial zoning district
C (use table) Use requires a Conditional Use Permit
CUP Conditional Use Permit
CA Central Area zoning district
dB Decibel
ETJ Extraterritorial Jurisdiction
GFA Gross floor area
GR General Retail zoning district
FP Floodplain overlay zoning district
Ft. Feet
H North Central Temple Historic overlay zoning district
HI Heavy Industrial zoning district
HUD Department of Housing and Urban Development
I-35 or IH-35 Interstate Highway 35 or General Bruce Drive
LI Light Industrial zoning district
L Use Permitted Subject to Limitations
Max. Maximum
MF-1 Multiple-Family Dwelling zoning district 1
MF-2 Multiple-Family Dwelling zoning district 2
MF-3 Multiple-Family Dwelling zoning district 3
MH Manufactured Home zoning district
Min. Minimum
Mph Miles per hour
O-1 Office One zoning district
O-2 Office Two zoning district
P Use Permitted By Right
PD Planned Development overlay zoning district
SF-1 Single-Family Dwelling zoning district 1
SF-2 Single-Family Dwelling zoning district 2
SF-3 Single-Family Dwelling zoning district 3
SFA-1 Single-Family Attached Dwelling zoning district 1
SFA-2 Single-Family Attached Dwelling zoning district 2
SFA-3 Single-Family Attached Dwelling zoning district 3
Sq. ft. Square Feet
TCEQ Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
TDHR Texas Department of Human Resources Standards
TH Townhouse zoning district
TMED Temple Medical and Educational District
UE Urban Estate zoning district
UDC Unified Development Code
Article 11: Definitions
Sec. 11.2. Defined Terms
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
11-2
Abbreviation Term
2F Two-Family Dwelling zoning district
Sec. 11.2.Defined Terms
As used in this UDC, unless the context otherwise indicates, the words below are defined as follows.
Words not expressly defined in this Section are to be construed in accordance with their ordinary
meaning or in accordance with their customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices.
Abutting. Adjacent; joining at a boundary.
Access. Refers to vehicular access, both automobile and truck.
Accessory Building, Detached. In a residential zoning district, a subordinate building detached and
used for a purpose customarily incidental to the main structure such as a private garage for
automobile storage, toolhouse, lath or greenhouse as a hobby (no business), home workshop,
children's playhouse, storage house or garden shelter, but not involving the conduct of a business
or a guesthouse residence.
Accessory Dwelling Unit. A dwelling unit subordinate to and incidental to the primary use of the
principal building or to the primary use of the premises.
Accessory Use. A use subordinate to and incidental to the primary use of the principal building or to the
primary use of the premises.
Agricultural Accessory Building. A structure, other than a dwelling, on a farm as defined in this UDC,
for the housing protection or storage of the usual farm equipment, animals and crops.
Airport or Landing Field. An area improved for the landing or take-off of aircraft approved by the City
for operation as an aircraft landing facility.
Alcoholic Beverages, Off-Premise Consumption, Beer & Wine Sales. Sales of beer or wine in
unbroken original containers for off-premises consumption.
Alcoholic Beverages, Off-Premise Consumption, Package Store. Sales of distilled liquors, wines
and beers in unbroken original containers for off-premises consumption.
Alcoholic Beverages, Sale of Beer and Wine Only for On-Premise Consumption, Less Than
75% Gross Revenue from Alcohol Sales. This is the land use listing for sale of beer and wine
only for on-premise consumption where the gross revenue from the on-premise sales of beer
and wine is less than 75% of total gross revenue.
Alcoholic Beverages, Sale of All Alcoholic Beverages for On-Premise Consumption, Equal To
or Exceeding 75% Of Gross Revenue From Alcohol Sales. This is the land use listing for sale
of all alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption where the gross revenue from on-premise
sales of alcoholic beverages equals or exceeds 75% of gross revenues.
Alcoholic Beverages, Sale of All Alcoholic Beverages for On-Premise Consumption, Less Than
75% Gross Revenue from Alcohol Sales. This is the land use listing for sale of all alcoholic
beverages for on-premise consumption where the gross revenue from the on-premise sales of
alcoholic beverages is greater than 50% and less than 75% of total gross revenue.
Alcoholic Beverages, Sale of All Alcoholic Beverages for On-Premise Consumption, Equal To
Article 11: Definitions
Sec. 11.2. Defined Terms
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
11-3
or Exceeding 75% of Gross Revenue from Alcohol Sales. This is the land use listing for sale
of all alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption where the gross revenue from on-premise
sales of alcohol beverages is 50% or less of gross revenues.
Alley. A minor public or private street right-of-way that is primarily for vehicular service access to the
back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
Alternative Support Structure or Tower. A building, clock tower, bell steeple, light pole or similar
alternative for the mounting an antenna. The term "alternative support structure or tower" does
not apply to a nonconforming or off-premise sign.
Amortization. A method of eliminating non-conforming uses by requiring the termination of the nonconforming
use after a specified period of time.
Amusement, Commercial (Indoor). An amusement enterprise wholly enclosed in a building which is
treated acoustically so that noise generated by the enterprise is not perceptible at the bounding
property line and including, but not limited to a bowling alley, billiard parlor, or shooting range.
Amusement, Commercial (Outdoor). Any amusement enterprise offering entertainment or games of
skill to the general public for a fee or charge wherein any portion of the activity takes place in the
open including, but not limited to a golf driving range, archery range and miniature golf course.
Annexation. The incorporation of land area into an existing municipality with a resulting change in the
boundaries of that municipality.
Antenna. Any exterior apparatus designed for wireless radio, television, microwave or telephonic
communication through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic spectrum waves. An
antenna could include directional or panel antennas, ancillary antenna, parabolic or panel dishes,
omni-directional antennas such as whips, and other similar transmitting or receiving equipment
intended for personal or communications use.
Antique Shop. An establishment offering for sale, within a building, articles such as glass, china, furniture
or similar furnishings and decorations that have value and significance as a result of age, design or
sentiment.
Apartment. A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family dwelling arranged, designed or occupied as a
place of residence by a single family, individual or group of individuals.
Applicant. A person submitting a development review application set forth in this UDC.
Arcade. An attached and covered passageway running along the exterior wall of a building.
[Ord. 2010-4415]
Art Gallery or Museum. An institution for the collection, display and distribution of objects of art or
science, and that is sponsored by a public or quasi-public agency and that facility is open to the
general public.
Auto Sales, New or Used (Outdoor Lot). An open, dust-free, all weather area, other than a street,
alley or other public place, used for the display and sales of new or used automobiles where no
repair work, except those actions normally associated with vehicle operator service, is done on
the cars to be displayed and sold on the premises.
Auto Sales Facility, New or Used. An open, dust-free, all weather surface other than a street, alley or
Article 11: Definitions
Sec. 11.2. Defined Terms
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
11-4
other public place, used for the display, wholesale or retail sale, repair, renovation and temporary
storage of new or used automobiles.
Awning. Any structure made of cloth or metal with a metal frame attached to a building that may be
fixed or can be retracted to a position flat against the building when not in use.
Backyard Compost Operations. The composting, land application and mulching of non-industrial
organic material, such as grass clippings, leaves, brush, clean wood material or vegetative food
material, generated by a homeowner, tenant of a single to multi-family residential or apartment
complex, or a commercial or institutional complex where the composting, land application or
mulching occurs on the dwelling property and the final product is utilized on the same property.
Backyard operations includes neighborhood composting demonstration sites that generate less
than 50 cubic yards of final product per year.
Barber Shop or Beauty Shop. A business of cutting or dressing hair, shaving or trimming beards,
performing manicures, facials or other grooming services including the performing of other
related services or the selling of related goods for human beings or animals.
Basement. A building story that is partly underground, but having a minimum of one-half of its height
above the average level of the adjoining ground.
Block. A unit of land bounded by streets or a combination of streets and public land, railroad rights-ofway,
waterways or any other barrier to the continuity to development.
Block Face. The aggregate of all the building façades on one side of a block.
[Ord. 2010-4415]
Board or Zoning Board. Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Boarding House/Rooming House. A building other than a hotel, where lodging and meals for four or
more persons are served for compensation and no rehabilitation services are provided.
Body Piercing. The creation of an opening in an individual’s body, other than in an individual’s earlobe,
to insert jewelry or another decoration.
Body Piercing Studio. A facility in which body piercing is performed.
[Ord. 2016-4768 & 2016-4769]
Building. Any structure built for the support, shelter and enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or
movable property of any kind. If subdivided in a manner sufficient to prevent the spread of fire,
each portion so subdivided may be deemed a separate building. This term is synonymous with
"structure".
Building Line. A line parallel or approximately parallel to the street line at a specified distance therefrom
creating the minimum distance from the street line that a building may be required.
Building Setback Line. A line beyond which buildings must be set back from the property line.
Canopy. Any structure, other than an awning, made of cloth or metal with metal frames attached to a
building that is carried by a frame supported by the ground or sidewalk.
Cellar. A building story with more than one-half its height below the average level of the adjoining
ground.
Article 11: Definitions
Sec. 11.2. Defined Terms
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
11-5
Cemetery. Land used or intended to be used for the interment of human remains and dedicated for
cemetery purposes, including crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in
conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery.
Certificate of Occupancy. An official certificate issued by the Chief Building Official that indicates
conformance with City regulations and authorizes the use of the premises for which it is issued.
Chief Building Official. That individual responsible for issuing Building Permits and enforcing provisions
of the building codes adopted by the City, as well as enforcing this UDC.
Child Care Facility, Family Home. A private residence where the occupant provides custodial care
and supervision during daylight hours for a maximum of six children at any one time. The
maximum of six children includes the family's natural or adopted children under the age of 14.
Child Care Facility, Group Day Care Home. A facility (including nonresidential structures) that
provides custodial care and supervision for less than 24 hours a day for between seven and 12
children, excluding foster and group homes.
Child Care Facility, Day Care Center. A facility where over 12 children receive custodial care and
supervision for less than 24 hours a day, excluding foster and group homes.
Cleaning, Pressing and Pick Up Shop. A custom cleaning shop for the cleaning and pressing of laundry
on-site.
Clinic. A group of offices for one or more physicians, surgeons or dentists to treat sick or injured outpatients
who do not remain overnight.
Clothing or Similar Light Manufacturing. Including, but not limited to cutting, sewing and forming
garments, millinery and accessories and the making of jewelry, compounding of perfume, small
instruments or pharmaceuticals, with no noise, dust, vibration, odor or other undesirable or
obnoxious condition created to affect adjacent property.
College or University. An academic institution of higher learning, accredited or recognized by the state
and offering a program or series of programs of academic study.
Collocation. The mounting or installation of an antenna on an existing tower, building or structure for
the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications
purposes.
Community Center. A building and grounds owned or leased and operated by a governmental body for
the social, recreational, health or welfare of the community served.
Common Area. Privately owned land and improvements within a development including buildings,
common open space, central services and utilities, streets, walks, plazas, recreation areas,
fountains, streams or ponds, parking areas, fencing and screening walls, landscaping and any other
elements and facilities under common ownership and available for the benefit, enjoyment or use
of all owners or tenants.
Community Event. An event of civic interest, such as parades, organized holiday festivities or special
events on behalf of charitable organizations.
Comprehensive Plan. The comprehensive plan of the City and adjoining areas adopted by the Planning
and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Council, including all its revisions. The plan
indicates the general locations recommended for various land uses, transportation routes, public
Article 11: Definitions
Sec. 11.2. Defined Terms
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
11-6
and private buildings, streets, parks and other public and private developments and
improvements, to include detailed plans for water, sewer, and other public services.
Conditional Use. A use permitted in a particular zoning district only upon showing that such use in a
specified location will be compatible and can comply with all the conditions and standards for the
location or operation of such a use as specified in this UDC.
Condominium. A building or group of buildings in which units are owned individually, while the
structure and common areas and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional,
individual basis.
Configuration. The form of a building, based on its massing, private frontage and height.
[Ord. 2010-4415]
Copy. Letters, characters, illustrations, logos, graphics, symbols or writing designed to communicate
information of any kind, to advertise or identify the purpose of a person or entity, to identify or
advertise a business or to advertise the sale or lease of a premise.
Correctional Facility. A penal facility including buildings and structures that are inhabited by 6 or more
persons who are under restraint or security and are generally incapable of self-preservation due
to security measures not under the occupants’ control. This definition includes, but is not limited
to prisons, jails, reformatories, detention centers, correction centers, and prerelease centers.
Country Club. An area containing a golf course and a clubhouse and available only to private specific
membership, such a club may contain adjunct facilities such as private club, dining room,
swimming pool, tennis courts and similar recreational or service facilities.
Credit Access Business. A credit services organization that obtains for a consumer or assists a
consumer in obtaining an extension of consumer credit in the form of a deferred presentment
transaction or a motor vehicle title loan.
[Ord. 2015-4740]
Cul-de-Sac. A local street with only one street outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the same
and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
Curb Line. An imaginary line drawn along the outermost part or back of the curb and gutter on either
side of a public street, or, if there is no curb and gutter, along the outermost portion of the paved
roadway, or if there is no paved roadway, along the edge of the traveled portion of the roadway.
Dance Hall or Nightclub. An establishment offering to the general public facilities for dancing and
entertainment for a fee and subject to licensing and regulation by the City.
Day Camp. A facility arranged and conducted for the organized recreation and instruction of children
including outdoor activities on a daytime basis.
Density: The number of dwelling units within a standard measure of land area.
[Ord. 2010-4415]
Director of Planning. That individual responsible for city planning duties, including administration of
portions of this UDC.
Disposition. The placement of a building on its lot.
Article 11: Definitions
Sec. 11.2. Defined Terms
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
11-7
[Ord. 2010-4415]
District. A section of the City for which the land development regulations are uniform.
Developer. (See Subdivider)
Double Fronting Lot. A lot that fronts upon two parallel streets, or that fronts upon two streets that do
not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.
Driveway. A vehicular lane within a lot, often leading to a garage.
[Ord. 2010-4415]
Dwelling, Multiple-Family. Any building or portion thereof, that is designed, built, rented, leased or let
to be occupied as three or more dwelling units or apartments or that is occupied as a home or
residence of three or more families.
Dwelling, Single-Family. A detached building having accommodations for and occupied by not more
than one family.
Dwelling, Triplex. A detached building designed and constructed with three separate living units under
a single roof for occupancy by three families.
Dwelling, Two-Family. A detached building designed and constructed with two separate living units
under a single roof for occupancy by two families.
Dwelling Unit. A building or portion of a building that is arranged, occupied or intended to be occupied
as living quarters and includes facilities for food preparation and sleeping.
Easement. A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to the public, a
corporation or another person or entity for such specific purposes as the construction of utilities,
drainage ways and access.
Easement, Avigation. An air-rights easement that protects air lanes around airports.
Easement, Drainage. An easement required for the installation of stormwater sewers or drainage
ditches and/or required for the preservation or maintenance of a natural stream or water course
or other drainage facility.
Easement, Utility. A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to the City, to
the public generally, or to a private utility company, for installation or maintenance of utilities
across, over, or under private land, together with the right to enter the property that the
easement covers with machines and vehicles as necessary for maintenance of such utilities.
Effective Parking. The amount of parking required for a mixed use development after adjustment by
the shared parking factor in TMED.
[Ord. 2010-4415]
Emergency Shelter. A facility providing temporary shelter, over a period of less than 30 days, for
persons who are indigent, needy, homeless or transient.
[Ord. 2012-4505]
Encroachment. Any structural element that breaks the plane of a vertical or horizontal regulatory limit,
extending into a setback, into the public frontage or above a height limit.
Article 11: Definitions
Sec. 11.2. Defined Terms
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
11-8
[Ord. 2010-4415]
Engineer. A person authorized under the Texas Engineering Registration Act to practice the profession
of engineering.
Equipment Enclosure. A small structure, shelter, cabinet or vault used to house and protect the
electronic equipment necessary for operating personal wireless service facilities. Associated
equipment may include air conditioning and emergency generators.
Erect. To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix and including the painting of signs.
Façade. Any separate face of a building that encloses or covers usable space.
Face, Facing or Surface. The surface of the sign, excluding structural trim or supports, upon, against or
through which the message is displayed or illustrated on the sign.
Family. Any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, in which not more than
three individuals are unrelated by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship and occupying a
dwelling unit.
Family or Group Home. A dwelling unit used as a single housekeeping unit where not more than six
physically or mentally impaired or handicapped persons are provided room and board, as well as
supervised care and rehabilitation provided by not more than two persons. "Family Home" means
a community-based residential home operated in accordance with the Community Homes for
Disabled Persons Location Act and its amendments.
Farm, Ranch, Garden or Orchard. An area of three acres or more that is used for the primary
purpose of growing of usual farm products, vegetables, fruits, trees and grain and for the raising
thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals such as horses, cattle and sheep and including
the necessary accessory uses for raising, treating and storing products raised on the premises, but
not including the commercial feeding of offal and garbage to swine and other animals and not
including any type of agriculture or husbandry specifically prohibited by ordinance or law.
Farmers’ Market. An open-air market with the primary purpose of providing retail sales and
demonstrations of home-grown products, including produce, ornamental crops, meat, eggs and
other agricultural products and homemade value added products, including baked goods, jams
and jellies, pickles and relish, dried fruits, syrups and honey. Farmers’ markets may also provide
retail sales of handmade arts, crafts, and unique local goods. Such sales and demonstrations must
be conducted by the vendor engaged in the production of such products. The term does not
include the sale or demonstration of mass produced items, used clothing, appliances, and other
similar products.
[Ord. 2015-4701]
Flood. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas
from the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance, Chapter 13 of the Code of Ordinance.
Frontage. The area between a building façade and the vehicular lanes, inclusive of its built and planted
components. Frontage is divided into private frontage and public frontage.
[Ord. 2010-4415]
Article 11: Definitions
Sec. 11.2. Defined Terms
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
11-9
Fronting. This term is used in describing properties that have or normally would have their sole, or
primary, or a major point of access at that edge of a piece of property adjoining a dedicated
street.
Fuel Sales. A place where gasoline, other fuels, oil and grease or accessories are sold and dispensed to
the retail motor vehicle trade
Golf Course, Commercial. A golf course privately owned but open to the public for a fee and operated
as a commercial venture.
Gross Floor Area. The total square feet of floor space within the outside dimensions of a building
including each floor level, but excluding cellars, carports or garages.
Halfway House. A residential facility for the housing, rehabilitation, and training of persons who are
subject to community supervisions, parole, or mandatory supervision under state or federal law.
Height of Tower. The vertical distance between the finished grade at the base of the tower or
nonresidential structure, or the lowest point of contact with the building, and the highest point of
the structure, including the antennas.
Heliport. A landing facility for rotary wing aircraft subject to regularly scheduled use and may include
fueling or servicing facilities for such craft and subject to approval by the City.
Helistop. A landing pad for occasional and infrequent use by rotary wing aircraft not exceeding a gross
weight of 6,000 pounds and not for regularly scheduled stops and subject to approval by the City.
Historic District. The North Central Temple Historic Overlay zoning district.
Home For the Aged. A home where elderly people are provided with lodging and meals without
nursing care.
Home Occupation. A home occupation is an occupation carried on in the home by a member of the
occupant's family, secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
Homeowners Association. A community association, other than a condominium association, that is
organized in a development in which individual owners share common interests in open space or
facilities.
Homeowners Association. Any association or organization of co-owners within a townhouse project;
including the Council of Co-Owners or a Condominium or Townhouse Management Association;
organized for the primary purpose of managing and maintaining the common areas and common
open space in any townhouse project. An organization, association or other entity formed and
controlled by the developer, project owner or general partner for this purpose will be included in
this definition.
Hospital. An institution where sick or injured patients are given medical or surgical treatment intended
to restore them to health and an active life and that is licensed by the State of Texas.
Hotel or Motel. A building or group of buildings designed and occupied as a temporary abiding place of
individuals. To be classified as a hotel or motel an establishment must contain a minimum of six
individual guest rooms or units and must furnish customary hotel services such as linen, maid
service, telephone, use and upkeep of furniture.
HUD-Code Manufactured Home. A structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the
Article 11: Definitions
Sec. 11.2. Defined Terms
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
11-10
rules of the United State Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one
or more sections, that, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet
or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and that is built on a
permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation
when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and
electrical systems. The term does not include a recreational vehicle as that term is defined by 24
C.F.R. Section 3282.8(g).
HUD-Code Manufactured Home Development. A HUD-Code manufactured home located on land
other than a HUD-Code manufactured home land lease community.
HUD-Code Manufactured Home Land Lease Community. A plot or tract of land that is separated
into two or more spaces or lots that are rented, leased, or offered for rent or lease, for a term of
less than 60 months without a purchase option, for the installation of HUD-Code manufactured
homes for use and occupancy as residences.
Incinerator. A furnace or apparatus for burning waste materials such as trash, wood and other
flammable items for the purpose of reducing their weight and bulk.
Industrialized Housing. A residential structure that is designed for the use and occupancy of one or
more families, that is constructed in one or more modules or constructed using one or more
modular components built at a location other than the permanent residential site, and that is
designed to be used as a permanent residential structure when the modules or modular
components are transported to the permanent residential site and are erected or installed on a
permanent foundation system. The term includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and
electrical systems. The term does not include any residential structure that is in excess of three
stories or 49 feet in height as measured from the finished grade elevation at the building entrance
to the peak of the roof. The term does not mean nor apply to (i) housing constructed of sectional
or panelized systems not utilizing modular components; or (ii) any ready-built home that is
constructed so that the entire living area is contained in a single unit or section at a temporary
location for the purpose of selling it and moving it to another location.
Intersection Visibility Triangle. That area enclosed by drawing an imaginary line connecting two points
located within 15 feet of the curb line of any street intersection, street/driveway intersection or
street/alley intersection, within which signs over three feet in height and less than eight feet in
height are prohibited.
Kennel. A place in which five or more dogs or cats at least a minimum of six months of age are kept,
boarded or trained, by the owners of the dogs or cats or by persons providing facilities and care,
with or without compensation.
Kindergarten or Pre-School. A private instructional facility offering an educational program generally
equivalent to state approved curriculum for pre-school children and operating on a regular basis.
A pre-school/kindergarten is not a child care facility.
Kiosk. A free-standing, non-manned, primary or accessory structure, within a pedestrian circulation or
parking area, from which commercial activities are conducted. Examples include, but are not
limited to, ice machines, automatic teller machines, and water vending machines. This definition
does not include kiosk food sales.
[Ord. 2012-4516]
Article 11: Definitions
Sec. 11.2. Defined Terms
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
11-11
Laundry and Cleaning (Self-Service). To be of the customer self-service type and not a commercial
laundry or cleaning plant.
Layer. A range of depth of a lot within which certain elements are permitted.
[Ord. 2010-4415]
Light Manufacturing. The use of a site for manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared
materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment,
and packaging of the products, and incidental storage, sales, and distribution of the products. This
use excludes the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominately
from extracted or raw materials, storage or manufacturing processes that involve flammable or
explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing processes that involve hazardous or commonly
recognized offensive conditions.
Livestock Auction. Barns, pens and sheds for the temporary holding and sale of livestock.
Live/Work Unit. A mixed use unit consisting of both commercial and residential functions. The
commercial function may be anywhere in the unit. It is intended to be occupied by a business
operator who lives in the same structure that contains the commercial activity or industry.
[Ord. 2010-4415]
Living Unit. The room or rooms occupied by a family and must include cooking facilities.
Loading Space. An off-street space or berth used for the loading or unloading of commercial or
industrial vehicles.
Logo. Any registered trademark of an organization, individual, company or product that is commonly
used in advertising to identify that organization, individual company or product.
Lot. An undivided parcel of land, identified by a number and designated as a distinct and separate
property on a fully approved subdivision plat properly filed of record.
Lot, Corner. A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection, or upon
two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
Lot Line. A line of record bounding a lot that divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private
street or any other public space.
Lot of Record. A lot that is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the
County Clerk of Bell County or a parcel of land, the deed for which it is recorded in the office of
the County Clerk of Bell County prior to the adoption of this ordinance.
Major Vehicle Repair. See “Vehicle Repair, Major” below.
Manufactured Housing or Manufactured Home. A HUD-Code manufactured home or a mobile
home and collectively means and refers to both.
Mini-Storage Warehouse. A building or group of buildings consisting of individualized shelters of
various sizes for rent or lease for the purpose of providing protection of commodities stored in
the mini-storage warehouse.
Minor Plat. A proposed plat with four or fewer lots, with the lot or lots fronting on an existing street,
and not requiring the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities.
Article 11: Definitions
Sec. 11.2. Defined Terms
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
11-12
Minor Vehicle Servicing. See “Vehicle Servicing, Minor” below.
Mixed Use. Multiple residential and nonresidential functions within the same building or in multiple
adjacent buildings.
[Ord. 2010-4415]
Mobile Home. A structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more
sections, that, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more
in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and that is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and
electrical systems.
Monopole. A freestanding personal wireless service facility which consists of: a single vertical pole that is
fixed into the ground and/or attached to a foundation; with no guy wires; and containing one or
more antennas.
[Ord. 2015-4707]
Mobile Home Park. A site with required improvements and utilities for the long-term parking of mobile
homes, which may include services and facilities for the residents.
Multi-Tenant site. A unified development site that contains multiple commercial uses and businesses
under the same primary ownership or lease agreement.
[Ord. 2012-4507]
Multi-tenant sign. A freestanding sign that advertises for more than two businesses on a site containing
multiple commercial uses and businesses under the same ownership or lease agreement in a
unified development or shopping center. [Ord. 2012-4507]
Nonconforming Lot of Record. A legally established lot that does not conform to the dimensional
standards of the zoning district in which it is located.
Nonconforming Structure or Building. A structure or building the size, dimensions or location of
which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the previously existing zoning
ordinance, but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment, to conform to the
present requirements of the zoning district.
Nonconforming Use. A use or activity that was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of
the previously existing zoning ordinance, but that fails, by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment, to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district.
Occupancy. The use or intended use of the land or buildings by proprietors or tenants.
Off-Street Parking as an Expansion of a Nonresidential Use. An off-street parking lot located in a
residential zoning district immediately adjacent to a retail or commercial district.
Open Space. Area included in any side, rear or front yard or any unoccupied space on the lot that is
open and unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projections of cornices, eaves, porches
and plant material.
Open/Outdoor Storage. The keeping, in an unroofed area of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, in
the same place for more than 24 hours.
Article 11: Definitions
Sec. 11.2. Defined Terms
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
11-13
Owner. (See Subdivider)
Park. Any public park, playground, recreation or open space area, as described in the current, adopted
Parks, Recreation and Open Space Master Plan, together with parking lots, that is operated,
maintained and controlled by the City, and subsequently platted, dedicated or designated as a
public park within the City. Land dedicated for public school land that contains a park or parkland
as defined in this UDC is deemed a park but only to the extent of the actual land dedicated for
such a park.
Park, Private. A park owned and maintained by a homeowners' association or similar entity, that
substantially meets the needs generated by a subdivision for a neighborhood park by providing
open space and recreational amenities such as field games, court games, playground equipment,
picnic areas, outdoor furniture, swimming pools, trails, exercise rooms and community rooms.
The typical minimum size is between three and five acres.
Park, Neighborhood. A park providing for a variety of outdoor recreational opportunities located
within a residential subdivision or within a close proximity or convenient distance of the majority
of residences to be served thereby so that the residential subdivision or subdivisions so located
are the primary beneficiaries of these facilities. The typical minimum size is between three and
five acres.
Parking Lot or Structure, Commercial (Auto). An area or structure devoted to the parking or
storage of automobiles for a fee. May include, in the case of a parking structure only, a facility for
servicing of automobiles provided such facility is primarily an internal function for use only by
automobiles occupying the structure and creates no special problems of ingress or egress.
Parking Space, Required. An enclosed or unenclosed all-weather (asphalt or concrete only) surfaced
area for the parking of a vehicle.
Performance Standard. A set of criteria or limits relating to nuisance elements that a particular use or
process may not exceed.
Permittee. A person receiving a permit pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance.
Person. Any individual, association, firm, corporation, governmental agency, political subdivision or other
legal entity.
Personal Wireless Services. Commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services and common
carrier wireless exchange access services. Personal communication service, cellular
radiotelephone service, specialized mobile radio services and paging services are examples of
personal wireless services.
Personal Wireless Service Facilities. Facilities for the provision of personal wireless services.
Place of Worship. A place of worship and religious training of recognized religions including on site
housing of ministers, rabbis, priests, nuns and similar staff personnel.
Planned Development. A development for which certain yards, areas and related standards may be
varied and a variety of land uses associated on a tract.
Planning and Zoning Commission. The agency appointed by the City Council as an advisory body to it
and that is authorized to recommend or approve changes in the zoning, recommend subdivision
plats, develop and amend the comprehensive plan and area plans, and perform other duties as
Article 11: Definitions
Sec. 11.2. Defined Terms
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
11-14
directed by the City Council.
Plat. A map representing a tract of land, showing the boundaries and location of individual properties and
streets, easements, parks and open space, and sidewalks.
Plat, Final. The final map of all or a portion of a subdivision that is presented to the proper review
authority for final approval.
Plat, Preliminary. A preliminary map indicating the proposed layout of a subdivision that is submitted to
the review authority for consideration and preliminary approval.
Playfield or Stadium, Public. An athletic field or stadium owned and operated by a public agency for
the general public including a baseball field, golf course, football field or stadium that may be
lighted for nighttime play.
Pole sign. A freestanding sign with visible support structure(s).
[Ord. 2012-4507]
Pylon sign. A freestanding sign in which the support structure is concealed and enclosed with a
decorative masonry material.
[Ord. 2012-4507]
Principal Building. The main building on a lot, occupied by the primary use and usually located toward
the frontage.
[Ord. 2010-4415]
Principal Entrance. The main point of access for pedestrians into a building.
[Ord. 2010-4415]
Principal Frontage. On corner lots, the side of the lot facing the larger of the streets or the designated
principal side. The other side facing the street will be secondary frontage.
[Ord. 2010-4415]
Private Garage. An accessory building housing vehicles owned and used by occupants of the main
building; if occupied by vehicles of others, it is a storage space.
Processing. The method or action to enhance recyclable materials for reuse, including, but not limited
to, separating, baling, flattening, shredding, crushing, cleaning or cutting for the purpose of
preparing recyclable materials for reuse, excluding a smelter operation.
Shop Yard of Local, State or Federal Government. Facilities such as office buildings, maintenance
yards and shops required by branches of local, state or federal government for service to an area
such as highway department yard, City service center or experiment station.
Radio or Television Tower. Structures supporting antennae for transmitting or receiving any portion of
the radio spectrum, but excluding noncommercial antennae installations for home use of radio or
television.
Railroad Team Track. A siding for spotting and unloading or loading box cars or other railroad cars and
that is connected to a public street by a drive for access.
Railroad Track and Right-Of-Way. Does not include railroad stations, siding, team tracks, loading
Article 11: Definitions
Sec. 11.2. Defined Terms
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
11-15
facilities, docks, yards or maintenance areas.
Recreational Vehicle Park. A parcel of land which has been planned and improved for the placement
of recreational vehicles for transient use and for the temporary parking of recreational vehicles,
placement of supplementary structures and accessory uses not prohibited by the City Code or
this UDC and containing sanitary facilities for the direct discharge from recreational vehicle
holding tanks and utility hookups.
[Ord. 2011-4499]
Recyclable Materials. Materials including, but not limited to, scrap steel, aluminum cans, appliances,
paper, batteries, glass bottles, motor vehicles, motor vehicle parts and machinery that have no
economic value except as composition material.
Recycling Collection Facility. A location where glass, paper, plastics and/or aluminum cans only are
deposited in containers, with no processing on site and usually occurring as an accessory use on
the property.
Replatting. The alteration of any part or all of any lot, block or tract of a previously platted subdivision.
Residential Area. Any area that in whole or in part is platted for the development of dwelling units or
residences, whether single-family, townhouse, two-family, multi-family, owner occupied,
condominium or rental dwelling units.
Residential Structure. Any structure where a minimum of 50 percent of the building’s intended use is
residential.
Restaurant (Not Drive-In). An establishment serving food to the general public in specific, designated
dining areas. This term does not include drive-in establishments where food is delivered to or
eaten in automobiles.
Restaurant (Drive-In). An establishment designed and constructed to serve food for consumption on
the premises in an automobile or for carry-out for off-premises consumption and that
establishment may or may not have on premises dining room or counter.
Retail Sales and Service. Companies or individuals involved in the sale, lease or rental of new or used
products, or providing personal services or repair services to the general public.
Rooming House/Boarding House. See Boarding House.
School, Business. A business organized to operate for a profit and offering instruction and training in a
service or art such as secretarial school, barber college, beauty school or commercial art school,
but not including manual trade schools.
School, Commercial or Trade. A business organized to operate for a profit and offering instruction
and training in a trade such as welding, brick laying, machinery operation and similar trades.
School, Public or Private. A school under the sponsorship of a public or religious agency having a
curriculum generally equivalent to public elementary or secondary schools, but not including
trade or commercial schools.
Secondary Frontage. On corner lots, the private frontage that is not the principal frontage. The First
Layer is regulated since it affects the public realm.
[Ord. 2010-4415]
Article 11: Definitions
Sec. 11.2. Defined Terms
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
11-16
Sexually Oriented Businesses. See Ordinance No. 99-2633 for definitions and regulations pertaining
to sexually oriented businesses.
Shopping Center. A group of commercial establishments, built on a site that is planned, developed,
owned or managed as an operating unit related in location, size and type of shops to the trade
areas that the unit serves; it provides on-site parking in definite relationship to the type and total
size of the stores and unified access to and through the site.
Shopping Center Pad Site. A site for a freestanding building that may be sold individually, located on a
parent shopping center that fronts on a public street and lies between the public street and the
principal shopping center.
Sidewalk. A walking path composed of concrete that generally runs parallel with a street and that is
located within a public right-of-way.
[Ord. 2011-4430]
Signs. See Sec. 7.6.2 for definitions of specific sign types.
Single-Family Dwelling (Attached). A dwelling that is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides
by a party wall or abutting separate wall and that is designed for occupancy by one family and is
located on a separate lot delineated by front, side and rear lot lines to include patio homes.
Single-Family Dwelling (Detached). A dwelling designed and constructed as a free-standing structure
for occupancy by one family and located on a lot or separate building tract and having no physical
connection to a building located on any other lot or tract and occupied by one family.
Site Plan. The development plan for one or more lots showing the existing and proposed conditions of
the lot including, for example, sidewalks, curb cuts, utilities, landscaping, structures and signs,
screening devices, lot dimensions, adjacent development and any other information reasonably
required in order to make an informed judgment about the compatibility of the proposal.
Social Service Shelter (Short Term Only) – A facility providing shelter, over a period of 30 days or
less, for no more than 10 persons who are receiving therapy or counseling from support staff
who are present at all times the residents are present, for one or more of the following
purposes:
(a) To help residents recuperate from the effects of drugs or alcohol addiction;
(b) To help homeless persons or families achieve independence and obtain permanent
housing; or
(c) To provide temporary shelter for persons who are victims of domestic abuse.
Stable, Residential or Noncommercial. An accessory building for quartering horses.
Stealth Personal Wireless Service Facility. A personal wireless service facility that is screened,
disguised, concealed or otherwise camouflaged as a natural structure, or part of a structure, such
that the personal wireless service facility is indistinguishable from other natural structures, or the
structure that it is attached to or within.
[Ord. 2015-4707]
Stealth Technology. Systems, components and materials used in the construction of the personal
wireless service facility to make it less intrusive with respect to the surrounding property.
Story. The height between the successive floors of a building or from the top floor to the roof. The
Article 11: Definitions
Sec. 11.2. Defined Terms
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
11-17
standard height for a story is 11feet, six inches.
Street. A public street right-of-way, however designated, that serves one or more of the following
purposes:
(a) A “major thoroughfare,” “arterial street” or “expressway” primarily provides vehicular
circulation to various sections of the City.
(b) A “collector street” primarily provides circulation within neighborhoods, to carry traffic
from local streets to arterial or major thoroughfare streets, or to carry traffic through or
adjacent to commercial or industrial areas.
(c) A “rural collector street” is a collector street designed for low density development, not
to exceed two dwelling units per acre. A rural collector street must not be constructed
adjacent to an area presumed to attain more traditional urban densities within a 20-year
planning horizon.
(d) A “marginal access” or “frontage street” is a street that is parallel to and adjacent to an
arterial street and primarily provides access to properties abutting these types of streets.
(e) A “local street” is a street designed primarily for access to abutting residential property.
A local street does not include roadways that carry through traffic, but will generally be
intersected frequently by “collector streets.”
(f) A “rural local street” is a local street designed for low density development, not to
exceed two dwelling units per acre. A rural local street must not be constructed adjacent
to an area presumed to attain more traditional urban densities within a 20-year planning
horizon.
Street, Cul de Sac. A local street with only one street outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the
safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
Street Line. A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street, the public
street right-of-way line.
Structurally Alter. Any change in the supporting member of a building, such as a bearing wall, column,
beam or girder.
Structural Trim. The molding, battens, capping, nailing strips, lattice and platforms that are attached to
the sign structure.
Structure. (Same as Building)
Substance Abuse Treatment Facility. An outpatient or residential facility that offers treatment for
persons with chemical dependency and operates such facility under a state license or registration
of a faith-based (non-medical) exempt program.
Swimming Pool, Commercial. A swimming pool with accessory facilities, not part of the municipal or
public recreational system and not a private swim club, but where the facilities are available to
the general public for a fee.
Swimming Pool, Private. A swimming pool constructed for the exclusive use of the residents of a onefamily,
two-family or multiple-family dwelling and located and fenced in accordance with the
regulations of the City. A private swimming pool must not be operated as a business nor
maintained in a manner to be hazardous or obnoxious to adjacent property owners.
Street Width. The distance from back-of-curb to back to back-of-curb. For a rural street, the distance
between the outer edges of asphalt pavement.
Article 11: Definitions
Sec. 11.2. Defined Terms
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
11-18
Subdivider. Any person or authorized agent dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a
subdivision, as defined in this Section, The term "subdivider" is restricted to include only the
owner, equitable owner or authorized agent of such owner or equitable owner, of land sought to
be divided.
Subdivision. A division of any tract of land, situated within the corporate limits of the City or within its
extraterritorial jurisdiction, into two or more parts for the purpose of laying out any addition to
the City, or for laying out lots, streets, alleys, access easements, public utility easements or parks
or other portions intended for public use or the use of purchasers or owners of adjacent or
fronting lots. The term “Subdivision” also means the development, within the corporate limits of
the City or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction, of a HUD-Code manufactured home land lease
community.
Surveyor. A registered public surveyor authorized by state statute to practice the profession of
surveying.
Tattoo. The practice of producing an indelible mark or figure on the human body by scarring or inserting
a pigment under the skin using needles, scalpels, or other related equipment. The term includes
the application of permanent cosmetics.
Tattoo Studio. An establishment or facility in which tattooing is performed.
[Ord. 2016-4768 & 2016-4769]
Teaser Parking. A technique to include a few parking spaces located in front of a business to lure
customers with their apparent convenience. Teaser parking acts as a visual cue, leading drivers to
the access points for larger parking lots or parking structures that provide the remaining required
parking to be placed behind or below buildings, with the option of a small amount of “teaser”
parking visible from the street in more automobile-oriented areas.
[Ord. 2010-4415]
Telephone Exchange. Switching relay and transmitting equipment, but not including public business
facilities, storage or repair facilities.
Temporary Field or Construction Office. A structure or shelter used in connection with a
development or building project for housing on the site of temporary administrative and
supervisory functions and for sheltering employees and equipment.
Temporary Use. A non-permanent use permitted in a particular zoning district only upon showing that
such use in a specified location can comply with all the conditions and standards for the location,
duration, or operation of such a temporary use as specified in this UDC.
[Ord. 2015-4701]
Thoroughfare Plan. A general graphic presentation, accompanied by written text, describing the
proposed arrangement of various classes of streets in the City at some future date. A
thoroughfare plan is a component of the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan.
Townhouse. A structure on an individual lot, that is one of a series of three or more dwelling units
designed for single-family occupancy, with dwelling units that are structurally connected or
immediately adjacent to and abutting each other between individual dwelling units. An apartment
in a condominium may be deemed a townhouse if no other dwelling unit or use of any kind exists
Article 11: Definitions
Sec. 11.2. Defined Terms
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
11-19
immediately above or below it. Any project including three or more such condominiums or
townhouses is deemed a "Townhouse Project".
Trail. A walking path composed of concrete, crushed granite or improved natural surfaces that traverses
land, does not generally run parallel with a street and that is located in a public right-of-way or a
public access easement.
[Ord. 2011-4430]
Transitional Shelter. A facility providing shelter, over a period of more than 30 days, for persons who
are receiving therapy or counseling from support staff who are present at all times the residents
are present, for one or more of the following purposes:
(a) To help residents recuperate from the effects of drugs or alcohol addiction;
(b) To help homeless persons or families achieve independence and obtain permanent
housing; or
(c) To provide temporary shelter for persons who are victims of domestic abuse.
[Ord. 2012-4505]
Upholstery Shop. A business establishment engaged in the installation of soft covering material such as
fabric and underlayment for furniture and other objects. Except however, with respect to motor
vehicles, it must only include interior upholstering. In no event may an upholstery shop include
the manufacture or building of furniture or other objects.
Use or Land Use. The activity or function that actually takes place or is intended to take place on a lot.
Use Permitted by Right. A use that this UDC designates as a permitted use within a particular district
and under certain conditions.
Utility easement. An interest in land granted to the City, the public generally or to a private
corporation, for installing and maintaining utilities across, over or under private land.
Variance. An adjustment in the application of the specific regulations of the zoning regulations in this
UDC to a particular parcel of property that, because of special conditions or circumstances
peculiar to the particular parcel, is necessary to prevent the property from being deprived of
rights and privileges enjoyed by other parcels in the same vicinity and zoning district.
Vehicle Repair, Major. A business specializing in major repair of motor vehicles including any use listing
below, as well as any use not listed as minor vehicle servicing.
(a) auto glass, seat cover and muffler shop;
(b) auto painting or body rebuilding shop;
(c) tire retreading and capping;
(d) body, fender, clutch, transmission, differential, axle, spring and frame repairs;
(e) major overhauling of engines requiring removal therefrom of cylinder head or crankcase
pan and any associated engine rebuilding;
(f) repair of radiator requiring removal from the vehicle;
(g) repair of truck, trailer, farm or industrial equipment or other machinery/supplies;
(h) brake work, other than minor maintenance such as disc pad replacement and minor
brake adjustment.
Vehicle Servicing, Minor. A business specializing in minor, routine, periodic, preventive maintenance of
Article 11: Definitions
Sec. 11.2. Defined Terms
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
11-20
a motor vehicle conducted entirely within an enclosed building, including the following.
(a) servicing of spark plugs, batteries, distributors and distributor parts and including minor
engine tune-ups;
(b) tire servicing and flat repair but not recapping or regrooving;
(c) radiator cleaning and flushing (on vehicle);
(d) fuel pump, oil pump and related maintenance;
(e) minor servicing of carburetors;
(f) emergency wiring repairs;
(g) minor motor adjustment not involving removal of head or crankcase;
(h) quick oil and filter change;
(i) servicing hoses, fan belts, brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat belts, windshield
wipers, mirrors and installation of vehicle accessories such as radios;
(j) lubrication, greasing and washing;
(k) disc pad replacement and minor brake adjustment.
Wireless Service, Unlicensed. The offering of telecommunications services using duly authorized
devices that do not require individual licenses, but does not mean the provision of direct-tohome
satellite services in the federal Communications Act.
Wrecking Yard. Any lot, tract or building or structure upon which used automobiles or parts of used
automobiles or other motor vehicles are stored for the primary purpose of obtaining parts for
resale as an automotive or motor vehicle part.
Yard, Required. An open space other than a court, on the lot in which a building is situated and that is
not obstructed from a point 48 inches above the general ground level of the graded lot to the
sky, except as provided for roof overhang and similar special architectural features and plant
material.
Yard, Required Front. The minimum open, unoccupied space on the portion of a lot facing a street
extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines and from the main building to the
front lot line.
Yard, Required Rear. The minimum open, unoccupied space, except for accessory buildings permitted
in Sec. 5.5, extending across the rear of a lot from one side lot line to the other side lot line from
the man building to the rear lot line.
Yard, Required Side. The minimum open, unoccupied space on one side or two sides of a main
building and on the same lot with the building situated between the building and a side lot line
and extending through from the front yard setback line to the rear yard setback line.
Zoning. The division of a municipality into districts in an effort to achieve compatible land use
relationships, and the associated establishment of regulations governing the use, placement,
spacing and size of land and buildings in order to achieve that compatibility.
Zoning District Map. The official map showing the division of the City into zoning districts that is a part
of this UDC.
Zoo. A facility housing and displaying live animals.
Article 11: Definitions
Sec. 11.2. Defined Terms
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
11-21
[This page intentionally left blank]

Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
i
Index
2F, Two-Family Dwelling District............ 4-6
Abbreviations......................................11-1
Access and Circulation.......................... 7-5
Accessory Uses and Structures .............5-34
Administrative Adjustment ...................3-36
AG, Agricultural District ........................ 4-4
Alcoholic Beverages, On-Premise
Consumption............................5-22
Alleys ..............................................8-11
Amending Plat ....................................3-26
Annexed Territory, Newly ..................... 4-3
Appeal of Administrative Decision.........3-45
Appeals…………………............................ 3-1
Authority............................................. 1-2
Auto Sales..........................................5-27
Blocks ..............................................8-15
Body Piercing Studio ...........................5-30
Buffering ............................................7-73
Building Coverage ...............................4-18
Building Exterior Materials....................7-82
Building Permit ...................................3-37
C, Commercial District .......................... 4-8
Child Care Facility
Day Care Center.....................................5-18
Family Home or Group Day Care Home....5-18
City Council ......................................... 2-1
City Participation.................................8-30
Cleaning, Pressing and Pick Up Shop ....5-26
Compost Operation .............................5-20
Conditional Use Permit ........................3-10
Construction Standards, Subdivision .....8-20
Credit Access Businesses .....................5-29
Defined Terms ....................................11-2
Definitions..........................................11-1
Development Review Committee ........... 2-4
Development Review Procedures........... 3-1
Director of Construction Safety.............. 2-6
District Dimensional Standards .... 4-21, 4-30
Donation Boxes...................................7-79
Drainage ............................................8-19
Dumpsters..........................................7-76
Enforcement, Violations & Penalties......10-1
Family/Group Home ............................5-14
Fences ..............................................7-74
Final Plat ............................................3-18
Floor Area Ratio..................................4-19
FP, Floodplain Overlay District..... 4-12, 6-46
Fuel Sales...........................................5-27
GR, General Retail District..................... 4-8
H, North Central Temple Historic Overlay
District ........................... 4-11, 6-45
H. K. Dodgen Loop, Development on ....8-21
Height ..............................................4-19
HI, Heavy Industrial District .................. 4-9
Home Occupations ..............................5-39
I-35 Corridor Overlay District ...... 4-12, 6-48
Improvement Guarantees ....................8-29
Internal Streets...................................8-30
Intersection Visibility Triangle ..............4-21
Jurisdiction.......................................... 1-2
Landscaping .......................................7-10
LI, Light Industrial District .................... 4-9
Loading, Off-Street..............................7-18
Lot Area.............................................4-13
Lot Width ...........................................4-13
Lots ..............................................8-16
Major Vehicle Repair ...........................5-27
Masonry Standards..............................7-82
MF-1, Multiple-Family District 1 ............. 4-6
MF-2, Multiple-Family District 2 ............. 4-6
MF-3, Multiple-Family District 3 ............. 4-7
MH, Manufactured Home District .....4-9, 6-1
Mini-Storage Warehouse......................5-18
Minor Plat………...................................3-26
Minor Vehicle Servicing........................5-28
MU, Mixed Use District..................4-10, 6-4
Multiple-Family Dwelling ......................5-16
Nonconformities
General....................................................9-1
Signs .......................................................9-3
Structures................................................9-1
Uses ........................................................9-1
NS, Neighborhood Service District ......... 4-8
O-1, Office 1 District 1.......................... 4-7
O-2, Office 1 District 2.......................... 4-7
Off-Street Loading...............................7-18
Article 11: Definitions
Sec. 11.2. Defined Terms
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
ii
Off-Street Parking ...............................7-18
Outdoor Display..................................7-77
Outdoor Shooting Range .....................5-24
Outdoor Storage .................................7-78
Package Store.....................................5-26
Park Land Dedication
Cash Instead of Land Dedication .............8-26
Land Characteristics ...............................8-28
Land Dedication .....................................8-23
Refund ..................................................8-27
Parking, Off-Street ..............................7-18
Patio Home ........................................5-17
PD, Planned Dev Overlay District ..........4-10
PD, Planned Dev Overlay District ..........6-44
Performance Standards ........................ 7-1
Perimeter Streets ................................8-30
Personal Wireless Service Facilities
Administrative Review ............................5-30
Conditional Use Permit............................5-31
Design Standards ...................................5-32
General..................................................5-30
Planning and Zoning Commission .......... 2-3
Planning Director ................................. 2-6
Plat Vacation ......................................3-29
Preliminary Plat...................................3-14
Pre-School..........................................5-19
Prohibited Uses............................5-1, 6-16
Purpose of UDC ................................... 1-1
Recycling Collection Location, Operation.....5-21
Refuse Containers ...............................7-76
Rezoning…………. ................................. 3-5
Screening...........................................7-73
Severability.......................................... 1-7
SF-1, Single-Family District 1 ................ 4-5
SF-2, Single-Family District 2 ................ 4-5
SF-3, Single-Family District 3 ................ 4-5
SFA, Single-Family Attached District 1.... 4-5
SFA-2, Single-Family Attached District 2. 4-5
SFA-3, Single-Family Attached District 3. 4-6
Shelter, Temporary or Emergency ........5-19
Sidewalk Waiver .................................3-30
Sidewalks ...........................................8-11
Sign Permit.........................................3-40
Signs
By Type .................................................7-42
Central Avenue ......................................7-67
Definitions .............................................7-27
General..................................................7-26
Prohibited ..............................................7-37
Single-Family Attached Dwelling...........5-17
Special Purpose and Overlay Zoning
Districts.................................... 6-1
Specific Use Standards ........................5-14
Stable, Residential or Noncommercial ...5-40
Storm Sewers .....................................8-19
Streets ............................................... 8-5
Subdivision Construction Standards ......8-20
Subdivision Design and Improvements
City Participation ....................................8-30
Design Standards .....................................8-5
General....................................................8-1
Improvement Guarantees .......................8-29
Park Land ..............................................8-23
Subdivision Plat Review .......................3-13
Tattoo Studio......................................5-30
Text Amendment, UDC......................... 3-3
TMED Review Committee...................... 2-5
TMED Site Plan Review........................3-32
TMED, Temple Med and Edu Dist 4-10, 6-10
Townhouse.........................................5-17
Transect Zones ...................................6-10
Transitional Provisions.......................... 1-4
UDC Text Amendment.......................... 3-3
UE, Urban Estate District ...................... 4-4
Use Standards ..................................... 5-1
Use Table............................................ 5-1
Uses, New and Unlisted.......................5-13
Variance.............................................3-42
Vehicle Repair, Major ..........................5-27
Vehicle Servicing, Minor.......................5-28
Vested Rights ...................................... 1-4
Wastewater ........................................8-17
Water ..............................................8-17
Wrecking or Salvage Yard....................5-28
Yards ..............................................4-14
Zero Lot Line Dwelling.........................5-17
Zoning Board of Adjustment ................. 2-1
Zoning Districts.................................... 4-1
Boundaries...............................................4-2
Establishment ..........................................4-1
Map.........................................................4-2
Purpose Statements .................................4-4
Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) ...... 3-5
Temple, Texas Unified Development Code
Effective 12/16/10 ? Last Amended 02/15/2018
iii
Appendix A
ZONING ORDINANCE
Repealed by Ordinance No. 2010-4413,
Adopted December 16, 2010
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE
ARTICLE VI. DEVELOPMENT ON LOOP 363
Sec. 33-120. Definitions.
Sec. 33-141. Provision of loop and frontage road right-of-way.
Sec. 33-142. Access standards.
Sec. 33-143. Standards and specifications.
Sec. 33-144. Administrative procedures.
EXHIBITS
Exhibit E: Addressing/ Street Numbering Handbook

DROUGHT
CONTINGENCY
PLAN
Updated:
May 2019










Utility Division
Department of Public Works
City of Temple, Texas
Public Water Supply Number: 140005 
City of Temple Drought Contingency Plan 1
Table of Contents
Section I. Declaration of Policy, Purpose, and Intent ......................................................................... 2
Section II. Public Involvement ............................................................................................................. 2
Section III. Public Education and Notification....................................................................................... 2
Section IV. Wholesale Water Contract Provisions ................................................................................ 3
Section V. Coordination with Regional Water Planning Groups .......................................................... 3
Section VI. Authorization ...................................................................................................................... 3
Section VII. Application .......................................................................................................................... 3
Section VIII. Definitions ........................................................................................................................... 3
Section IX. Initiation and Termination of Water Shortage Stages ........................................................ 5
Year-Round Water Conservation ................................................................................. 5
Moderate Water Shortage ........................................................................................... 5
Severe Water Shortage ................................................................................................ 5
Emergency Water Shortage ......................................................................................... 6
Section X. Water Shortage Response .................................................................................................. 6
Year-Round Water Conservation Guidelines................................................................ 6
Wholesale Customers ............................................................................................ 7
Moderate Water Shortage Response ........................................................................... 7
Wholesale Customers ............................................................................................ 8
Severe Water Shortage Response ................................................................................ 8
Wholesale Customers ............................................................................................ 9
Emergency Water Shortage Response ......................................................................... 9
Wholesale Customers .......................................................................................... 10
Section XI. Pro Rata Water Allocation (Wholesale Customers) .......................................................... 10
Section XII. Variances ........................................................................................................................... 12
Section XIII. Enforcement ..................................................................................................................... 12
Section XIV. Severability ....................................................................................................................... 13
Appendix A — Drought Contingency Plan Ordinance ................................................................................. 14
Appendix B — Regional Water Planning Group Coordination .................................................................... 16
 
City of Temple Drought Contingency Plan 2
Section I. Declaration of Policy, Purpose, and Intent
The City of Temple (“The City”) formally adopted this Drought Contingency Plan (“The Plan”) to conserve the
available water supply and protect the integrity of water supply facilities, with particular regard for domestic
water use, sanitation, and fire protection, and to protect and preserve public health, welfare, and safety and
minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortage during drought or other water supply emergencies.
This Plan is designed to meet the requirements of 30 Tex. Admin. Code § 288, pertaining to Drought
Contingency Plans for Municipal Uses by Public Water Suppliers. These regulations require all Texas retail
and wholesale public water suppliers providing water service to 3,300 or more connections to update
Drought Contingency Plans by May 1, 2009, and every five years thereafter.
Water uses regulated or prohibited under this Plan are considered non-essential, and continuation of such
uses during times of water shortage or other emergency water supply conditions constitutes a waste of
water which subjects the offender(s) to penalties defined in Section XIII of this Plan.
Section II. Public Involvement
Opportunity for public input into the preparation of the Plan was provided by the City at public workshops
and hearings.
Section III. Public Education and Notification
The City will periodically provide the public, retail water customers, and wholesale water customers with
information about the Plan, including information about the conditions under which each stage of the Plan
is to be initiated or terminated and the response measures to be implemented in each stage. This
information will be provided through the City’s website and media releases and may also include additional
means such as printed brochures and utility bill inserts.
Notification
Notification of the Public:
The City Manager shall notify the public of water shortage stages by appropriate means which may
include:
? publication in a newspaper of general
circulation
? direct mail to each customer
? public service announcements
? signs posted in public places
? other appropriate means
Additional Notification:
The City Manager shall directly notify appropriate individuals and entities, which may include:
? Mayor and City Council
? City department heads
? City and/or County emergency management
coordinator
? County Judge & Commissioners
? Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
? major water users
? critical water users, e.g. hospitals 
Section IV. Wholesale Water Contract Provisions
In the event that a wholesale water contract is renewed, extended, or amended, the wholesale customer
shall be required to develop and implement a water conservation and drought contingency plan. This
requirement shall be made a part of the contract. Further, if the wholesale customer intends to resell the
water, a contract between the initial supplier and wholesale customer must provide that the contract for
resale of the water have a water conservation requirement, so that each successive customer in the resale
of the water will be required to implement conservation measures in accordance with 30 Tex. Admin. Code
§ 288.
It shall also be a contract provision in every wholesale water contract entered into or renewed after the
adoption of the Plan, that in case of water shortage, potable water must be distributed in accordance with
Texas Water Code § 11.039.
Section V. Coordination with Regional Water Planning Groups
The utility service area of the City is located within the Brazos G Regional Water Planning Area. The City has
provided a copy of this Plan to the Brazos G Regional Water Planning Group. A copy of the transmittal letter
is included in Appendix B.
Section VI. Authorization
The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this Plan upon
determination that such implementation is necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare. The City
Manager shall have the authority to initiate or terminate drought stages or water shortage response
measures as described in this Plan.
Section VII. Application
The provisions of this Plan shall apply to all persons, customers, and property using water provided by the
City. The terms “person” and “customer” as used in this Plan include individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, and all other legal entities.
Section VIII. Definitions
For the purposes of this Plan, the following definitions shall apply:
Aesthetic water use: water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools,
and water gardens.
City Manager means the appointed City Manager or his/her designee. 
City of Temple Drought Contingency Plan 4
Commercial and Institutional water use: water use which is integral to the operations of commercial and
non-profit establishments and governmental entities such as retail establishments, hotels and motels,
restaurants, and office buildings.
Conservation: those practices, techniques, and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce
the loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of
water so that a supply is conserved and made available for future or alternative uses.
Customer: any person, company, or organization using water supplied by the City.
Domestic water use: water use for personal needs or for household or sanitary purposes such as drinking,
bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation, or for cleaning a residence, business, industry, or institution.
Even number address: street addresses, box numbers, or rural postal route numbers ending in 0, 2, 4, 6, or
8 and locations without addresses.
Industrial water use: the use of water in processes designed to convert materials of lower value into forms
having greater usability and value.
Landscape irrigation use: water used for the irrigation and maintenance of landscaped areas, whether
publicly or privately owned, including residential and commercial lawns, gardens, golf courses, parks, and
rights-of-way and medians.
Non-essential water use: water uses that are not essential nor required for the protection of public, health,
safety, and welfare, including:
(a) irrigation of landscape areas, including parks, athletic fields, and golf courses, except
otherwise provided under this Plan;
(b) use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other
vehicle;
(c) use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis
courts, or other hard-surfaced areas;
(d) use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate
fire protection;
(e) flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street;
(f) use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools or Jacuzzitype pools;
(g) use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes except where
necessary to support aquatic life;
(h) failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been
given notice directing the repair of such leak(s); and
(i) use of water from hydrants for construction purposes or any other purposes other
than firefighting. 
City of Temple Drought Contingency Plan 5
Odd numbered address: street addresses, box numbers, or rural postal route numbers ending in 1, 3, 5, 7,
or 9.
Section IX. Initiation and Termination of Water Shortage Stages
The City Manager shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a regular basis and shall
determine when conditions warrant initiation or termination of each stage of the Plan, that is, when the
specified “triggers” are reached.
The triggering criteria described below are based on known capacity limits of the water treatment system,
total daily water demand, and the water level of the City’s water supply source.
Year-Round Water Conservation
Customers shall be requested to adopt year-round water conservation practices, regardless of the
season or water supply conditions. Guidelines for Year-Round Water Conservation as provided in
Section X, “Water Shortage Response,” remain in effect until the City Manager declares a water
shortage. Year-Round Water Conservation automatically resumes by default immediately upon
ordered termination of all water shortage stages. The peak season for water use in Temple is the
period from June 1st to September 30th, and special attention to water conservation in this period is
critical to protecting valuable drinking water resources.
Moderate Water Shortage
Requirements for initiation- Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and
restrictions for Moderate Water Shortage as provided in Section X, “Water Shortage Response” when
one of the following criteria are met:
1. When total daily water demand equals or exceeds 85% of plant capacity for 3
consecutive days or 90% of plant capacity on a single day;
2. Brazos River Authority initiates Stage 2 of their Drought Contingency Plan; or
3. The City Manager declares a Moderate Water Shortage.
Requirements for termination – Declaration of Moderate Water Shortage may be rescinded when all
the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 7 consecutive days or
when the City Manager declares termination. Upon termination of Moderate Water Shortage, the
standard condition of Year-Round Water Conservation becomes operative.
Severe Water Shortage
Requirements for initiation- Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and
restrictions for Severe Water Shortage as provided in Section X, “Water Shortage Response” when
one of the following criteria are met:
1. When total daily water demand equals or exceeds 90% of plant capacity for 3
consecutive days or 95% of plant capacity on a single day; 
City of Temple Drought Contingency Plan 6
2. Brazos River Authority initiates Stage 3 of their Drought Contingency Plan; or
3. The City Manager declares a Severe Water Shortage.
Requirements for termination- Declaration of Severe Water Shortage may be rescinded when all the
conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 7 consecutive days or when
the City Manager declares termination. Upon termination of Severe Water Shortage, water use
requirements and restrictions of Moderate Water Shortage become operative unless otherwise
determined by the City Manager.
Emergency Water Shortage
Requirements for initiation- Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and
restrictions for Emergency Water Shortage as provided in Section X, “Water Shortage Response”
when one of the following criteria are met:
1. Major water line breaks, or pump or system failures occur, which cause loss of
capability to provide water service;
2. Natural or man-made contamination of the water supply source;
3. Brazos River Authority initiates Stage 4 of their Drought Contingency Plan; or
4. The City Manager declares an Emergency Water Shortage.
Requirements for termination- Declaration of Emergency Water Shortage may be rescinded when all
the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 7 consecutive days or
when the City Manager declares termination. Upon termination of Emergency Water Shortage, water
use requirements and restrictions of Severe Water Shortage become operative unless otherwise
determined by the City Manager.
Section X. Water Shortage Response
The City Manager shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a regular basis and, in
accordance with the triggering criteria set forth in Section IX of this Plan, shall determine that a moderate,
severe, or emergency water shortage exists and shall implement the following actions:
Year-Round Water Conservation Guidelines
Target: Achieve a voluntary reduction in daily water demand.
Voluntary Water Use Restrictions:
(a) Water customers are requested to voluntarily limit the irrigation of landscaped areas to
Sundays and Thursdays for customers with a street address ending in an even number,
and Saturdays and Wednesdays for water customers with a street address ending in an
odd number, and to irrigate landscapes only before 10:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. on
designated watering days. However, irrigation of landscaped areas is permitted anytime
if it is by means of a hand-held hose, a faucet filled bucket or watering can of five (5)
gallons or less, or a permanently installed drip irrigation system; 
City of Temple Drought Contingency Plan 7
(b) Irrigation of public landscaped areas by the City shall adhere to a Year-Round Water
Conservation water use schedule approved by the City Manager; and
(c) Water customers are requested to practice water conservation and to minimize water
use for non-essential purposes.
Wholesale Customers
(a) The City Manager will request wholesale water customers to implement a comparable
stage of the customer’s water conservation or drought contingency plan.
Moderate Water Shortage Response
Target: Achieve a 10 percent reduction in daily water demand.
Mandatory Water Use Restrictions:
Under threat of penalty for violation, the following water use restrictions shall apply to all persons:
(a) Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to Sundays and Thursdays for customers
with a street address ending in an even number, and Saturdays and Wednesdays for
water customers with a street address ending in an odd number. Additionally, irrigation
of landscapes is only permitted before 10:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. on designated
watering days. However, irrigation of landscaped areas is permitted anytime if it is by
means of a hand-held hose, a faucet filled bucket or watering can of five (5) gallons or
less, or a permanently installed drip irrigation system;
(b) Irrigation of public landscaped areas by the City shall adhere to the Moderate Water
Shortage water use schedule approved by the City Manager;
(c) Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools, wading pools,
or Jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited except on designated watering days;
(d) Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is
prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or
ponds are equipped with a recirculation system;
(e) Use of water for the irrigation of golf course greens, tees, and fairways is prohibited
except on designated watering days before 10:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. However, if
the golf course utilizes a water source other than that provided by the City, the facility
shall not be subject to these regulations;
(f) All restaurants are prohibited from serving water to patrons except upon request of the
patron;
(g) The following uses of water are defined as non-essential and are prohibited:
(i) wash down of any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts,
or other hard-surfaced areas;
(ii) use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than
immediate fire protection;
(iii) use of water for dust control; 
City of Temple Drought Contingency Plan 8
(iv) flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street;
and
(v) failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having
been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s); and
(h) The City Manager may order water rationing to selected users of the system in
accordance with the following sequence:
(i) Recreational users
(ii) Commercial and Industrial users
(iii) School users
(iv) Residential Users
(v) Hospitals, public health facilities, and safety facilities.
Wholesale Customers
(a) The City Manager will request wholesale water customers to implement response
measures of the customer’s water conservation or drought contingency plan that are
comparable to the City’s Moderate Water Shortage Response; and
(b) The City Manager will initiate contact with wholesale water customers to discuss water
supply and/or demand conditions and the possibility of pro rata curtailment of water
diversions and/or deliveries.
Severe Water Shortage Response
Target: Achieve a 20 percent reduction in daily water demand.
Mandatory Water Use Restrictions:
All requirements of Moderate Water Shortage response shall remain in effect during Severe Water
Shortage, and:
(a) Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to designated watering days. Additionally,
irrigation of landscapes is only permitted before 8:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. on
designated watering days. However, irrigation of landscaped areas is permitted at any
time if it is by means of a hand-held hose, a faucet filled bucket or watering can of five
(5) gallons or less, or a permanently installed drip irrigation system;
(b) Irrigation of public landscaped areas by the City shall adhere to the Severe Water
Shortage water use schedule approved by the City;
(c) Use of water for the irrigation of golf course greens, tees, and fairways is prohibited
unless the golf course utilizes a water source other than that provided by the City;
(d) Use of water from hydrants shall be limited to firefighting, related activities, or other
activities necessary to maintain public health, safety, and welfare. The use of water
from designated fire hydrants for construction purposes may be allowed under special
permit from the City; and 
City of Temple Drought Contingency Plan 9
(e) The City Manager may order water rationing to selected users of the system in
accordance with the following sequence:
(i) Recreational users
(ii) Commercial and Industrial users
(iii) School users
(iv) Residential Users
(v) Hospitals, public health facilities, and safety facilities.
Wholesale Customers
(a) The City Manager will request wholesale water customers to implement response
measures of the customer’s water conservation or drought contingency plan that are
comparable to the City’s Severe Water Shortage Response; and
(b) The City Manager will initiate preparations for the implementation of pro rata
curtailment of water diversions and/or deliveries by preparing a monthly water usage
allocation baseline for each wholesale customer according to the procedures specified
in Section XI of the Plan.
Emergency Water Shortage Response
Target: Achieve a 30 percent reduction in daily water demand.
Mandatory Water Use Restrictions:
All requirements of Moderate and Severe Water Shortage response remain in effect during
Emergency Water Shortage, and:
(a) Irrigation of landscaped areas is absolutely prohibited;
(b) Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other
vehicle is absolutely prohibited;
(c) The filling, refilling, or adding of water to swimming pools, wading pools, and Jacuzzitype pools is prohibited;
(d) The use of water for construction purposes from designated fire hydrants under special
permit is prohibited, even when previously allowed.
(e) No application for new, additional, expanded, or increased-in-size water service
connections, meters, service lines, pipeline extensions, mains, or water service facilities
of any kind shall be allowed or approved; and
(f) The City Manager is authorized to implement any actions or restrictions necessary to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare including, but not limited to, water
rationing, water service termination; and mandatory closure of commercial and
industrial facilities; and
(g) The City Manager may order water rationing to selected users of the system in 
City of Temple Drought Contingency Plan 10
accordance with the following sequence:
(i) Recreational users
(ii) Commercial and Industrial users
(iii) School users
(iv) Residential Users
(v) Hospitals, public health facilities, and safety facilities.
Wholesale Customers
(a) The City Manager will request wholesale water customers to implement response measures
of the customer’s water conservation or drought contingency plan that are comparable to
the City’s Emergency Water Shortage Response; and
(b) The City Manager may initiate pro rata curtailment of water diversions and/or deliveries in
accordance with the procedures in Section XI of the Plan in order to achieve a 30 percent
reduction in all wholesale customers’ allocations.
Section XI. Pro Rata Water Allocation (Wholesale Customers)
In the event that the triggering criteria specified in Section IX of the Plan for Emergency Water Shortage have
been met, the City Manager is hereby authorized to initiate allocation of water supplies on a pro rata basis
in accordance with Texas Water Code § 11.039 and according to the following water allocation policies and
procedures:
(a) A wholesale customer's monthly allocation shall be a percentage of the customer’s
water usage baseline. The percentage will be set by resolution of the City Council based
on the City Manager's assessment of the severity of the water shortage condition and
the need to curtail water diversions and/or deliveries. Monthly allocations may be
adjusted periodically by resolution of the City Council as conditions warrant. Once pro
rata allocation is in effect, water diversions by or deliveries to each wholesale customer
shall be limited to the allocation established for each month.
(b) A monthly water usage allocation shall be established by the City Manager for each
wholesale customer. The wholesale customer's water usage baseline will be computed
on the average water usage by month for the previous four-year period. If the
wholesale water customer's billing history is less than four years, the monthly average
for the period for which there is a record shall be used for any monthly period for
which no billing history exists.
 
City of Temple Drought Contingency Plan 11
Example of Calculation of Monthly Allocation for Hypothetical Wholesale Water Customer
(c) The City Manager shall provide notice, by certified mail, to each wholesale customer
informing them of their monthly water usage allocations and shall notify the news
media and the executive director of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
upon initiation of pro rata water allocation.
(d) Upon request of the customer or at the initiative of the City Manger the allocation may
be reduced or increased if, (1) the designated period does not accurately reflect the
wholesale customer's normal water usage; (2) the customer agrees to transfer part of
its allocation to another wholesale customer; or (3) other objective evidence
demonstrates that the designated allocation is inaccurate under present conditions. A
customer may appeal an allocation established hereunder to the City Council of the
City.
(e) During any period when pro rata allocation of available water supplies is in effect,
wholesale customers shall pay the following surcharges on excess water diversions
and/or deliveries. The below surcharges shall be cumulative:
? 1.5 times the normal water charge per 1,000 gallons for deliveries exceeding
the monthly allocation up through 5 percent above the monthly allocation;
? 2.0 times the normal water charge per 1,000 gallons for deliveries exceeding
the monthly allocation from 5 percent through 10 percent above the monthly
allocation;
? 2.5 times the normal water charge per 1,000 gallons for water deliveries
exceeding the monthly allocation from 10 percent through 15 percent above
the monthly allocation, and;
? 3.0 times the normal water charge per 1,000 gallons for water deliveries more
than 15 percent above the monthly allocation.
YEAR 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 SUM AVERAGE ALLOCATION
PERCENTAGE
MONTHLY
ALLOCATION
January 133 137 146 148 156 720 144 75% 108
February 115 122 133 133 147 650 130 75% 98
March 130 150 146 149 159 734 147 75% 110
April 130 167 168 157 187 809 162 75% 121
May 160 152 179 183 171 845 169 75% 127
June 226 184 172 205 249 1,036 207 75% 155
July 235 274 232 314 246 1,301 260 75% 195
August 222 203 206 337 309 1,277 255 75% 191
September 199 160 196 229 198 982 196 75% 147
October 165 172 197 165 185 884 177 75% 133
November 139 142 149 153 162 745 149 75% 112
December 142 143 150 156 165 756 151 75% 113
TOTAL 1,863 2,006 2,074 2,329 2,334 10,606 2,148 
City of Temple Drought Contingency Plan 12
Section XII. Variances
The City Manager may, in writing, grant temporary variance for existing water uses otherwise prohibited
under this Plan if it is determined that failure to grant such variance would cause an emergency condition
adversely affecting the health, sanitation, or fire protection for the public or the person requesting such
variance and if one or more of the following conditions are met:
(a) Compliance with this Plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of
the water supply shortage or other condition for which the Plan is in effect.
(b) Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction
in water use.
Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions of this Ordinance shall file a petition for variance with
the City within 5 days after the Plan or a drought response stage has been invoked. All petitions for variances
shall be reviewed by the City Manager and shall include the following:
(a) Name and address of the petitioner(s).
(b) Purpose of water use.
(c) Specific provision(s) of the Plan from which the petitioner is requesting relief.
(d) Detailed statement as to how the specific provision of the Plan adversely affects the
petitioner or what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if petitioner
complies with this Ordinance.
(e) Description of the relief requested.
(f) Period of time for which the variance is sought.
(g) Alternative water-use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes
to take to meet the intent of this Plan and the compliance date.
(h) Other pertinent information.
Section XIII. Enforcement
(a) No person shall knowingly or intentionally allow the use of water from the City for
residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental, or any other purpose in
a manner contrary to any provision of this ordinance, or in an amount in excess of that
permitted by the drought response stage in effect at the time pursuant to action taken
by the City Manager, in accordance with provisions of this ordinance.
(b) Any person who violates this ordinance is guilty of a Class C Misdemeanor, and upon
conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more
than two-thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that one or more of the provisions in
this ordinance is violated shall constitute a separate offense. If a person is convicted of
three or more distinct violations of this ordinance, the City Manager shall, upon due
notice to the customer, be authorized to discontinue water service to the premises
where such violations occur. Services discontinued under such circumstances shall be
restored only upon payment of a re-connection charge in accordance with current 
City of Temple Drought Contingency Plan 13
policies and ordinances and any other cost incurred by the City in discontinuing service.
In addition, suitable assurance must be given to the City Manager that the same action
shall not be repeated while the ordinance is in effect. Compliance with this plan may
also be sought through injunctive relief in the district court.
(c) Any person, including a person classified as a water customer of the City in apparent
control of the property where a violation occurs or originates shall be presumed to be
the violator, and proof that the violation occurred on the person’s property shall
constitute a rebuttable presumption that the person in apparent control of the property
committed the violation, but any such person shall have the right to show that he/she
did not commit the violation. Parents shall be presumed to be responsible for violations
of their minor children and proof that a violation, committed by a child, occurred on
property within the parents’ control shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the
parent committed the violation.
(d) Any employee of the City, police officer, or other employee designated by the City
Manager, may issue a citation to a person he/she reasonably believes to be in violation
of this ordinance. The citation shall be prepared in duplicate and shall contain the name
and address of the alleged violator, if known, the offense charged, and shall
(e) direct him/her to appear in the municipal court on the date shown on the citation for
which the date shall not be less than 3 days nor more than 5 days from the date the
citation was issued. The alleged violator shall be served a copy of the citation. Service
of the citation shall be complete upon delivery of the citation to the alleged violator, to
an agent or employee of a violator, or to a person over 14 years of age who is a member
of the violator’s immediate family or is a resident of the violator’s residence. The alleged
violator shall appear in municipal court to enter a plea of guilty or not guilty for the
violation of this ordinance. If the alleged violator fails to appear in municipal court a
warrant for his/her arrest may be issued. A summons to appear may be issued in lieu of
an arrest warrant. These cases shall be expedited and given preferential setting in
municipal court before all other cases.
Section XIV. Severability
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council of the City that the sections, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses, and phrases of this ordinance are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence,
paragraph, or section of this ordinance shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of
any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases,
clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this ordinance, since the same would not have been enacted
by the City Council of the City without the incorporation into this ordinance of any such unconstitutional
phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section. 
City of Temple Drought Contingency Plan 14
Appendix A — Drought Contingency Plan Ordinance 
City of Temple Drought Contingency Plan 15
 
City of Temple Drought Contingency Plan 16
Appendix B — Regional Water Planning Group Coordination 

·-
ORDINANCE NO. 2001-2769
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
TEMPLE, TEXAS, AMENDING CHAPTER 23, "MOBILE HOME
PARKS AND SUBDIVISIONS," OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF
THE CITY OF TEMPLE; PROVIDING A SAVINGS CLAUSE;
PROVIDING A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE; PROVIDING AN
EFFECTIVE DATE; PROVIDING A REPEALER; AND PROVIDING
AN OPEN MEETINGS CLAUSE.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF
THE CITY OF TEMPLE, TEXAS, THAT:
Part 1: Chapter 23, "Mobile Home Parks and Subdivisions," of the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Temple, Texas, is amended to read as follows:
Chapter23
MANUFACTURED HOUSING
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
• Sec. 23-1. Definitions.
•
(a) Administrator means the City Manager or a person designated by the City
Manager to administer licensing for Land Lease Communities.
(b) HUD-code manufactured home means a structure constructed on or after June
15, 1976, according to the rules of the United State Department of Housing and Urban
Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight
body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is
320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used
as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems. The
term does not include a recreational vehicle as that term is defined by 24 C.F .R. Section
3282.8(g).
( c) HUD-code manufactured home development means a HUD-code manufactured
home located on land other than a HUD-code manufactured home land lease community.
( d) HUD-code manufactured home land lease community or land lease community
means a plot or tract of land that is separated into two or more spaces or lots that are
rented, leased, or offered for rent or lease, for a term of less than 60 months without a
•
•
purchase option, for the installation of HUD-code manufactured homes for use and
occupancy as residences.
(e) Mobile Home means a structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976,
transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or
more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more
square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities
and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems.
(f) Manufactured housing or manufactured home means a HUD-code manufactured
home or a mobile home and collectively means and refers to both.
Sec. 23-2. Parking of manufactured homes.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to park a manufactured home within the City
of Temple for longer than 48 hours. It shall be an affirmative defense that a manufactured
home is:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
parked on property in accordance with an unexpired, temporary special
permit for an accessory dwelling;
parked on property in accordance with a temporary permit for a field or
construction office and not used as a dwelling;
a HUD Code Manufactured Home located in a Land Lease Community;
a HUD Code Manufactured Home located in a HUD Code Manufactured
Home Development;
( 5) a HUD Code Manufactured Home parked on property where HUD Code
Manufactured Homes are manufactured or sold and it is not used as a
dwelling; or
( 6) a legal, nonconforming use.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to park a manufactured home on a public
street or alley.
Secs.23-3-23-10.R.eserved.
ARTICLE II.
LAND LEASE COMMUNITY
Sec. 23-11. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a Land Lease Community without
having a current license from the City .
2
•
•
•
Sec. 23-12. License term.
The term of an initial license or a renewal license is one year .
Sec. 23-13. Application fee.
The fee for processing initial, renewal and transfer applications shall be set by
resolution of the City Council.
Sec. 23-14. Administration.
The City Manager shall designate a person to serve as administrator.
Sec. 23-15. Application process.
(a) All applications shall be made in writing on a form provided by the City.
(b) The filing date of a license application or a transfer request is the date on which
the information and items required by this article are delivered to the Administrator. The
City may require additional relevant information to clarify items on the application.
( c) The Administrator shall, within 30 days from receipt of a complete application,
either issue the requested license, renewal or transfer, or deny the application in writing,
giving notice of reasons for finding that the applicant has not demonstrated satisfactory
compliance with this article.
Sec. 23-16. Temporary or provisional license.
(a) If a license cannot be issued at the time within 30 days, the Administrator may
issue a temporary or provisional license which shall be valid until such time as the annual
license is issued or the temporary license is revoked for failure or refusal to comply with
this article. The purpose for a temporary or provisional license is to allow a business to start
or continue the business while a violation or condition is being remedied or otherwise
resolved.
(b) A temporary license shall have the word "temporary" or "provisional" written
across the face of the license and be issued under a cover letter that
( 1) provides a date that the temporary license is issued; and
(2) states the condition which for which the provision is necessary; and
(3) provides an expiration date for correction of the provision .
3
Sec. 23-17. Initial application.
• An application for an initial license to operate a Land Lease Community shall
•
include, at a minimum, the following information and items:
(1) Receipt from the Business Office for payment of the application fee;
(1) Trade name, address and legal description;
(2) Total acreage; acreage of recreation area(s), gross density (number of units
divided by total land area) and net density (number of units divided by [total
land minus streets]);
(3) Identification of real property owner by name, type of business organization,
assumed name, if any, mailing address, and street address;
( 4) Identification of business owner by name, type of business organization,
assumed name, if any, mailing address, and street address;
( 5) Identification of property manager by name, type of business organization,
assumed name, if any, mailing address, and street address;
(6) Name, mailing address and street address of person designated by applicant to
receive notices from the City and other governmental agencies regarding
license and compliance with laws;
(7) Plot plan with 6 copies, showing:
(a) Date of preparation, name of preparer, scale, and north point;
(b) Location of property line boundaries and dimensions of tract;
( c) Location and width of streets and access aisles used for ingress and
egress and for internal circulation;
( e) Location of permanent and accessory structures;
(f) Location and dimensions of front, rear and side yard setbacks for the
community and individual home sites;
(g) Type of construction, vegetation, location and height of all screening
devices;
4
•
•
•
(h) Location and description of parking, recreatiorial and landscaped
areas;
(8) Rules and regulations that apply to leases.
(9) Signature of the business owner(s) or the owner's authorized representative.
Sec. 23-18. License renewal.
An application for renewal of a license to operate a Land Lease Community shall
include, at a minimum, the following information and items:
(I) Receipt from the Business Office for payment of the application fee.
(2) All changes in information furnished with application for initial license.
Sec. 23-19. Change in control.
It shall be unlawful for a license holder to transfer its interest in a Land Lease
Community to another person without delivering notice of such transfer to the City
Secretary within 3 business days after the closing date for the transfer.
Sec. 23-20. Transfer .
An application to transfer a license for the remainder of the license term shall
include, at a minimum, the following information and items:
(1) Receipt from the Business Office for payment of the application fee.
(2) All changes in information furnished with application for initial license.
Sec. 23-21. Suspension or revocation.
The Administrator may suspend or revoke a license for failure to comply with the
requirements of this Article.
Sec. 23-22. Inspection.
(a) The Administrator is authorized to make inspections of the premises of a Land
Lease Community when application is made for issuance or transfer of a license and
whenever necessary or expedient after that to determine the condition of a Community. The
Administrator may be assisted by others, including but not limited to code enforcement,
housing, building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, or fire officials; Bell County Health
Department personnel; or consultants .
5
(b) It shall be the duty of the license holder to give the Administrator access to the
premises at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection.
• Sec. 23-23. Notice of violation.
•
(a) Proper service to a license holder shall be deemed to have occurred when the
Administrator sends by certified mail, or personally delivers, any notice about a license or a
violation to the contact person and address designated in the license application or an
amendment sent by certified mail to the Administrator at 2 North Main Street, Temple,
Texas 76501.
(b) Notice of a violation shall include the following information:
(I) a statement of the reasons for issuance of the notice;
(2) an outline of remedial action, which if taken, will effect compliance; and
(3) the earliest date when the premises will be re-inspected to determine
compliance. action the administrator proposes to take if a violation is not
remedied.
Sec. 23-24. Hearing .
Any person affected by a notice that has been issued in connection with enforcement
of this Article, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the proper
board or the City Council if there is no intermediate board having jurisdiction over the
matter. The request shall be made and the hearing conducted under the ordinances and
policies established governing the particular board. The request for a hearing shall operate
as a stay of the notice and suspension except in the case of an emergency order. A person
aggrieved by the decision of the board may seek appeal therefrom to the City Council.
Sec. 23-25. Emergency order.
The Administrator or other authority may take immediate action to protect public
health, by issuing, without notice or hearing, an order reciting the existence of such an
emergency and requiring specified action that is reasonably necessary. An emergency order
is effective when signed. As soon as reasonably practical after issuing an emergency order,
the Administrator shall give notice of the order, and upon request, afford the license holder
a hearing as soon as possible.
Sec. 23-26--23-30. Reserved.
6
•
•
Sec. 23-31. Minimum standards for a Land Lease Community.
(a) No license shall be issued, renewed or transferred for a Land Lease Community
that does not comply with this article.
(b) A Land Lease Community shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and
local laws and regulations as a condition of holding a license.
( c) The provisions of this article are cumulative of other City ordinances, including
but not limited to, ordinances governing plat approval, zoning, fire protection, and building
and maintenance. The City may utilize any remedy available under other laws and
ordinances in addition to or instead of the remedies provided in this article.
( d) Additional minimum standards for a Land Lease Community are set out in the
following sections of this Article.
Sec. 23-32. Area and density.
A Land Lease Community shall contain at least 5 acres, with no more than an
average of 10 HUD Code Manufactured Homes per acre. The lots or sites within a
Community shall be not less than 35 feet wide at the narrowest point measured on a
perpendicular between the side lot lines, or, if the side lot lines are not parallel, then on a
line perpendicular to one side lot line .
Sec. 23-33. Fire protection.
(a) The premises of a Land Lease Communities shall be kept free of litter, rubbish
and other flammable materials.
(b) Cooking shelters, barbecue pits, fireplaces and stoves, if any, shall be so located,
constructed, maintained and used as to minimize fire hazards and smoke nuisances both on
the property where used and on neighboring property. No open fire shall be permitted
except in facilities provided. No open fire shall be left unattended. No fuel shall be used and
no material burned which emits dense smoke or objectionable odors. No campfires will be
permitted under any circumstances.
( c) Gasoline or other flammable fluids shall never be placed or stored in any unit in a
Land Lease Community or contained or stored in any manufactured home, except for a
sufficient amount of gasoline or flammable fluid for domestic use, but the quantity so kept
shall not exceed 112 gallon.
( d) Portable fire extinguishers shall be kept in service buildings and rest room
facilities, if any. The extinguishers shall be of a capacity of not less than 5 112 pound ABC
type.
7
•
•
Sec. 23-34. Fire protection; fire hydrants.
Fire hydrants shall be installed if the water supply is capable to serve them in
accordance with the following requirements:
( 1) The water supply system shall permit the operation of a minimum of two 1-
1 /2 inch hose streams.
(2) Each of 2 nozzles, held 4 feet above the ground, shall deliver at least 75
gallons of water per minute at a flowing pressure of at least 30 pounds per
square inch at the highest elevation point of the park.
(3) Fire hydrants shall be located within 500 feet of any home, service building or
other structure in the park.
Sec. 23-35. Fuel oil and liquefied propane gas.
Fuel oil shall not be used or stored in a Land Use Community.
Liquefied Propane Gas:
(a) Liquefied petroleum gas (L.P. gas) systems may be installed and if installed, shall
be installed and maintained in accordance with the applicable codes and regulations
governing such systems .
(b) Such systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive pressure
and shall be arranged so that the discharge tenninates at a safe location.
( c) Such systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting off gas. Such
means shall be located outside the home and shall be maintained in effective operating
condition.
( d) All L.P. gas piping outside of the homes shall be well supported and protected
against mechanical injury. Undiluted L.P. gas in liquid form shall not be conveyed through
piping equipment and systems in homes.
( e) L.P. gas containers installed on a home site shall be securely but not permanently
fastened to prevent accidental overturning. Such containers shall not be more than 250 U.S.
gallons gross capacity.
(f) No L.P. gas vessel shall be stored or located inside or beneath any storage
cabinet, carport, home, or any other structure, unless such installations are approved by the
fire marshal.
8
•
Sec. 23-36. Garbage and refuse.
(a) Each Land Lease Community site shall be provided with one fly tight, watertight
and rodent proof container.
(b) Refuse collection stands shall be provided for all refuse containers. Such
container stands shall be so designed as to prevent containers from being tipped, to
minimize spillage and container deterioration, and to facilitate cleaning around them.
( c) Storage, collection and disposal of refuse shall be so conducted so as to create no
health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air
pollution.
( d) Refuse and garbage collection shall be made by the City under the terms and
conditions set out in the applicable ordinances.
( e) Garbage and refuse may not be incinerated in a Land Lease Community.
Sec. 23-37. Lighting.
A Land Lease Community shall be furnished with lighting units so spaced and
equipped with luminaries placed at such mounting heights as will provide the following
average maintained levels of illumination for the same movement. of pedestrians and
• vehicles at night:
(1) All parts of the street systems: 0.6 foot candle, with a minimum of 0.1 foot
candle,
(2) Potentially hazardous locations, such as major street intersection, stoops or
stepped ramps shall be individually illuminated, with a minimum of 0.3 foot
candle.
(3) Lights shall be so located and shielded that illumination does not exceed .2
foot candles at the bounding property line.
Sec. 23-38. Natural gas.
(a) A natural gas piping systems may be installed, extending from the point of
delivery to the terminal of the gas riser at each home site.
(b) Piping shall be buried to a sufficient depth or covered in a manner so as to protect
the piping system from physical damage.
( c) Piping shall not be installed underground beneath homes with an enclosing
foundation.
9
•
•
( d) Outlets for individual homes and gas piping to any building supplied by the
system shall be provided with a readily accessible manual shutoff valve .
( e) Trailers (in communities developed when trailers were allowed) shall be
connected to the gas piping system with rigid pipe or listed connectors approved under
American Gas Association 3.87 or semi-rigid tubing of adequate size and installed so as to
be protected against physical damage. Provisions for flexibility shall be provided when
necessary.
(f) Where information is not available on the location trailer supply connection, the
gas riser to each trailer site should be placed in there are one-third section of the site and not
less than 18 inches from the roadside wall of the trailer. It shall be located and protected or
supported so as to minimize the likelihood of damage by moving vehicles. When the gas
pressure at the terminal of the gas riser at each trailer site is 0.5 psi or less, the minimum
size of the gas piping outlet shall be three-quarter(%) inch for other than undiluted liquefied
petroleum gases.
Sec. 23-39. Parking
There shall be provided 2 parking spaces for each home site. The minimum street
width requirement shall be increased by 7 feet for each parking lane if on-street parking is
the only type of parking provided in the park. One additional parking space for each four
lots or sites shall be provided for guest parking. Guest parking spaces shall be located in the
vicinity of the sites intended to be served.
Sec. 23-40. Recreation area.
There shall be required in each Land Lease Community a recreation area(s) equal in
size to at least 5 percent of the total area, which shall be easily accessible to all residents. A
recreation area shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards and should be, topography
permitting, centrally located.
Sec. 23-41. Sewerage requirements.
(a) A Land Lease Community shall be connected to the City wastewater system.
(b) Each HUD Code Manufactured Home shall be connected to the City's
wastewater system through its own sewer riser pipe at least 4 inches in diameter. The sewer
riser pipe shall be located so that the connection to the home drain outlet approximates a
vertical position.
( c) The sewer connection shall have a minimum nominal inside diameter of at least 4
inches, and the slope of any portion thereof shall be at least 114 inch per foot. The sewer
10
connection shall consist of one pipe only without any branch fittings. All joints shall be
watertight.
• (d) All materials used for sewer connections shall be PVC Schedule 40 or SDR 35.
•
•
The inner surface shall be smooth.
(e) Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when a home does not
occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the riser. The rim of the riser
pipe shall extend at least four ( 4) inches above ground elevation.
Sec. 23-42. Streets and parking.
(a) A Land Lease Community shall be provided with safe and convenient vehicular
access from abutting public streets or roads to each site, with a minimum of two means of
vehicular access.
(b) Entrances shall be designed to minimize congestion and hazards and allow free
movement of traffic on adjacent streets. No on-street parking shall be permitted for a
distance of 100 feet from an entrance, unless the entrance is constructed as a collector street.
( c) Major and minor streets constructed in accordance with the Subdivision
Ordinance .
( d) Interior street construction shall meet the standards and specifications for street
construction for subdivisions.
Sec. 23-45. Water supply required.
(a) The internal potable water supply system shall be connected to the City water
system. The water distribution system shall be looped, subject to the approval of the
Utilities Director.
(b) Every home site shall be served by an internal potable water supply system that is
constructed and maintained in accordance with state laws and regulations and plumbing
codes adopted by the City.
Sec. 23-46. Water supply; riser pipes.
(a) Individual water riser pipes shall be located within each home site at a point
where the water connection will approximate a vertical position.
(b) A water riser pipe shall extend at least 4 inches above ground elevation. The pipe
shall be at least 3/4 of an inch in diameter. The water outlet shall be capped when a home
does not occupy the site .
11
•
•
•
(c) Surface drainage shall be diverted from the location of the riser pipe.
( d) The main feed to each home site shall have a shutoff valve placed at a sufficient
depth below grade or covered in a manner so as to protect the valve from physical damage.
( e) Underground stop and waste valves shall not be installed on any water system.
Secs. 23-47--23-60. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
SPECIAL TEMPORARY PERMIT
Sec. 23-61. Special permits.
(a) With satisfactory proof that the applicant qualifies for the exception set out
below, a temporary special permit may be issued by resolution of the City Council for use
of a HUD Code Manufactured Home as an accessory residence to a principal residence for
the sole purpose of housing immediate family members, subject to the following conditions:
( 1) Upon satisfactory proof of emergency conditions constituting a documented
medical hardship, a temporary special permit may be issued to the owner of a
HUD Code Manufactured Home for location on a lot or tract owned by him
or a member of his immediate family;
(2) The HUD Code Manufactured Home shall be occupied only by said
landowner and his family or another member or members of his immediate
family and shall never be rented out or used for any commercial purpose
whatsoever;
(3) The property shall be zoned agricultural and minimum contiguous land area
which must be owned to allow for placement of a HUD Code Manufactured
Home as an accessory residence to a principal residence shall be 3 acres. In
all other respects, the Agricultural District area regulations shall apply;
( 4) The principal residence shall meet all applicable building codes in effect in
the City (building, plumbing, mechanical, and electrical);
(5) The HUD Code Manufactured Home shall meet minimum applicable codes
in effect in the City;
6) The HUD Code Manufactured Home shall meet the minimum applicable
septic tank ordinances in effect in the City;
(7) A minimum separation of 50 feet shall be observed between the HUD Code
Manufactured Home and any adjacent residence;
12
•
•
•
(8) A single water utility service shall be provided for the principal residence and
accessory HUD Code Manufactured Home residence in the property owner's
name, where possible;
(9) A detailed site plan shall be provided which assures compatible placement of
a HUD Code Manufactured Home in relation to the principal residence,
surrounding property lines and development, streets, and other relevant site
factors;
(I 0) The maximum term of permit approval shall not exceed 3 years; however,
extensions may be considered and approved if such extension is not adverse
to the surrounding area.
(b) Prior to approval of a temporary special permit under this section, a public
hearing shall be held before the Planning Commission and the City Council in the same
manner prescribed for a zone change in Section 20, Amendments, Zoning Ordinance .. All
other provisions of said portion of the Code shall apply for the review, approval and
reconsideration of a request.
( c) The City Council, following recommendation by the Planning Commission, may
impose conditions on such permit as it deems necessary to be in the public interest after full
hearing on an application and reserves, at all times, the right and power to revoke any such
permit for violation of any of its terms after a hearing at which the holder has been given at
least I 0 days prior notice.
( d) Applications for consideration of a temporary special permit for a HUD Code
Manufactured Home may be obtained from the planning director.
Part 2: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
ordinance are to the extent of such conflict hereby repealed.
Part 3: It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this ordinance are severable and, if
any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this ordinance should be declared
invalid by the final judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and
sections of this ordinance, since the same would have been enacted by the City Council
without the incorporation in this ordinance of any such invalid phrase, clause, sentence,
paragraph or section.
Part 4: This ordinance shall take effect immediately from and after its passage in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the City of Temple, Texas, and it is
accordingly so ordained .
13
,.
•
•
Part 5: It is hereby officially found and determined that the meeting at which this
Resolution is passed was open to the public as required and that public notice of the time,
place, and purpose of said meeting was given as required by the Open Meetings Act.
PASSED AND APPROVED on First Reading on the 3rd day of May, 2001.
PASSED AND APPROVED on Second and Final Reading on the 17th day of
May, 2001.
THE CITY OF TEMPLE, TEXAS
~~ KEIFER MA~ayor
ATTEST: APPROVED AS TO FORM:
City Secretary
14