CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF TAFT, TEXAS 
____________ 
Published in 2020 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
  
CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Pedro Lopez 
Mayor 
____________ 
Lolo Hernandez, Mayor Pro Tem 
Leonard Vasquez, Ward 1 
Rolando Rodriguez, Ward 1 
JoAdrian Vara, Ward 2 
City Council 
____________ 
Ray De Los Santos 
Interim City Manager 
____________ 
Roxann Pais Cotroneo 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Jennifer Pineda 
City Secretary  
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Taft, Texas. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been provided catchlines to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
RELATED LAWS 	RL:1 
SPECIAL ACTS 	SA:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	RLCT:1 
SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	SACT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Daniel F. Walker, Code Attorney, and Andrea Palmieri, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Jennifer Pineda, City Secretary, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Taft, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Taft, Texas. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Taft, Texas. 2020.  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Taft, Texas," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Taft Municipal Code."  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the governing body, the following definitions and rules shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
Boards, committees, commissions, officers, employees, departments. Any reference to city boards, committees, commissions, officers, employees, or departments shall be construed to mean the respective entities or personnel of the City of Taft, Texas. 
City. The term "the city" or "this city" or "city" means the City of Taft in the County of San Patricio in the State of Texas. 
Code. The term "this code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Taft, Texas, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be conducted, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be done shall be counted unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.004. 
County. The term "county" means the County of San Patricio, Texas. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a section or provision appears to require the head of a department or some other city officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or duty, unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males. 
Highway. The term "highway" includes any street, alley, highway, avenue, public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Municipality. The term "municipality" means this political subdivision, the City of Taft, Texas. 
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and" and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" extends and is applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Shall. The term "shall" always means mandatory and never means permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral link of the roadway and adjacent property line, intended for use by pedestrians. 
Signature, subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when a person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Texas. 
Street. The term "street" includes any highway, alley, street, avenue, boulevard, public place or square, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel and causeway in the city, dedicated to public use. 
TAC, T.A.C., Texas Admin. Code. The terms "TAC," "T.A.C." and "Texas Admin. Code" mean the Texas Administrative Code. 
Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. The term "Vernon's Ann. C.C.P." means the latest edition or supplement to Vernon's Annotated Code of Criminal Procedure. 
Vernon's Ann. Civ. Stat. The term "Vernon's Ann. Civ. Stat." means the latest edition or supplement to Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes. 
V.T.C.A. The term "V.T.C.A." means and refers to the latest edition or supplement to Vernon's Texas Code Annotated. 
Written, in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of the sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly provided, shall they be so deemed when any of the sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
State Law reference— Headings, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.024.  
Sec. 1-4. - History notes. 
This history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of the matter contained in the section.  
Sec. 1-5. - References and editor's notes. 
References and editor's notes following certain Code sections are provided as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling nor meant to have any legal effect whatsoever.  
Sec. 1-6. - References to chapters, articles, divisions and sections. 
All references in this Code to chapters, articles, divisions and sections are to the chapters, articles, divisions and sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified.  
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein; or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of the subsequent ordinances until the time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of ordinances. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Taft, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as enacted. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Taft, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows:…." The new section shall then be set out in full as enacted. 
(d)  In lieu of the foregoing subsection, when the governing authority desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in the Code, but which the governing authority desires to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made a part of the ordinance: "It is the intention of the council, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made part of the Code of Ordinance of the City of Taft, Texas, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish that intention." 
(e)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be.  
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
State Law reference— Repeal of a repealing statute, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.030.  
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by municipal personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement, and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that when they are inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to the Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency, organization or company authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing sections or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of the ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-10. - General penalty. 
Whenever in this Code or in any city ordinance or in any rule, regulation or order promulgated by any city officer or agency under authority vested in such officer or agency any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided, the violation of any provision of this Code or of any specific ordinance, regulation, rule or order that governs or regulates fire, safety, zoning, public health or sanitation, including the dumping of refuse, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00. The violation of any other provision of this Code or any other ordinance, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by fine not exceeding $500.00, unless otherwise specifically stated in this Code. If the maximum penalty provided by this Code for any offense is greater than the maximum penalty for such violation provided by state law, the maximum penalty for such violation shall be that accorded under state law. Except where provided otherwise in this Code, each day an offense shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to establish penalties for violation of Code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001.  
Sec. 1-11. - Severability of parts of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code.  
Sec. 1-12. - Certain ordinances, rights, etc., not affected by Code adoption. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code, or the ordinance adopting this Code, shall affect: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city; 
(3)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict with the provisions of the Code; 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution fixing salaries and employment benefits of officers or employees of the city, unless superseded; 
(5)  Any appropriation ordinance or resolution; 
(6)  Any right of franchise granted by the council to any person, firm or corporation; 
(7)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, closing, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(8)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing the street grades of any city streets; 
(9)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city, or providing regulations for the same; 
(11)  Any ordinance annexing property to the city; 
(12)  Any ordinances or amendments thereto concerning zoning, subdivisions, or land development; 
(13)  Any ordinance or resolution regulating the erection, alteration, repair, demolition, moving or removal of buildings or other structures; 
(14)  Ordinances or resolutions prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not inconsistent with this Code; 
(15)  Any ordinance or resolution fixing utility and other rates and charges, or any valid comprehensive fee schedule; 
(16)  Any ordinance of agreement with another political subdivision; 
(17)  Any ordinance concerning issuance of tax anticipation notes; 
(18)  Any current ordinance concerning personnel benefits, included, but not limited to, participation in the Texas Municipal Retirement System or the Texas Municipal League intergovernmental employee benefits pool; 
(19)  Any ordinance in effect which establishes a requirement or procedure to obtain a municipal permit or license to conduct any commercial activity, construct or alter a building or structure, or otherwise obtain municipal permission or sanction as a precondition; 
(20)  Any ordinance in effect at time of adoption of this Code which imposes a tax; 
(21)  Any ordinance in effect which provides for regulation of adult-entertainment or sexually-oriented businesses; 
(22)  Any ordinance in effect which pertains to regulation of alcoholic beverages, including, but not limited to, hours of sale and the operation of private clubs; 
(23)  Any ordinance, resolution or order of the governing body accepting the designation by a state or federal entity to administer or enforce state or federal laws, regulations, or orders; 
(24)  Any ordinance concerning establishment and operation of the municipal court, including court fees; 
(25)  Any ordinance establishing historic districts, designating landmarks and establishing criteria, appointing a preservation officer or commission and prescribing duties, and otherwise pertaining to historic preservation; 
(26)  Any ordinance adopting a plan or program. 
(b)  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect; and all such ordinances and resolutions are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances and resolutions are on file in the city clerk or secretary's office.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Provisions and powers of Type A general-law municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.011—51.018; Type A municipality may adopt necessary ordinances not inconsistent with state law, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.011; Public Funds Investment Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 2256.001 et seq.; Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Classification and powers of city. 
The city is a general-law Type A municipality with all powers granted to such cities under state law.  
Sec. 2-2. - Public hearing and notice. 
In any instance where any public hearing is required to be held by the city council under the laws of the state or ordinances of the city concerning zoning, such public hearing may be held by the city council, after published notice required by state law, jointly with any special hearing required to be held by the city zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 230, 7-11-1961)  
Sec. 2-3. - Liability for response during emergency situations. 
Every officer, agent or employee of the city, while responding to emergency situations is hereby authorized to act in such a manner as to most effectively deal with the emergency. This provision shall prevail over every other ordinance of the city and, to the extent to which the city has the authority to so authorize, over any other law establishing a standard of care in conflict with this section. Neither the city nor the employee shall be liable for any failure to use ordinary care in such emergency. 
(Ord. No. 531, § 1, 6-10-1986)  
Sec. 2-4. - Council meetings and public notice. 
(a)  The city council shall meet regularly at least once a month at the regular meeting place. Such regular meeting shall be at 6:30 p.m. at the Kiva Hut 402, Park Street, Taft, Texas 78390. 
(b)  All agendas for said meetings (regular or special meetings) shall be posted at least 72 hours preceding the meeting, pursuant to the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(c)  The deadline for requesting items be placed on the agenda for the upcoming meeting shall be Wednesday at 5:00 p.m. preceding the meeting. 
(d)  The mayor may call a special meeting at the mayor's own request or at the request of three aldermen. Each member of the governing body, the secretary, and the municipal attorney must be notified of the special meeting. The notice may be given personally or left at the person's usual place of residence. 
(Ord. No. 856, 4-26-2011)  
Sec. 2-5. - Electronic means of payments to city. 
(a)  Each officer employed by the city who, as part of that employment, collects fees, fines, court costs, or other charges from members of the public that are due the city is authorized to accept credit cards, debit cards, or other electronic means as payment for such fees, fines, court costs, and other charges. 
(b)  For each non-municipal court related fee, fine, court cost, or other charge that is paid by credit card, debit card, or other electronic means, the officer collecting same shall also collect a processing fee in an amount equal to three percent of the amount of the fee, fine, court cost, or other charge, as authorized by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 132.003(b). For each municipal court related fee, fine, court cost, or other charge that is paid by credit card, debit card, or other electronic means, the officer collecting same shall also collect a processing fee in an amount equal to five percent of the amount of the fee, fine, court cost, or other charge, as authorized by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 132.003(b). 
(c)  If for any reason a payment by credit card, debit card, or other electronic means is not honored by the company on which the funds are drawn, the officer shall collect from the member of the public who attempted to pay by credit or debit card an additional service charge in an amount equal to the fee then being charged for the collection of a check drawn on an account with insufficient funds, as authorized by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 132.005. 
(d)  The mayor shall be authorized on behalf of the city to contract with a company that issues credit cards or payment by other electronic means to collect and seize credit cards issued by the company that are outdated or otherwise authorized. Such contract may provide that the city will charge the company a fee for the return of such credit cards, as authorized by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 132.005. 
(e)  Processing fees and service charges collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the general fund of the city, as provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 132.006. 
(Ord. No. 927, § 1, 7-1-2014)  
Sec. 2-6. - Service fee for check acceptance. 
The city does not charge a service fee for checks that are rendered for payments for city services, fees, fines, court costs and other charges. 
(Ord. No. 915, § 1, 9-24-2013)  
Secs. 2-7—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY MANAGER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 947, adopted December 18, 2015, repealed and reenacted article II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Forerly, article II, sections 2-31—2-39 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 858, §§ 1, 2, 4—7, 9, adopted August 9, 2011; Ord. No. 873, adopted February 14, 2012, and Ord. No. 898, § II, adopted March 19, 2013. 
 
Sec. 2-31. - Appointment. 
The governing body of the city shall appoint a city manager for the city who shall serve as the administrative head of the municipal government under the direction and supervision of the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 947, 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 968, 4-11-2017)  
Sec. 2-32. - Residency. 
The city manager is not required to reside within the city limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 947, 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 968, 4-11-2017)  
Sec. 2-33. - Term of office. 
The city manager shall be appointed for an indefinite period and shall be subject to discharge at the will of the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 947, 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 968, 4-11-2017)  
Sec. 2-34. - Absence or disability. 
During the absence or disability of the city manager, the governing body shall designate some properly qualified person to serve as an interim city manager. 
(Ord. No. 947, 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 968, 4-11-2017)  
Sec. 2-35. - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the city manager shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  Devote his time and attention to the affairs of the city and be responsible to the governing body for the efficient administration of its affairs; 
(2)  Being accountable and responsible to the governing body for the efficient administration of his duties to enhance the entity; 
(3)  See that all laws and ordinances are enforced; 
(4)  Shall have the authority to appoint and remove all employees, in keeping with the city's personnel policy and being duty bound to inform the elected officials of actions taken. Said report shall be in a timely fashion with all employees being informed of grievance policies; 
(5)  Exercise supervision and control over all departments created by the governing body or that may hereafter be created by said governing body of the city; 
(6)  Shall have the authority to give merit raises and certification pay increases to employees that have enhanced their work by completing certification or licensing that will aid the city in serving the residents, as long as said increases are within the adopted budget; 
(7)  Attend all meetings of the governing body with the right to take part in the discussion, but having no vote. The city manager shall be notified of all special meetings, committee meetings and workshops of said governing body; 
(8)  See that all terms and conditions imposed and in favor of the city, its inhabitants in any public utility franchise are faithfully kept and performed and upon knowledge of any violation thereof to call the same to the attention of the governing body; 
(9)  Act as budget officer and as such to prepare and submit to the governing body and the inhabitants of Taft the proposed budget for the following fiscal year. The budget shall contain the past years budget, the actual amounts paid and the proposed budget. After passage of the budget by the governing body, the manage shall file said instrument with the city secretary are required by state law; 
(10)  The city manager will ensure that the city council receives a print out of the current monthly expenditures, a financial report monthly and keep the governing body apprised of the city's financial needs, overages, shortfalls, or potential shortfalls; 
(11)  The city manager and/or his designee shall serve as the city's purchasing agent and shall sign off on all purchases in compliance with the city's purchasing policies. In addition, the city manager shall have the authority to adopt such rules and regulations governing requisitions and business transactions; 
(12)  The city manager while acting in the capacity of purchasing agent for the city shall encourage competitive bidding on purchases and sales except when the nature of the sale is such that competitive bids would be impracticable or unnecessary. It shall be the practice that all purchases in excess of $5,000.00 excluding real estate or easements shall be bid and the sources documented. The lowest responsible bidder will be chosen. All sales or purchases in excess of $50,000.00, excluding real estate or easements shale be let, via written contract, after public notice is given and receipt of sealed bids are submitted. The bids or bid sheets shall be delivered to the governing body for action at their next regularly scheduled meeting where they shall accept or reject any or all said bids. The purchasing agent shall require the contractors to furnish certificates or liability, proof of insurance, and validation of the agents' workmen's compensation if required by law. No contract shall exceed a year; 
(13)  The city manager shall have the authority, during emergency circumstances to make purchases and award contracts for the purpose of repairing damage caused by said accident or avoiding said public emergency but at the council's next regularly scheduled meeting the manager shall disclose the contracts and expenditures made and request the city council ratify the actions taken; 
(14)  Recommend to the governing body the salaries to be paid each appointive officer and subordinate employee of the city and act on council's motion; 
(15)  The city manager has the authority to initiate and establish a "merit" raise for employees that have exhibited outstanding work habits, results, and achievement as long as said raise is in compliance with the budget reflected in the budget; 
(16)  The city manager shall execute all such duties as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the city's governing body; 
(17)  Enable the city manager to assume the duties of city secretary should the position be vacant until such time as the governing body fills said vacancy; 
(18)  Grant authority to the city manager with approval of the mayor or the mayor pro tem, in his/her absence, to make decisions during times of disasters, natural or manmade, which may imperil the safety of the inhabitants of the city or their property or would place undue financial burdens to the residents when such decisions must be made before a meeting of the city council may reasonably be convened. 
(Ord. No. 947, 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 968, 4-11-2017; Ord. No. 980, § 2, 10-10-2017)  
Sec. 2-36. - Compensation and salary. 
The city manager shall receive compensation as the governing body shall fix from time to time by ordinance. The city manager shall be paid an annual salary of $60,000.00, payable in installments at the same time and manner as full time employees of the city are paid. 
(Ord. No. 947, 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 968, 4-11-2017)  
Sec. 2-37. - Disability and retirement benefits. 
The city manager shall be covered by the same disability and retirement benefits as are available to all other full time city employees. 
(Ord. No. 947, 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 968, 4-11-2017)  
Sec. 2-38. - Other benefits. 
The city manager shall be covered and entitled to the same accrual of sick leave, vacation leave, holidays and other benefits as are available to all full-time city employees. The city manager shall also be paid an automobile allowance of $400.00 per month. 
(Ord. No. 947, 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 968, 4-11-2017)  
Sec. 2-39. - Bond. 
The city manager shall furnish a surety bond as required by law in an amount recommended by the Texas Municipal League. The city shall pay the premium on such surety bond. 
(Ord. No. 947, 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 968, 4-11-2017)  
Sec. 2-40. - Annual performance evaluation. 
The city council shall conduct an annual city manager performance evaluation on or about the annual anniversary date of appointment. 
(Ord. No. 947, 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 968, 4-11-2017)  
Secs. 2-41—2-66. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CITY ATTORNEY 
 
Sec. 2-67. - Appointment of attorney. 
(a)  The city council shall appoint a competent and duly licensed attorney who practices law in Nueces County, Aransas County or this county who shall serve as the city attorney. 
(b)  He shall receive for his services such compensation as may be fixed by the city council and shall hold his office at the pleasure of the city council. The city attorney, or such other attorneys selected by him, with the approval of the city council shall represent the city in all litigation, if requested. He shall be the legal advisor for all departments upon request. 
(c)  The position, duties, and scope of representation by and of city attorney shall be subject to such ordinances as adopted from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 867, 9-13-2011)  
Secs. 2-68—2-118. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AGENCIES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-119—2-149. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of division 2 by Ord. No. 1053, § 1(Exh. A), adopted February 11, 2020, Ord. No. 949, § 1, adopted February 19, 2016, repealed the former division 2, sections 2-150—2-153 in its entirety, which pertained to the city planing commission, and derived from Ord. No. 205, §§ 2, 4, 5, adopted November 20, 1958, and Ord. No. 537, § 1, adopted November 11, 1986. 
 
Sec. 2-150. - Establishment of planning and zoning commission. 
There is hereby created and established a planning and zoning commission within the city, in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211. 
(Ord. No. 1053, § 1(Exh. A), 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 2-151. - Number of members. 
The planning and zoning commission shall be composed of five members appointed by the city council. Each person so nominated must be approved by a simple majority vote of the council before being appointed as a member of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1053, § 1(Exh. A), 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 2-152. - Term of office. 
The term of office of each member shall be two years; provided, however, at the time of appointment of the initial members of the planning and zoning commission, the city shall draw by lot to determine two members who shall serve a one-year term and three members who shall serve a two-year term. The planning and zoning commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 1053, § 1(Exh. A), 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 2-153. - Vacancies. 
When vacancies occur on the planning and zoning commission, the city council shall appoint, by majority vote, a replacement to serve the remainder of that term. 
(Ord. No. 1053, § 1(Exh. A), 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 2-154. - Officers. 
In October of each year, the city council shall appoint the chairman of the planning and zoning commission to serve for one year beginning in that month. In October of each year, the planning and zoning commission shall elect from its members a vice chairman and a secretary to serve for one year beginning in that month. 
(Ord. No. 1053, § 1(Exh. A), 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 2-155. - Meetings. 
The planning and zoning commission shall have its regular meeting on the third Tuesday of each month. The planning and zoning commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings which shall be of public record. Board members are required to be in compliance with policies defined by the city council for board members that are in existence or as modified in the future. Meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Open Meetings Law. 
(Ord. No. 1053, § 1(Exh. A), 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 2-156. - Agendas. 
The planning and zoning commission shall post its agendas in accordance with the Open Meetings Law. 
(Ord. No. 1053, § 1(Exh. A), 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 2-157. - Quorum/voting. 
Three members of the planning and zoning commission shall constitute a quorum. No action or recommendation of the planning and zoning commission shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the affirmative vote of a majority of the planning and zoning commission members present. The chairman shall be considered a voting member of the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 1053, § 1(Exh. A), 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 2-158. - Powers and authority. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission shall be responsible to and act as an advisory board to the city council. The planning and zoning commission shall: 
(1)  Review all current and proposed ordinances and amendments pertaining to planning and zoning and make recommendations to the city council for action to be taken; 
(2)  Make proposals to the city council to amend, extend and add to the comprehensive plan for the physical development of the city; 
(3)  Keep public records of its resolutions, findings and determinations; and 
(4)  Perform all functions and duties required by law and such other and further duties requested of it by the city council. 
(b)  The planning and zoning commission shall have full power to: 
(1)  Exercise the authority of the planning and zoning commission as provided by state law and city ordinances; and 
(2)  Make reports and recommendations relating to the comprehensive plan and development of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1053, § 1(Exh. A), 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 2-159. - Procedure. 
(a)  Any and all rules and regulations adopted by the commission, if any, shall be forwarded in writing to the city manager who shall submit them to the city council with the city manager's recommendations. The city council may amend, adopt or reject any such rules or regulations. If any rules or regulations should be rejected, the planning and zoning commission may modify them and submit such modified rules and recommendations to the city council. 
(b)  Should any person on the planning and zoning commission have a conflict of interest, pursuant to any state laws, city ordinances regulating conflicts of interest of municipal officers, with an agenda item then before the planning and zoning commission, that member shall openly declare before discussion proceeds and is prohibited from discussing the item or voting on the question, and is not considered present and voting for the purposes of the tally. 
(c)  Should any person on the planning and zoning commission choose to abstain from voting on any question before the planning and zoning commission, where no conflict of interest exists, the person's vote shall be recorded as a negative vote in the official minutes of the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1053, § 1(Exh. A), 2-11-2020)  
Secs. 2-160—2-174. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-175. - Establishment. 
An economic development board is hereby established to be advisory to the council and have the powers and duties hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 1, 4-9-1985)  
Sec. 2-176. - Board. 
The board shall consist of seven members appointed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 885, § 2, 8-14-2012)  
Sec. 2-177. - Terms of office. 
Each of the seven board members appointed shall serve at the will of the council. Vacancies during the term of any member shall be filled by the city council for the remaining period. 
(Ord. No. 885, § 3, 8-14-2012)  
Sec. 2-178. - Qualifications. 
The board shall consist of citizens, all of whom shall be qualified voters and taxpayers in the city. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 4, 4-9-1985)  
Sec. 2-179. - Removal of members. 
The council, by a three-fifths vote of its members, shall have the authority to remove any member of the board from office whenever, in its discretion, the best interest of the city shall be served thereby. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 5, 4-9-1985)  
Sec. 2-180. - Meetings, officers. 
The board will name its officers to serve at its pleasure from the membership of the board. Officers shall include chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary. 
(1)  Regular meetings. The board shall meet publicly in regular session at least once each month at a time and place selected by a majority of its members. 
(2)  Special meetings. The chairperson or any three members of the board shall have the authority to call a special meeting of the board. Written notice of special meetings, except for emergency meetings, shall be given to all members at least 72 hours prior to the time of the meeting unless the time and place for the special meeting is set at a regular meeting. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 6, 4-9-1985)  
Sec. 2-181. - Board staff. 
The board shall receive the staff services of the city manager within the means provided by and appropriations made therefore by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 7, 4-9-1985)  
Sec. 2-182. - Rules and procedure. 
The board shall adopt a set of rules to govern its own meetings and procedures. The rules may be amended from time to time, but only upon notice to all members that the said proposed amendments shall be acted upon at a specified meeting. A majority vote of the board shall be required for the approval of the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 8, 4-9-1985)  
Sec. 2-183. - Absence of members. 
Absence from three consecutive regular meetings without the formal consent of the board shall be deemed to constitute a resignation of a member. The vacancy thus created shall be filled thereafter by appointment of the city council for the remainder of the term of the member so deemed to have resigned. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 9, 4-9-1985)  
Sec. 2-184. - Powers and duties. 
The board shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To confer with and advise the council on all matters concerning the economic development of the city. 
(2)  To publicize, with the consent of the city manager, the industrial and commercial advantages and opportunities of the city. 
(3)  To collect data and information as to the type of industries and commerce best suited to the city. 
(4)  To periodically survey the overall condition of the city from the standpoint of determining whether the city has a community climate for economic development and to determine the general receptiveness of the city to particular types of new industry and business. 
(5)  To publicize information as to the general advantages of industrial and commercial development in a community. 
(6)  To cooperate with all industries and businesses in the city and in the solution of any community problems which they may have, and to encourage the expansion, development and management of such industries and business so as to promote the general welfare of the city. 
(7)  To cooperate with the Coastal Bend Council of Governments in the undertaking of necessary surveys and studies in the furtherance of commercial and industrial development. 
(8)  To aid the council and planning commission in the proper zoning and orderly development of areas suitable for industrial and commercial development. 
(9)  To develop, compile, coordinate and publicize information such as, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Existing industrial and commercial concerns with the city, their addresses, type of business, number of employees and whether each serves local, regional or national markets. 
b.  Available industrial and commercial sites including number of acres, approximate price, existing zoning and proximity to trackage and highways. 
c.  Available buildings for industrial and commercial operations, including type of building, number of square feet, existing zoning and proximity to trackage and highways. 
d.  Transportation facilities, including railroads, motor carriers, water transportation, air transportation and highway facilities. 
e.  Electric power available. 
f.  Fuels available for industrial and commercial use. 
g.  Sewage disposal facilities. 
h.  Water supply facilities. 
i.  Community facilities such as fire, police and educational. 
j.  Recreational facilities. 
k.  Going wage rate in the city for the trades, skilled, and semi-skilled and white collar workers. 
l.  Availability of labor. 
m.  General community attitude toward industrial and commercial expansion, development and attraction. 
n.  Experience and program of other communities in regards to industrial and commercial expansion, development and attraction. 
(10)  To approach industries and businesses in the state and beyond, that may have an interest in relocating. 
(11)  To recommend to the council policies and particular actions in regards to industrial and commercial expansion development and attraction. 
(12)  To cooperate with and use the facilities of the state economic development commission and other state and federal programs. 
(13)  To cooperate and coordinate with the Taft Industrial Development Foundation and local lending institutions in defining available property and assembling financing packages for commercial and industrial prospects. 
(14)  The board shall have the power to appoint subcommittees of a size and nature it may deem necessary and may enlist the aid of persons and/or organizations who are not members of the board. The board shall have no power to make contracts, or impose financial obligation on the city without the authorization of the city manager or city council. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 10, 4-9-1985)  
Sec. 2-185. - Annual report. 
The board shall make a report to the city council of its activities in December of each year. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 11, 4-9-1985)  
Secs. 2-186—2-208. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq.; designation of records management officer, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.025. 
 
Sec. 2-209. - Definition of city records. 
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city, or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. 
(Ord. No. 586, § 1, 12-11-1990)  
Sec. 2-210. - Additional definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department head means the officer, who by ordinance, order, or administrative policy, is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records. 
Essential record means any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
Permanent record means any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent. 
Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
Records liaison officers mean the persons designated under section 2-218. 
Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term "records management" includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
Records management committee means the committee established in section 2-214. 
Records management officer means the person designated in section 2-213. 
Records management plan means the plan developed under section 2-215. 
Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
(Ord. No. 586, § 2, 12-11-1990)  
Sec. 2-211. - City records declared public. 
All city records, as defined in section 2-210, are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No city official or employee has, by virtue of his position, any personal or property right to such records even though he may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 586, § 3, 12-11-1990)  
Sec. 2-212. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records management practice. 
(Ord. No. 586, § 4, 12-11-1990)  
Sec. 2-213. - Designation of records management officer. 
The city secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management officer for the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his name with the director and librarian of the state library within 30 days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 586, § 5, 12-11-1990)  
Sec. 2-214. - Establishment of records management committee; duties. 
A records management committee consisting of the city manager, chief of police, director of public works, and the finance director is hereby established. The committee shall: 
(1)  Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing the records management program; 
(2)  Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and improvements if needed; 
(3)  Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer; 
(4)  Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control schedules; and 
(5)  Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 586, § 6, 12-11-1990)  
Sec. 2-215. - Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan. 
(a)  The records management officer and the records management committee shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the city, and to properly preserve those records of the city that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively. 
(b)  Once approved by the city council, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city, and records shall be created, maintained, stored, and microfilmed. 
(c)  State laws relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the records management plan adopted under it, and may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city. 
(Ord. No. 586, § 7, 12-11-1990)  
Sec. 2-216. - Duties of records management officer. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each city office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to re-establish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city; 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the city; 
(7)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all city departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation; 
(8)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and archives commission to determine if the records management program and the city's record control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(9)  Disseminate to the city manager and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(10)  Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records management program; 
(11)  Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation of the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this article; 
(12)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of the city records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law; 
(13)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(14)  Report annually to the city manager on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (13) of this section; and 
(15)  Bring to the attention of the city manager noncompliance by department heads or other city personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the Local Government Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 586, § 8, 12-11-1990)  
Sec. 2-217. - Duties and responsibilities of department heads. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and 
(3)  Maintain the records in his care and carry out the preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 586, § 9, 12-11-1990)  
Sec. 2-218. - Designation of records liaison officers. 
Each department head shall designate a member of his staff to serve as records liaison officer for the implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records management officer determines that in the best interests of the records management program more than one records liaison officer should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison officer for his department. 
(Ord. No. 586, § 10, 12-11-1990)  
Sec. 2-219. - Duties and responsibilities of records liaison officers. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records liaison officers shall: 
(1)  Conduct or supervise the conduction of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of records control schedules; 
(2)  In cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in their department; and 
(3)  Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program. 
(Ord. No. 586, § 11, 12-11-1990)  
Sec. 2-220. - Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state. 
(a)  The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall prepare records control schedules on a department by department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of city records as the records management plan may require. 
(b)  Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management office on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the city. 
(c)  Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department head and the members of the records management committee. 
(d)  Before its adoption, a record control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian. 
(Ord. No. 586, § 12, 12-11-1990)  
Sec. 2-221. - Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule. 
(a)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-215 shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison offices according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit, or the department head requests in writing to the records management committee that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(c)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the records management committee. 
(Ord. No. 586, § 13, 12-11-1990)  
Sec. 2-222. - Destruction of unscheduled records. 
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction authorization request. 
(Ord. No. 586, § 14, 12-11-1990)  
Sec. 2-223. - Records center. 
A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by section 2-215, shall be under the direct control and supervision of the records management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under section 2-215. 
(Ord. No. 586, § 15, 12-11-1990)  
Sec. 2-224. - Micrographics. 
Unless a micrographics program in a department is specifically exempted by order of the city council, all microfilming of records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the records management officer. The records management plan will establish policies and procedures for the microfilming of city records, including policies to ensure that all microfilming is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the microfilming of local government records established in rules of the state library and archives commission. The plan will also establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for microfilming and protocols for ensuring that a microfilming program that is exempted from the centralized operations is, nevertheless, subject to periodic review by the records management officer as to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency, and compliance with commission rules. 
(Ord. No. 586, § 16, 12-11-1990)  
Secs. 2-225—2-241. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PERSONNEL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 1003, adopted March 12, 2019, states the following: "Ordinance No. 975 adopting the Taft Revised Personnel Policy of September 26, 2017 is hereby repealed to allow Resolution No. 616 to stand as the City Council's official approving documentation." 
 
Secs. 2-242—2-260. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PUBLIC MEETING POLICIES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-261—2-283. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - AUDIO AND VISUAL REPRODUCTION EQUIPMENT 
 
Sec. 2-284. - Governmental body defined. 
The Open Meetings Act defines a governmental body as a municipal governmental body in the state, a deliberative body that has rulemaking or quasi-judicial power and that is classified as a department, agency, or political subdivision of a county or municipality; and a nonprofit corporation that is eligible to receive funds under the federal community services block grant program and that is authorized by this state to serve a geographic area of the state. 
(Ord. No. 757, § 1, 5-17-2005; Ord. No. 833, § 1, 10-27-2009)  
Sec. 2-285. - Rules for use of equipment during an open meeting of a governmental body. 
The following rules shall be guidelines for the use of a tape recorder, video camera, or other means of aural or visual reproduction equipment during an open meeting of a governmental body of the city: 
(1)  Any citizens desiring to use any audio or visual equipment during the conduct of an open meeting shall register his name, address and telephone number with staff prior to the commencement of the meeting; 
(2)  All audio and video equipment shall be set up at the back wall of the room and not interfere with the audience or conduct of the meeting; 
(3)  All audio and video equipment shall be turned on only at the call of the meeting and must be immediately turned off at the adjournment of the meeting; 
(4)  Any operators of the equipment will respect members of the audience or anyone not desiring to be recorded, either visually or otherwise; 
(5)  Operators of the equipment shall limit their recordings to members of the council and staff; 
(6)  Operators of the equipment are not permitted to take any photographs, make recordings or operate any equipment while in the municipal building except as allowed during the course of the meeting; 
(7)  Members of the media will be allowed to make recordings and photographs from the space reserved for members of the media, provided that they limit their recordings to members of the council, staff, and speakers appearing before the council; 
(8)  City staff shall be exempt from these rules in order to comply with section 551.021 of the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(Ord. No. 757, § 2, 5-17-2005; Ord. No. 833, § 2, 10-27-2009)  
Sec. 2-286. - Penalty for disregarding rules for use of equipment. 
Any person found to be uncooperative and noncompliant with the rules adopted by the city council of the city, after refusing to comply with an order to leave the meeting, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not exceeding $300.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 757, § 3, 5-17-2005; Ord. No. 833, § 3, 10-27-2009)  
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local regulation of alcoholic beverages, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.31 et seq.; local fee authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 11.38; local license fee authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 61.36; local regulation of billboards and electric signs, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 108.55; local option elections, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 251.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage, liquor, wine and vinous liquor, and beer are as defined in V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.04. 
(Ord. No. 384, § 2, 4-8-1975)  
Sec. 4-2. - Hours of sale; retailers not for on premises consumption—Beer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who retails beer as a retailer, manufacturer or distributor not selling beer or offering beer for sale for consumption on the premises where sold, or offered for sale, to sell beer or offer the same for sale within the corporate limits of the city: 
(1)  On Sunday at any time between the hours of 12:00 noon and 12:00 midnight. 
(2)  On any day except Sunday at any time between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, and Saturday between 7:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 384, § 3, 4-8-1975)  
Sec. 4-3. - Hours of sale; retailers not for on premises consumption—Alcoholic beverages other than beer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who retails alcoholic beverages, other than beer, as a retailer, manufacturer or distributor not selling such alcoholic beverages or offering alcoholic beverages for sale or consumption on the premises where sold, or offered for sale, to sell such alcoholic beverages or offer the same for sale within the corporate limits of the city: 
(1)  On Sunday at all, nor on Christmas Day. 
(2)  On all other days except Sunday between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 384, § 4, 4-8-1975)  
Sec. 4-4. - Restricted locations for sales. 
Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33, the sale of alcoholic beverages within the city is prohibited by a dealer whose place of business is within 300 feet of a church, public school, or public hospital. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the public schools shall be in a direct line from the property line of the public school to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across intersections. 
(Ord. No. 642, § 1, 9-10-1996)  
Sec. 4-5. - License and permit fees—Generally. 
There are hereby prescribed and levied annual occupation taxes or license fees upon persons, firms or corporations carrying on business within the city as follows: 
(1)  From the holder of any retail dealers off premise license, as defined and required by the state, domiciled in the city or carrying on business therein under such permit, an annual tax or fee of one-half that levied by the state for such permit. 
(2)  From the holder of each brewers permit, as defined and required by the state, domiciled in the city and carrying on business therein under such permit, an annual tax or fee of one-half that levied by the state for such permit. 
(3)  From the holder of each distillers permit, an annual tax or fee of one-half that levied by the state for each such permit. 
(4)  From the holder of each winery permit, an annual tax or fee of one-half that levied by the state for each such permit; provided, however, there is not included herein nor covered hereby the holder of a Class B winery permit as defined in state law. 
(5)  From the holder of each rectifier's permit, an annual tax or fee of one-half that levied by the state for each such permit. 
(6)  From the holder of each wholesaler's permit, an annual tax or fee of one-half that levied by the state for each such permit. 
(7)  From the holder of each beer and wine wholesaler's permit, an annual tax or fee of one-half that levied by the state for each such permit. 
(8)  From the holder of each package store permit, an annual tax or fee of one-half that levied by the state for each such permit; provided that the annual tax or fee from the holder of a package store permit to sell wine only shall be one-half that levied by the state for each such permit. 
(Ord. No. 384, § 7, 4-8-1975) 
State Law reference— Local fees authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 11.38.  
Sec. 4-6. - License and permit fees—Advance payment. 
All taxes or fees prescribed by section 4-5 shall be paid in advance for one year, unless such tax or fee is collected for only a portion of the year. In such event, the fee required shall cover the period of time according to criteria as established from time to time by the city. The fractional part of any remaining months shall be counted as one month in calculating the fee that shall be due. 
(Ord. No. 384, § 8, 4-8-1975)  
Sec. 4-7. - License and permit fees—Issuance of permit. 
Upon payment of the applicable tax or fee herein prescribed to the tax assessor-collector and exhibition to him of a permit duly issued by the state to the applicant or person paying such tax or fee, the tax assessor-collector shall in the name of the city issue and deliver to such applicant or person a permit to engage in business in the city of the character described in and authorized by the permit from the state held by such applicant or person. The permit so issued in the name of the city shall authorize the conduct of such business upon the premises described in the permit from the state and shall remain in force only so long as such permit from the state remains in force. 
(Ord. No. 384, § 9, 4-8-1975)  
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 6-1—6-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AMUSEMENT MACHINES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 950, §§ I—XVI, adopted March 8, 2016, repealed and reenacted article II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article II, sections 6-19—6-31 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 886, §§ III—XV, adopted August 14, 2012. 
 
Sec. 6-19. - Definitions. 
As pertaining to this article the following definitions will have their specific meaning as follows: 
Amusement center means any business establishment with two or more coin operated machines used for recreation and amusement purposes, or shuffleboard, pool, billiard tables, or similar machines or devices. 
Coin-operated machine used for recreation or amusement purposes means any machine or device of any kind or character which is operated with coins or metal slugs, tokens, tickets, coupons, checks, or similar items and which dispenses or is used or is capable of being used or operated for amusement, pleasure, skill or recreation. This term expressly includes pinball, football, coin-operated pool tables, shuffleboard tables, and other coin-operated machines, including those commonly called 8-liners, which dispense or afford skill or pleasure. This term expressly excludes coin-operated music machines, pay toilets, pay telephones, coin-operated rides for children and all other coin-operated machines which dispense or vend merchandise, commodities, confections, or music. This term shall also include machines operated by currency or legal tender. 
Owner means any person, firm, company, association or corporation owning any coin-operated machines used for recreation, or pool or billiard tables from which he/she derives a profit, save and except local religious, charitable and educational organizations authorized under the laws of the state. 
Pool or billiard table means any table surrounded by a ledge or cushion, with or without pockets, upon which balls are propelled by a stick or cue, and where any player thereon does not or is not required to make a coin deposit causing an electrical connection of any nature or kind before such game may be actually commenced. 
Recreation or amusement machines mean any coin operated pool or billiard table or any other coin-operated machine used for amusement purposes, any of which table or machine is operated for profit. 
(Ord. No. 950, § II, 3-8-2016; Ord. No. 951, 3-22-2016)  
Sec. 6-20. - Occupation tax. 
(a)  There is levied an annual occupation tax equal to one-fourth of the amount levied by the state on coin-operated machines used for recreation or amusement purposes, or pool or billiard tables. The occupation tax shall be levied upon the owner of such coin-operated machines, or pool or billiard tables, save and except local religious, charitable and educational organizations authorized under the laws of the state; and the tax levied herein shall be paid to the City of Taft, through the permit department, who shall issue an occupation tax receipt and, for each machine on which the occupation tax is paid, an occupation tax tag. The occupation tax shall be due and payable on January 1st of each year or upon commencing business. Such occupation tax receipt shall specify the number of recreation or amusement machines, pool or billiard tables for which it is issued and the address of the legal owner. The occupation tax shall be affixed to each machine, pool or billiard table on which the occupation tax is paid. 
(b)  In the event the owner of any of the recreation and amusement machine wishes to substitute a different machine for one within the city on which the occupation tax has been paid, the city shall be notified, so documentation of the substitution is on file and city personnel will remove the tax tag from the machine to be placed and place it upon the substitute machine. Provided, however, that the machine that is replaced by the substitute machine shall not be operated for profit within the city again until an occupation tax tag is affixed to it. In the event the tax tag is mutilated, the owner will turn in the mutilated occupation tax tag to the permit department and receives a new tag. There shall be a $5.00 charge for the new tag. 
(Ord. No. 950, § III, 3-8-2016; Ord. No. 951, 3-22-2016)  
Sec. 6-21. - Location of recreation or amusement machines. 
Within each place of business in which recreation or amusement machines are operated for a profit, the machine will be so situated so that the said machines will be paid for and played in full, open public view. 
(Ord. No. 950, § IV, 3-8-2016; Ord. No. 951, 3-22-2016)  
Sec. 6-22. - Minor's presence restricted. 
No person who has the control of any business establishment wherein is kept, used or operated for profit any recreation or amusement machines shall permit or allow any minor under the age of 18 years to play thereon or to operate any such machine during school hours or in violation of the juvenile curfew ordinance. It shall be the duty of any person who is the proprietor or keeper of such business establishment to post conspicuously in his/her place of business in the vicinity of the machines' location within the place of business the following sign: "Minors Under the Age of 18 Years Not Allowed Here During School Hours or in violation of Juvenile Curfew Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 950, § V, 3-8-2016; Ord. No. 951, 3-22-2016) 
Cross reference— Curfew, §§ 36-82 et seq.  
Sec. 6-23. - Penalty for failure to pay occupation tax. 
The city manager or designee is authorized to seal any recreation or amusement machine, or pool or billiard table on which the occupation tax has not been paid. The permit department is authorized to charge a fee of $5.00 per machine for the release of any recreation or amusement machine, pool or billiard table that is sealed as provided above for nonpayment of the occupation tax. The owner and/or operator shall be responsible should any seal affixed in the name of the city be broken, and anyone who removes from the location any recreation or amusement machine, pool or billiard table shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor under the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 950, § VI, 3-8-2016; Ord. No. 951, 3-22-2016)  
Sec. 6-24. - Inspections. 
The city manager shall appoint or designate an authorized representative to make periodic inspections of premises licensed under this article to determine compliance with the building provisions, applicable code provisions and any other ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 950, § VII, 3-8-2016; Ord. No. 951, 3-22-2016)  
Sec. 6-25. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or business entity that owns an amusement center, save and except local religious, charitable or education organizations authorized under the laws of the state, to operate such business within the city without first having obtained an appropriate license from the city permit department. The initial application for license shall be made with the city permit department and renewed thereafter on or before the anniversary date of each succeeding year. Whoever shall violate this section shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor under this Code. 
(Ord. No. 950, § VIII, 3-8-2016; Ord. No. 951, 3-22-2016)  
Sec. 6-26. - Fee. 
There is levied an annual license fee per location on each person or business entity that owns an amusement center within the city. The city of permit department is authorized to collect this annual license fee, which shall be due and payable on January 1st of each year or upon commencing business. In the event that a person or business entity seeks to increase the amount of machines during the course of the year, an additional payment of a license and occupational fee will be due and payable immediately. The city will be paid under the guidelines set forth herein. The annual license and occupational fee for such business shall be based $1,000.00 per machine. 
(Ord. No. 950, § IX, 3-8-2016; Ord. No. 951, 3-22-2016)  
Sec. 6-27. - Nuisance declared. 
Because of the rapid proliferation of such businesses in the city and the observed congestion, late hours, potential for being an attractive nuisance to minors and the questioned legality of such activities, the city council hereby finds that a further proliferation and concentration of such businesses constitutes a nuisance to the health, safety and welfare of the city. Accordingly, subsequent to the passage of the ordinance from which article derives, no license will be issued for any such establishment unless such is at least 300 feet in a direct line from any of its public entrances to the nearest property line of a church, hospital, or school. Any business-entity currently operating under a valid license issued under a prior ordinance and prior to the passage of the ordinance from which this article derives shall be permitted to continue in operation, provided, however, if they should cease operations for a period of 90 days or more, or should they violate any of the provisions of this article or any other applicable city, state, or federal law related to such amusement centers or machines, their license shall be subject to revocation and the same may not be renewed unless and until the applicant for a license meets all provisions of any applicable law, including the above spacing requirements. 
(Ord. No. 950, § X, 3-8-2016; Ord. No. 951, 3-22-2016)  
Sec. 6-28. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  A game room may operate between the hours of 8:00 a.m.—11:00 p.m. CST from Sunday through Thursday and 8:00 a.m.—11:59 p.m. CST on Friday and Saturday so as to limit the increase of personal crimes such as assaults and robberies. 
(b)  An owner or operator commits a Class C misdemeanor offense if the owner or operator intentionally or knowingly operates a game room in violation of this section punishable by a fine of up to $2,000.00 per violation per day. 
(Ord. No. 950, § XI, 3-8-2016; Ord. No. 951, 3-22-2016)  
Sec. 6-29. - Game room memberships. 
(a)  A game room owner or operator shall not restrict entry to a game room or prohibit the use of an amusement redemption machine by a patron through the requirement of a game room membership. 
(b)  An owner or operator commits a Class C misdemeanor offense if the owner or operator intentionally or knowingly operates a game room in violation of this subsection punishable by a fine of up to $2,000.00 per violation per day. 
(Ord. No. 950, § XII, 3-8-2016; Ord. No. 951, 3-22-2016)  
Sec. 6-30. - Term, nontransferable. 
Any license issued pursuant to this article shall be non-transferable for the full period of its effectiveness. 
(Ord. No. 950, § XIII, 3-8-2016; Ord. No. 951, 3-22-2016)  
Sec. 6-31. - Display. 
A licensed issued pursuant to this article shall at all times be displayed in some conspicuous place within the licensed place of business. 
(Ord. No. 950, § XIV, 3-8-2016; Ord. No. 951, 3-22-2016)  
Sec. 6-32. - Revocation. 
The power of revocation shall be exercised upon the following grounds only: 
(1)  For the violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(2)  For knowingly permitting the presence on the premises of a person under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs. 
(3)  For knowingly permitting disorderly conduct or immoral practices on the premises. 
(4)  For knowingly permitting the violation of the laws of the state of this article or any other ordinance of the city. 
(5)  For failure to comply with the regulations of this article relating to minors. 
(Ord. No. 950, § XV, 3-8-2016; Ord. No. 951, 3-22-2016)  
Sec. 6-33. - Penalty clause. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article for which no other penalty is set forth shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty of not more than $2,000.00 per machine, per incident or per day in which such condition exists. Each day that such violation is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. The term "person" as used in this section shall include the owner, occupant, mortgager or vendor in possession, assignee or renter, receiver, executor, trustee, or lessee, agent or another person, form or corporation directly, or indirectly, in control of a building or tract of land. 
(Ord. No. 950, § XVI, 3-8-2016; Ord. No. 951, 3-22-2016)  
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Health and safety of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.001 et seq.; Type A municipality may regulate animals running at large, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.026; rabies control, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.001 et seq.; municipality may adopt rabies control chapter of state law, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.013; municipality may establish local rabies control program, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.015; designation of local rabies control authority, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.017; subchapter of state law does not preempt municipal regulation or prohibition of dangerous wild animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.116(b). 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
Animal means any vertebrate animal other than human beings. 
Animal nuisance means the public nuisance created by an animal or animals within the city limits that affect the quality of life or persons of normal nervous sensibilities, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Excessive noise produced by barking, whining, digging, or any other noise activity. 
(2)  Destruction of public or private property belonging to any person other than the owner. 
(3)  Any foul or noxious odor produced by the offending animal or animals. 
(4)  Allowing the animals to urinate or defecate on any public or private property other than that of the owner unless such waste is removed and properly disposed by the custodian of the animal. 
At large means not physically restrained to the premises of the owner or not under the direct control of the owner, handler, or trainer (direct control shall mean securely confined by leash, chain, or other devise not more than six feet in length held by a person capable of controlling the animal.) 
Cat kennel means any place in which more than three feline animals over three months of age are confined. This definition excludes animal hospitals. 
Dog kennel means any building, structure or enclosure, where three canine animals over the age of three months of age are confined. This definition excludes animal hospitals. 
Dog means any male or female canine. 
Household means those who dwell in the same residence and compose a family. 
Hybrid animal means any offspring of two animals of different species. 
Owner means any person or legal entity owning, harboring, or caring for an animal. 
Provocation means any purposeful act that causes an animal to bite, scratch or otherwise attack in protection of self, owner, or owner's property. 
Restraint or restrained means any physical means of controlling an animal, to include but not limited to cage, fence, leash (or chain) or automobile (in the cab or tied). 
Street line means the nearest edge of any sidewalk, or if there is none, then the nearest edge of any curb, or if there is none, then the nearest edge of the improved portion of the public right-of-way. 
Vicious animal means any animal with the propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack human or domestic animals unprovoked. Any animal that has attacked or attempted to attack humans or domestic animals except when the victim is unlawfully on the premises of the owner. 
Wild animal means an undomesticated animal with the propensity, tendency, or disposition for unprovoked attacks on humans or domestic animals. 
Working day means any day of the week excluding weekends and city observed holidays. 
(Ord. No. 866, § I, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 956, 8-9-2016)  
Sec. 8-2. - Animal control officers and duties. 
(a)  Officers. The positions of the chief animal control officers and deputy animal control officers are hereby established. 
(b)  Department. The animal control department shall function as a department of the city subject to guidelines and procedures adopted by the city council for its operations. 
(c)  Compensation. The chief animal control officer and deputy animal control officer shall receive such compensation as shall be established by the city's annual fiscal budget. The deputy animal control officer is hereby authorized and directed to perform, in conjunction with and under the supervision of the chief animal control officer, the powers and duties herein bestowed upon and required to be performed by said chief animal control officer. 
(d)  Police powers. The animal control officer shall be vested with the necessary police powers for the exclusive purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, and it shall be his duty to issue citations for violations of any of the provisions of this chapter. Both shall enforce all of the laws of the city, county, and state relating to the care, treatment and impounding of animals and to the prevention of cruelty to animals. This exercise of said police powers shall be under the direct supervision of the chief of police or designated representative. 
(e)  Powers to collect fees. The animal control officer shall be vested with the powers to collect fees established by this section, subsection (m) and enforce the provisions of this chapter as described herein. All sums so collected shall be paid over to the finance department promptly as directed. 
(f)  Duties. It is hereby made the duty of the animal control officer to enforce any other sections of this chapter whether as a duty or not. 
(g)  Interference with duty. No person shall rescue or attempt to neither rescue any animal mentioned herein from the possession of any animal control officer nor interfere with the chief animal control officer, or his deputies, in the performance of their official duties. 
(h)  Entering the premises. The animal control officer or any police officer of the city is authorized to enter upon any premises upon which any animal is kept, for the purposes of taking up, seizing or impounding any animal found running at large, or staked, herded or grazing thereon, contrary to provisions of this chapter for the purpose of ascertaining whether such animal is duly vaccinated for the control of rabies as provided in this chapter, or for the purpose of inspecting the premises to ascertain whether any law of the city or state relating to the care, treatment or impounding of animals or the prevention of cruelty to animals is being violated, provided there is probable cause to believe there is a violation. 
(i)  Animal control shelter. There shall be provided by the city a suitable building or enclosure to keep and safely hold all animals herein enumerated which are subject to be impounded, which shall be known and designated as the "animal control shelter". 
(j)  Impounding. It shall be the duty of the animal control officer or any peace officer to take up, impound, or safely keep any animal found to be in violation of this chapter. 
(1)  Animal control officers or other law enforcement officers shall have the power to impound animals which create an animal nuisance for the purpose of abating the nuisance as follows: 
a.  On public property in all cases. 
b.  On private property, if: 
1.  The consent of the property owner or resident is obtained; 
2.  The officer reasonably believes there is immediate or imminent danger or peril to the public if the animal in question is not impounded; 
3.  If the animal or animals are found to be in violation of subsection (h); 
4.  Authorized by appropriate courts of law, or 
5.  If property is vacant of buildings and residents to serve as a custodian for the animal. 
(2)  Animal control officers or other law enforcement officer shall have the power to impound unrestrained animals for the purpose of abating the nuisance as follows: 
a.  On public property in all cases; 
b.  On private property with the consent of the property owner or resident; 
c.  On private property when in pursuit of an animal, which he believes, is subject to impoundment under the provisions of this chapter; 
d.  When authorized by an appropriate court of law; 
e.  On private if property is vacant of buildings and residents to serve as a custodian for the animal. 
(k)  Care of animal. It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to provide impounded animals with adequate food, water, and shelter for the period of their impoundment. 
(l)  Reclaiming. The animal control officer shall make every attempt within reason to notify the owner of an animal, at his last known residence, immediately after impounding either by mail, telephone, or personal contact. The owner of an impounded animal may reclaim said animal at any time prior to final disposition of said animal upon payment of all charges incurred by said impoundment. 
(m)  Fees. The animal control officer shall charge, and collect the following fees for services and impounding animals. 
(1)  Dogs and cats: $25.00 for impounding plus $10.00 per day board. 
(2)  Rabies vaccination (vaccination or proof of current vaccination is required prior to release of any dog or cat): Charge based on veterinarians fee plus $5.00 for transportation of animal. 
(3)  Livestock: $75.00 for impounding plus $25.00 per day board. 
(4)  Other fees: 
a.  Euthanizations dogs and cats: $10.00. 
b.  Trap use deposit: There shall be paid to the city a refundable $15.00 deposit for each trap issued by the animal control officer which shall be refundable upon their return in like conditions as when issued. 
(5)  Payment of any applicable fees is due in advance of the animal's release to owner or claimant. 
(6)  Any person surrendering a pet for any reason shall be assessed a fee of $40.00. 
(n)  Accounting for sums collected. The animal control officer shall pay over to the finance director all sums collected by him, pursuant to the terms of this chapter, promptly as directed. 
(o)  Revenue allocation. All sums received by the city pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be deposited into the city's general fund. 
(p)  Destruction of impounded animals unfit for use by age, crippled, diseased, or wild. It shall be the duty of the animal control officers to order the destruction of any animal lawfully taken into custody, which in the opinion of the animal control officer is, by reason of old age, unfit for use, or which is infected with a dangerous or communicable disease, or which is in an incurably crippled condition, or which is adjudged by a report of a licensed veterinarian to be afflicted with any painful, incurable disease. A reasonable attempt shall be made to notify the owner (if known) prior to taking action, however the humane destruction of a sick or injured animal may necessitate immediate action. 
(q)  Disposition of vicious animals. 
(1)  The chief of police, or his designee, may order the seizure and humane euthanization of any vicious animal found within the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  The chief of police, or his designee may order that a vicious animal be: 
a.  Permanently removed from the corporate limits of the city; 
b.  Transferred permanently to an appropriate animal care facility; or 
c.  Euthanized in the event that an animal is found in violation of any order described in subsection a. or b. above. 
(Ord. No. 866, § II, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 956, 8-9-2016)  
Sec. 8-3. - Dogs and cats. 
(a)  Tags must be shown. No person shall fail or refuse to show the animal control officer or any police officer of said city, the rabies vaccination tag for any duly vaccinated dog or cat kept or remaining within any home or upon any enclosed premises under his immediate control. Said vaccination tag shall be attached to a neck collar and be worn by the animal at all times. If a tag is lost it shall be the responsibility of the owner to replace the tag as soon as possible in order to return to compliance of this section. 
(b)  Removal of vaccination tags. No unauthorized person shall remove from any dog or cat any collar, harness, or other devise to which is attached a vaccination tag for the current year, or to remove such tag there from. 
(c)  Counterfeiting tags. No person shall imitate or counterfeit the tags in this section provided for, or shall use any imitation or counterfeit of such tag. 
(d)  Dogs running at large prohibited. No person owning, harboring, or caring for a dog shall allow said animal to be off the premises of its owner unless securely confined by a strong leash not to exceed six feet in length continuously held by a person capable of controlling the dog or confined to an automobile. 
(e)  Impounding. It shall be the duty of the animal control officer and of any police officer of said city, to take up all dogs found in violation hereof. When such dog is taken up by a police officer, it shall be delivered by him to the animal control officer. All such dogs shall be impounded in the city's animal control shelter. 
(f)  Rabies vaccination required. Every person owning or harboring a dog or cat in the city shall cause such dog or cat to be vaccinated for rabies with an approved rabies vaccine: 
(1)  Immediately upon it's procurement if it is over four months old and has not been so vaccinated within a period of one year prior to the procurement of said animal, or 
(2)  As soon as possible after the dog or cat has attained the age of three months, provided, however, that such vaccination has been accomplished by the time it attains the age of four months. 
(g)  Annual vaccination required. Every person owning or harboring in the city a dog or cat which has been vaccinated with an approved vaccine shall cause the dog or cat to be revaccinated within a period not to exceed one year. 
(h)  Rabies certificate. Every person keeping, harboring or having in the city any dog or cat required by this section to be vaccinated shall at all times while such dog or cat is thus kept, harbored or had, have in his possession a certificate issued by a person licensed by the state or any other state or nation to practice veterinary medicine, which certificate shall specify that such dog or cat has been vaccinated in accordance with provisions of this section. At the time a dog or cat is vaccinated, a vaccination tag shall be stamped with the date of vaccination and the type of vaccine used. 
(i)  Rabies vaccination evidence. At the time a dog or cat is vaccinated, a vaccination tag shall be stamped with the date of vaccination and the type of vaccine used. It is the pet owner's responsibility to keep in his/her possession the certificate issued to them at the time of the animal's vaccination and to produce said certificate if requested by the animal control officer or police officer. 
(j)  Rabies precautions. Officers or persons capturing dogs or cats suspected of having rabies under the provisions of this section shall separately confine such dog or cat, shall report the capture to a licensed veterinarian, and shall submit said animal to the examination of a veterinarian. It shall be the duty of the veterinarian to ascertain whether or not the dog or cat is infected with rabies. Such dog or cat shall not be killed, but shall be kept in confinement until further observation of such dog or cat claimed by its owner is not necessary for the determination of the presence or the absence of rabies. Stray or unclaimed animals shall be processed as allowed by state health regulations incurring the least expense upon the residents of the city. 
(k)  Unlawful for any person to fail to notify the city's police department or animal control officer regarding rabid dog. It shall be unlawful for any person having knowledge of the whereabouts of an animal known to have or suspected of having rabies or has shown symptoms of rabies to fail, refuse or neglect to allow the city's police department or animal control officer, to make an inspection or examination that such animal has or does not have rabies. The city's police department or animal control officer shall likewise be notified of any person bitten by an animal of a species subject to rabies, whether or not the animal is suspected of having rabies. 
(l)  Ten-day quarantine. 
(1)  Whenever it is shown that any dog, cat, or other animal without proof of current rabies vaccination has bitten any person, no person owning or harboring said animal, upon order of the animal control officer or any police officer, shall fail, refuse, neglect to take or cause to be promptly taken, such animal to a veterinarian to be held in quarantine for a period of ten days. Such animal may not be released from quarantine without the authorization of the veterinarian in charge. The total cost of the confinement for a ten-day period shall be borne by the owner. 
(2)  The owner of a duly vaccinated animal that has bitten or scratched a person, causing skin abrasion, will assume personal responsibility for the quarantine of said animal for the ten days only under the following circumstances: 
a.  The facilities must be sufficiently secure so as to prevent the escape of said animal to prevent contact of said animal with any person other than the immediate family of the owner. 
b.  The facilities are inspected and approved by the animal control officer. 
c.  The animal is examined by a licensed veterinarian at least on the first day of quarantine period and the last day of the quarantine period. 
d.  If the animal shall become ill or dies suddenly the animal control officer shall be notified immediately and shall conduct an on-site visual inspection of the animal. 
e.  Release from quarantine may be accomplished only by written authorization by the inspecting veterinarian. 
(3)  If an animal is believed to have rabies or has been bitten by an animal suspected of having rabies, such animal shall, upon order of the animal control officer either is quarantined by a licensed veterinarian for the appropriate period of time or humanely euthanized. If human exposure to such an animal has occurred, the head of such animal shall be removed and submitted to the state department of health lab for rabies diagnosis. 
(4)  The violation of the observation confinement of the biting animal as provided in subsection (2) shall be just cause for seizure and confinement of the animal at a licensed veterinary facility. 
(5)  No wild animals will be placed in quarantine. All wild animals involved in biting incidents will be humanely euthanized in such a manner that the brain is not mutilated. The brain shall be submitted to a state department of health lab for rabies diagnosis. 
(6)  The total cost of the confinement period shall be borne by the owner or the animal with the following exception: 
If it can be proved that such a bite or scratch was caused by a provocation, the person responsible for said provocation shall bear the expense of any quarantine, provided however, that the animal in question was not in violation of any provision of this section at the time of the attack. 
(m)  Knowledge of bite; duty of report. If any animal within the corporate limits of the city shall bite or scratch any person or so injure any person so as to cause a skin abrasion, and such facts be known to the owner of such animal, such owner shall immediately give his name and address together with the animal's license tag number to the person bitten or injured, provided, however that the person so bitten or injured is over 18 years of age. If the person bitten or injured is under the age of 18 years then such required information shall be given to a parent or guardian. In addition thereto, the owner of such animal shall immediately thereafter, and in no event later than 24 hours thereafter, notify the police department or animal control officer giving his name, animal's vaccination tag number, the name of the victim, and any other information that the police department or animal control officer may require. 
(n)  Application for returning impounded animal. Subject to the other provisions of this section, any person may make application to the animal control officer for the return of any dog, cat, or other animal, and upon presentation of proof satisfactory to said animal control officer that such person is the owner or is rightfully entitled to the possession of such animal, may recover the same upon payment of any required fee including a fee for rabies vaccination if such is not current. If an animal so impounded is not current for rabies vaccination, the animal control officer shall take said animal to a licensed veterinarian for rabies vaccination prior to release to its owner. 
(o)  Period of impounding and final disposition. The city encourages and supports development of "pet adoption" programs by organizations within the community, and will cooperatively work with such organizations to encourage responsible pet adoption. 
(1)  Dogs and cats—Three working days. 
(2)  Dogs and cats shall be kept for two working days following the minimum period of impoundment for possible sale to the public, or transfer to a pet adoption program. 
(p)  Maximum number of animals. 
(1)  No household shall keep or harbor more than four dogs or four cats or a combination of dogs and cats not to exceed four in the corporate limits of the city except temporarily while any of the dogs or cats hereto allowed is nursing a litter of puppies or kittens until said litter attains the age of three months at which time the household must return to compliance of this section. The provisions of animal nuisance, as hereto defined, shall apply during this exemption. 
(2)  No boarding kennel shall be allowed within the city except exempted animal hospitals. 
(Ord. No. 866, § III, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 956, 8-9-2016)  
Sec. 8-4. - Other animals. 
(a)  Animals not allowed within the city. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and no person shall keep or maintain at their residence any of the following animals within the city. 
(1)  Horse, colt, jack or mule; 
(2)  Goats or sheep; 
(3)  Cattle including ox, steer, bull, cow or calf; 
(4)  Pigs or hogs; and 
(5)  Bees, or hive of bees. 
(6)  Monkeys. 
(b)  Maximum number of fowls and rabbits. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and no person shall keep or maintain at their residence a cumulative total exceeding ten chickens, geese, ducks, turkeys, pheasants, doves, pigeons, squabs, roosters, similar fowl, or rabbits within the city. An adult rooster (crowing age) may be substituted for one of the ten fowl allowed as per subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Fowls and rabbits not to run at large. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and no person shall allow fowls or rabbits to run or fly at large or go upon the premises of any other person, or upon a public way in the city. Said animals shall be kept in a confined area no closer than 30 feet to the nearest street line, or 20 feet to the nearest property line. 
(d)  Sale of rabbit or fowl. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the display or sale of any rabbit or fowl by any dealer, hatchery, or store engaged in the business of selling the same to be raised for food purposes whenever such dealer, hatchery, or store has proper facilities for the display and care of such animals or fowl and is in compliance with city zoning regulations. 
(e)  Advertisement, sale, and redemption fee for impounded livestock. After giving five days notice in the newspaper, the animal control officer may sell at public stockyards any impounded animal covered by ordinance. Redemption by the owner or his agent is possible any time prior to sale by paying $75.00 impounding fee plus $15.00 per day board. In the case of redemption, all advertising fees shall be paid by the owner. All moneys so received by virtue of sale of such animals shall be turned over to the city's finance director for deposit into the city's general fund. 
(f)  Disposition of animals. Any animal covered under this section not sold or redeemed may be disposed of by the animal control officer or police chief in whatever manner is in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 866, § IV, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 956, 8-9-2016)  
Sec. 8-5. - Wild animals. 
(a)  Certain animals prohibited. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and no person or business shall keep or maintain in the city any wild or vicious animal or reptile of any nature whatsoever, including hybrid animals. 
(b)  Carnivals or circuses. Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to the temporary display of wild or vicious animals or reptiles in carnivals, zoos, museums, exhibitions, or circuses provided that prior city council approval has been obtained for such a display and inspected by the animal control officer and that such animals or reptiles are so restricted so as to pose no threat to the public safety and provided further that such animals so displayed will be well cared for, free from disease and kept in sanitary conditions. 
(c)  Exception for transportation of animals through city. The requirements of this section shall not be applicable to persons transporting wild or vicious animals through the city providing that the transporter has taken adequate safeguards to protect the public and does not park the transporting vehicle within the city limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 866, § V, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 956, 8-9-2016)  
Sec. 8-6. - Miscellaneous rules. 
(a)  Carcass of animal. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and no person shall cause, suffer or permit the carcass of any animal to remain upon any lot, premises or place owned, controlled or occupied by him or it for a period of more than 24 hours. 
(b)  Manure bins and removal of manure. Every person owning or occupying premises where manure from any pigeon, fowl, rabbit or other animal accumulates shall provide for the removal of such manure daily, boxes, bins or receptacles of a design and construction acceptable to the animal control officer shall be provided by the owner or occupant of such premises, and such boxes, bins or receptacles shall be used only for the purpose of containing the accumulation of manure, which shall be placed therein or removed there from, and in no instance shall manure be so placed in such boxes or receptacles in such a manner as to prevent the tight closing of the lid; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall apply to manure which is spread as fertilizer over or around cultivated plants, vines, vegetables, lawns, bushes or trees, or to manure kept by any nursery for commercial fertilizer purposes, unless such manure creates a nuisance either from fly breeding or excessive obnoxious odors. Said boxes, bins or receptacles shall be constructed of brick, stone, concrete, metal or wood lines with metal or other sound material, and shall be proof against access to the contents thereof by files. The contents of said boxes, bins, or receptacles shall be removed once a week. 
(c)  Animal control officer may order premises and manure bins cleaned and disinfected. No person who is ordered by the animal control officer to clean or disinfect any stables, bar, corral, stall, pen, coop, building, or place in which any fowl, bird or other animal kept, or who is ordered by such officer to clean or disinfect any box, bin or receptacle used for the accumulation of manure shall fail, neglect to clean or disinfect such stable, bar, corral, stall, pen, coop, building place, box, bin, or receptacle. 
(d)  Animals prohibited in certain areas. No person shall allow any animal into an area where food is prepared for commercial purposes with the exception of dogs aiding the seeing or hearing impaired. 
(e)  Fee a debt. The amount of any fee imposed by this section shall be defined a debt to the city and any person keeping any animal without having complied with the provisions of this section shall be liable to an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the fees or penalties imposed and required by this section to be paid for the privilege of keeping such animal and it shall be the duty of the animal control officer to cause a civil complaint to be filed against any person violating any of the provisions of this section, and the city chief of police shall cause an action to be brought against any person failing to pay penalty required by the provisions of this section for the recovery of the same. 
(f)  Keeping diseased animals prohibited; exception. No person except a licensed veterinarian shall keep any animal which is known or believed by him to be infected with any dangerous or communicable disease, or which is afflicted with any painful disease believed by him to be incurable, without written permission to do so from an animal control officer of the city. 
(g)  Rabies. Whenever it is suspected that any animal shall have contracted rabies, or shall have been bitten by another animal having, or suspected of having rabies, the animal control officer, or police officers will be immediately notified and subsection 8-3(j) shall apply. 
(h)  Penalties. A person who shall be found guilty of violating this chapter may be assessed a fine of not more than $1,000.00. Each day the violation occurs may be deemed a separate offense. Repeat offenses may be punished by no less than $200.00 nor more than $1,000.00. 
(i)  Applicability of chapter. Whenever any reference is made to any portion of this chapter such reference applies to all amendments and additions thereto now or hereafter made. The present tense includes the past and future tense and the future, the present. Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty imposed upon, the animal control officer and other public officers, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of the officers or by a person authorized, pursuant to law, by the officer, unless this chapter expressly provides otherwise. 
(j)  Unlawful to rescue animals. It shall be unlawful to rescue or turn loose any animal impounded by the city by whatever method. 
(k)  Reclamation and prosecution. The owner of any animal impounded remains subject to prosecution for violation of this chapter regardless of whether or not such animal is reclaimed. Such owner shall remain liable for all fees incurred by said animal regardless of whether or not the animal is reclaimed. 
(l)  Chemicals/traps prohibited. The use of cyanic pallet traps or any other kind of trap containing a substance noxious to man is prohibited within the city limits, unless deemed necessary by the Texas Department of Health for the control of communicable disease. 
(m)  Inhumane traps prohibited. No person shall set up or allow to be set up on his property within the city limits any kind of trap that tears, cuts, or in any way mutilates the prey. This will not apply to traps used to catch common rodents, i.e., rats, mice, gophers, and ground squirrels. Such traps may be used on the order of the animal control officer for the control of communicable diseases. 
(n)  Tin traps prohibited. Tin traps are not to be allowed in the city limits unless ordered by the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 866, § VI, 9-13-2011; Ord. No. 956, 8-9-2016)  
Sec. 8-7. - Dogs running at large. 
(a)  No dog, licensed or not, shall be allowed to run at large or upon the premises of anyone other than the owner. If any such dog is found running at large in violation of this section, and the owner is unknown the dog shall be taken up and impounded. 
(b)  If a dog is found running at large in violation of this section and the owner is known, the dog will be taken to the owner and the owner may be issued a citation for failure to keep his dog from running at large, or the dog may be taken up and impounded. 
(c)  If a dog is found running at large in violation of this section and the owner is unknown and the dog cannot be safely taken up and impounded, such dog may be tranquilized and taken up and impounded, or when such dog be deemed vicious or dangerous to persons or other animals and cannot be tranquilized, the dog may be humanely euthanized by a police officer or under the supervision of a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 532, div. II, § 3, 8-12-1986)  
Sec. 8-8. - Muzzling vicious cats and dogs. 
The animal control officer may order a vicious cat or dog to be kept muzzled, or that such cat or dog may be kept within a sufficient enclosure. Failure to keep such animal muzzled or within a sufficient enclosure, is deemed a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 532, div. II, § 4, 8-12-1986)  
Sec. 8-9. - Abandonment and neglect. 
No person who has within his control, either temporarily or permanently, any cat or dog, shall abandon the same in the city, nor shall any person allow any cat or dog to be left without proper food, water, and shelter within the city. Failure by an owner to redeem an impounded cat or dog within three days constitutes abandonment. 
(Ord. No. 532, div. II, § 5, 8-12-1986)  
Sec. 8-10. - Proclamation ordering muzzling of cats or dogs; destruction of rabies suspect cat or dog. 
(a)  Whenever it becomes necessary to safeguard the public from the dangers of rabies, the mayor, if he deems it necessary, shall issue a proclamation ordering every person owning or keeping a cat or dog to confine it securely on his premises unless such cat or dog has a muzzle of sufficient strength to prevent its biting any person. 
(b)  All cats and dogs which are noticeably affected with rabies and displaying vicious propensities may be killed under the supervision of any police officer without notice of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 532, div. II, § 6, 8-12-1986)  
Sec. 8-11. - Rabies control measures report; quarantine and disposition of rabies or rabies suspect animals. 
(a)  When a cat or dog has been bitten by an animal known to have rabies, the cat or dog shall be quarantined for a period of 180 days at a veterinary facility or destroyed by a veterinarian at the discretion of the owner and at the owner's expense. 
(b)  When a dog or cat has been bitten by an animal suspected of having rabies, and the rabies suspect animal is captured and quarantined at a veterinary facility, the animal bitten will also be quarantined for ten days. Disposition of both animals will be determined by the veterinarian having custody of each of the animals. 
(c)  Animal owners shall notify the city animal control officer of the fact that his cat or dog has been exposed to rabies and, at his discretion, the animal control officer is empowered to have such cat or dog removed from the owner's premises to a veterinary facility for observation at the owner's expense. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowing or suspecting a cat or dog to have rabies to dispose of such cat or dog without written permission of the city animal control officer. 
(e)  Every owner or other person, upon ascertaining that a cat or dog is rabies, shall immediately notify the animal control officer who shall either remove the cat or dog to the animal shelter, if possible, and if not, to summarily have it destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 532, div. II, § 7, 8-12-1986)  
Sec. 8-12. - Physician's report of animal bites. 
It shall be the duty of every physician or other practitioner to report to the city police department the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals together with such information necessary to assist the investigation of the bite accident. 
(Ord. No. 532, div. II, § 8, 8-12-1986)  
Sec. 8-13. - Refusing to cooperate and/or interfering with impounding of cat or dog. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to deliver any unlicensed or unvaccinated cat or dog upon demand for impounding, or to interfere with an attempt to prevent the animal control officer or any of his deputies, animal wardens or any city police officer from catching or impounding any cat or dog running at large. 
(Ord. No. 532, div. II, § 10, 8-12-1986)  
Sec. 8-14. - Duty of officers. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control officer, any of his deputies, animal warden or any police officer to pick up and impound, subject to the provisions of this chapter, all animals that are in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 532, div. III, § 1, 8-12-1986)  
Sec. 8-15. - Authority to enter. 
The animal control officer, his deputy, animal warden or any city police officer, while on duty, is hereby authorized to enter upon any public place, unfenced private property, lot, tract or parcel of land that is not the land of the owner of the animal within the city, whether in the immediate presence of the owner or custodian or otherwise, for the purpose of seizing or impounding any animal running at large thereon. 
(Ord. No. 532, div. III, § 2, 8-12-1986)  
Sec. 8-16. - Impoundment records. 
Records of all impounded animals will be kept in accordance with the administrative procedures approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 532, div. III, § 3, 8-12-1986)  
Sec. 8-17. - Disposition of cats and dogs—Period of keeping. 
All cats and dogs not claimed and released within 72 hours after being impounded shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of as the city council may so designate. In the case of a sick, injured, diseased or infected animal, the animal control officer or a veterinarian may waive the 72-hour waiting period, when in his professional opinion it would be dangerous, inhumane or likely to cause the spread of the disease to hold such animal for such period. The person allowing the animal to get into such poor, sick, diseased or injured condition is hereby held responsible for such condition and the animal control officer and/or the veterinarian is hereby relieved of responsibility in destroying the animal. In the case of a well-kept animal, with or without collar or harness and license tag, the animal control officer will continue impoundment of the animal for an additional 24 hours to allow additional time for redemption and a call to the city secretary for any special report of lost animal; however, the final responsibility for location of an impounded animal is that of the owner. The animal control officer shall notify his supervisor of the extended impoundment and thereafter may destroy or otherwise dispose of the animal and both the animal control officer and the supervisor are hereby relieved of responsibility in destroying the animal. 
(Ord. No. 532, div. III, § 4, 8-12-1986)  
Sec. 8-18. - Disposition of cats and dogs—Sale authorization. 
At any time after the period of time for redemption of impounded cats or dogs shall have expired the animal control officer may, without further notice and without advertising in any manner, sell at private sale or public auction for cash any cat or dog not redeemed or reclaimed. 
(Ord. No. 532, div. III, § 5, 8-12-1986)  
Sec. 8-19. - Disposition of cats and dogs—Other. 
All impounded dogs or cats that remain unredeemed, unclaimed or unsold after the period of time for redemption has expired, shall forthwith be disposed of by the animal control officer according to current policies. 
(Ord. No. 532, div. III, § 6, 8-12-1986)  
Sec. 8-20. - Disposition of cats and dogs—Release in case of willful release of dogs and cats. 
Whenever the city manager is satisfied that any cat or dog has been willfully released from any enclosure by any person other than the owner with the intention of having the same impounded to injure the owner thereof, he shall order the animal control officer to release the cat or dog so impounded without any city impoundment fee or cost to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 532, div. III, § 7, 8-12-1986)  
Sec. 8-21. - Disposition of cats and dogs—Redemption of cats and dogs; procedure, fees. 
(a)  The owner of any licensed cat or dog may redeem such cat or dog at any time prior to sale or adoption, by the payment of impounding fee of $10.00 and fee per day of $2.00 plus any medical or other cost expended on behalf of subject animal. 
(b)  The impounding and boarding fee shall be doubled for any owned cat or dog impounded for a second time within a one-year period. A warning notice shall be issued to the owner stating that if a third offense occurs with a one-year time period of the second offense, a summons shall be issued. 
(c)  Owners reclaiming such cat or dog for a third time or thereafter, shall be charged impounding and boarding fees in accordance with the amount designated in the second offense, and issued a municipal court summons for violation of this chapter. 
(d)  The owner of any impounded unlicensed cat or dog may redeem such cat or dog any time prior to sale or disposition by having such cat or dog duly licensed, and paying the impounding fee and fee per day for each day such cat or dog shall have been impounded, plus any medical or other costs expended on behalf of subject animal. License and vaccination requirements are not applicable if the animal is not going to be housed in this city. 
(Ord. No. 532, div. III, § 8, 8-12-1986)  
Sec. 8-22. - Disposition of cats and dogs—Proceeds. 
The money collected shall be deposited in accordance with current directives, credited toward and used solely for the expense of the animal control shelter operation. 
(Ord. No. 532, div. III, § 9, 8-12-1986)  
Sec. 8-23. - Breaking and entering animal control shelter, releasing, injuring confined animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to forcibly open the gate or otherwise enter the animal control shelter, in any way damage the animal control shelter, injure animals therein, or to release, drive out or turn loose therefrom or to permit the escape of any animal therein confined. 
(Ord. No. 532, div. III, § 10, 8-12-1986)  
Sec. 8-24. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not exceeding $200.00, and each and every day of such violation shall be deemed a separate and complete offense. 
(Ord. No. 532, div. IV, § 2, 8-12-1986)  
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of housing and other structures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001 et seq.; International Residential Code as municipal residential building code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.212; International Building Code as municipal commercial building code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.216; national electrical code applicable statewide for construction, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.214; municipal authority concerning swimming pool enclosures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.101; standards for public pools and spas, 25 Tex. Admin. Code § 265.181 et seq.; municipal authority concerning plumbing and house draining, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.012; municipal authority concerning substandard building, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001; additional authority to secure substandard building, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 214.0011, 214.0015; time for issuance of municipal building permit, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.904; verification of builder registration with state, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.906. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Trench safety. 
On all construction projects, public or private, within the boundaries of the city, or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction, the bid document and the contract shall contain: 
(1)  Detailed plans and specifications for adequate safety systems that meet OSHA standards; and 
(2)  A pay item for those safety systems. This requirement shall not apply to persons subject to safety standards adopted under state law. 
Violation of OSHA witnessed by the building inspectors in the field should be reported to OSHA and the construction job superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 554, §§ I, II, 3-8-1988)  
Sec. 10-2. - Registration and proof of state-issued license requirement. 
Company registration with the city is required prior to issuance of any mechanical permit. Proof of current state-issued license must be presented annually. 
(Ord. No. 753, § 3, 9-16-2004)  
Secs. 10-3—10-22. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 10-23. - Intent, purpose of article. 
(a)  Name. This article shall be commonly referred to as the city's "Substandard Building Ordinance." 
(b)  Purpose. This article is adopted so that the city council may promote the public health, safety, and general welfare within the city through the regulation of substandard and dangerous buildings or structures. By requiring the repair and/or demolition of substandard and dangerous buildings and structures, the city council seeks to protect property values and prevent bodily injury, death, and property damage within the city limits. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appraised value means the value given the structure by the county tax assessor's office. 
Building means any structure of any kind or any part thereof, erected for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattel or property of any kind. 
Building inspector means the person appointed by the city to conduct periodic inspections of buildings and structures to ensure that the same are being maintained in a manner consistent with prescribed building codes of the city and not in violation of this article. 
Diligent effort means the best or a reasonable effort to determine the identity and address of an owner, a lienholder, or a mortgagee including a search of the following records: 
(1)  County real property records of the county in which the building is located; 
(2)  Appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the building is located; 
(3)  Records of the secretary of state; 
(4)  Assumed name records of the county in which the building is located; 
(5)  City tax records; and 
(6)  City utility records. 
Minimum housing standards means those standards adopted by the city, including, if applicable, building, electrical, plumbing, gas, mechanical, existing building and fire prevention codes and any other housing and structure regulations adopted under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code chapter 214. 
Owner means any person, agent, firm, corporation, or other entity named in the real property records of the county where the building is located as owning the property. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, or any part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 891, § I, 10-9-2012)  
Sec. 10-24. - Declaration of nuisance. 
Any building or structure requiring repair, removal or demolition, as described and defined herein, and all buildings or structures within the city which are unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise dangerous to the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and unlawful and subject to the provisions of this article regarding repair, removal or demolition. 
(Ord. No. 891, § II, 10-9-2012)  
Sec. 10-25. - Inspection. 
An inspection shall be made of every building located within the city which is suspected of being in violation of this article. The building inspector, or his official designee, is hereby authorized to conduct inspections of buildings suspected of being in violation of this article and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 891, § III, 10-9-2012)  
Sec. 10-26. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  Whenever a violation of this article has been discovered and reported by the building inspector, or his designee, a public hearing shall be held by the city council to determine whether a building complies with the standards set out in this article. 
(b)  A notice of the hearing shall be sent to the occupant, if any, and record owner, lienholder or mortgagee. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be served by personal delivery or by certified mail return receipt requested. Additionally, a copy of the notice shall be posted on the front door of each affected structure situated on the property or as close to the front door as practicable. It is not necessary that the notice to the occupant of the property list an occupant by name. Service of the notice may be accomplished by the first class U.S. mail or by personal delivery to any occupant of the property who is above 18 years of age. 
(c)  The notice shall contain: 
(1)  The names of all persons to whom notice is being served; 
(2)  The street address or legal description of the premises; 
(3)  The date of inspection; 
(4)  The nature of the violation; 
(5)  The date, time and location of the hearing; and 
(6)  A statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee will be required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with the article and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. 
(Ord. No. 891, § IV, 10-9-2012)  
Sec. 10-27. - Standards. 
The following standards shall be utilized in determining whether a building should be ordered repaired, removed or demolished: 
(1)  The building or structure is liable to partially or fully collapse. 
(2)  The building or structure was constructed or maintained in violation of any provision of the city's building code, or any other applicable ordinance or law of the city, county, state, or federal government. 
(3)  Any wall or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle one-third of its base. 
(4)  The foundation or the vertical or horizontal supporting members are 25 percent or more damaged or deteriorated. 
(5)  The nonsupporting coverings of walls, ceilings, roofs, or floors are 50 percent or more damaged or deteriorated. 
(6)  The structure has improperly distributed loads upon the structural members, or the structural members have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
(7)  The structure of any part thereof has been damaged by fire, water, earthquake, wind, vandalism, or other cause to such an extent that it has become dangerous to the public, health, safety and welfare. 
(8)  The structure does not have adequate light, ventilation, or sanitation facilities as required by the city. 
(9)  The structure has inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or other emergency or has insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means of ingress or egress. 
(10)  The structure, because of its condition, is unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of the city's citizens including all conditions conducive to the harboring of rats or mice or other disease carrying animals or insects reasonably calculated to spread disease. 
(Ord. No. 891, § V, 10-9-2012)  
Sec. 10-28. - Hearings. 
(a)  The date of the hearing shall not be less than ten days after notice is made (as described in section 10-26). 
(b)  If a building is found to be in violation of this article, the city shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the building to repair, remove or demolish the building within 30 days, unless it is proven at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be done in 30 days. 
(c)  If the city allows more than 30 days for the building to be repaired, removed or demolished, the city shall establish specific time schedules for the work to be commenced and performed and shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed, as determined by the hearing official. 
(d)  The city shall not allow the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than 90 days to repair, remove or demolish the building or fully perform all worked required to comply with the order unless a detailed plan and time scheduled for the work are submitted at the hearing and it is proven at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within 90 days because of the scope and complexity of the work. Additionally, the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee must submit work progress reports to demonstrate compliance with the time schedule established. 
(e)  In any case where repairs are estimated to cost 50 percent or more of the appraised value, a building shall be demolished or removed, and in all cases where a structure cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the provisions of this article, it shall be demolished or removed. 
(Ord. No. 891, § VI, 10-9-2012)  
Sec. 10-29. - Order for repair or demolition. 
(a)  After the public hearing, if a building is found to be in violation of the standards set out in this article, the city may order that the building be repaired, removed or demolished within a reasonable time, as established under section 10-28. 
(b)  If the building is ordered to be repaired, removed or demolished, the city shall promptly mail by certified mail, return receipt requested, or personally deliver a copy of the order to the owner of the building and to any lienholder or mortgagee of the building. The city shall make a diligent effort to discover each owner, mortgagee and lienholder having an interest in the building or property on which the building is located. 
(c)  If the ordered action is demolition of the building or structure, demolition shall not occur until a magistrate has issued a seizure and demolition warrant supported by a probable cause affidavit stating that: 
(1)  The building or structure constitute a nuisance; 
(2)  The city has complied with the procedures set forth in this article; 
(3)  Demolition has been ordered by the city; and 
(4)  The time for appeal of the order to district court has expired and no appeal has been taken or, in the alternative, the order was appealed to district court but the appeal has been finally resolved in a manner that does not prevent the city from proceeding with demolition. 
(Ord. No. 891, § VII, 10-9-2012)  
Sec. 10-30. - Notice of repair or demolition. 
(a)  In addition to the order, each identified mortgagee or lienholder shall be sent a notice containing: 
(1)  An identification of the building and property on which it is located (this does not have to be a legal description); 
(2)  A description of the violation of the article; and 
(3)  A statement that the city may demolish the building if the ordered action is not taken. 
(b)  If the notice is returned "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected and the notice shall be deemed delivered. 
(c)  Within ten days after the date that the order is issued, the city shall: 
(1)  File a copy of the order in the office of the city secretary; and 
(2)  Publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city (and where the building is located) stating: 
a.  The street address or legal description of the property; 
b.  The date of the hearing; 
c.  A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and 
d.  Instructions as to where a complete copy of the order may be obtained. 
(Ord. No. 891, § VIII, 10-9-2012)  
Sec. 10-31. - Appeal. 
The owner, lienholder, or mortgagee shall have the right to appeal the decision made at the hearing to a district court. A notice of appeal must be filed with the district court within 30 calendar days from the date the order is mailed to the owner, lienholder or mortgagee, as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 891, § IX, 10-9-2012)  
Sec. 10-32. - Demolition and repair expenses. 
(a)  Whenever it is discovered upon reinspection that the owner, mortgagee or lienholder has failed to repair, remove or demolish the building or take other ordered action within the allotted time, the city, or its authorized agent, shall make a diligent effort to discover each mortgagee and lienholder having an interest in the building or in the property which the building is located and shall personally deliver or send by certified mail, return receipt requested, to each a notice containing: 
(1)  An identification of the building and property on which it is located (this does not have to be a legal description); 
(2)  A description of the violation of the article; and 
(3)  A statement that the municipality will remove or demolish the building if the ordered action is not taken. 
(b)  Whenever it is discovered upon reinspection that the owner, mortgagee or lienholder has failed to repair, remove or demolish the building or take other ordered action within the allotted time, the city, or its authorized agent, may repair, remove or demolish and remove said building or cause the same to be done and charge the expenses incurred in doing such work or having the same done to the owner, mortgagee or lienholder of said land or otherwise assess the expenses against the property on which the building is located. 
(c)  If such work is done at the expense of the city, then the said expense shall be assessed against any salvage resulting from the demolition of the building and against the lot, tract, or parcel of land, or the premises upon which such expense was incurred. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, any repair, alteration or improvement made to a building by the city will only be to the extent necessary to bring the building into compliance with the minimum housing standards and only if the building is a residential building with ten or fewer dwelling units; provided, however, the city may elect to obtain a judicial determination by a decree of a court of competent jurisdiction of the existence, in fact, of a public nuisance in cases contemplated by this article. Such judicial determination may include any available remedy for the abatement of such a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 891, § X, 10-9-2012)  
Sec. 10-33. - Assessment of lien. 
(a)  When the city incurs expenses to repair, remove or demolish a building, the city may assess the expenses on and obtain a lien against the property on which the building is located, unless it is a homestead as protected by the state constitution. The lien arises and attaches to the property when the city has the lien recorded and indexed with the county clerk of the county in which the property is located. The notice shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner, if that information can be determined with a reasonable effort; 
(2)  A legal description of the real property on which the building was located; 
(3)  The amount of expense incurred by the city; 
(4)  The balance due; and 
(5)  The date on which said work was done or improvements made. 
(b)  The city shall have a privileged lien on such lot or other premises or real estate upon which said building was located, to secure the expenditure so made, second only to other liens as provided by law. It is further provided that for any such expenditure suit may be instituted and foreclosure of said lien may be made in the name of the city; and the statement of expenses so made, as aforesaid, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or expense. 
(c)  The lien is extinguished if the property owner or another person having an interest in the legal title to the property reimburses the city for the expenses. 
(Ord. No. 891, § XI, 10-9-2012)  
Sec. 10-34. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Authority. The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this article as may be required by governing law. 
(b)  Civil remedies. 
(1)  A property owner violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not exceeding $1,000.00 for each and every day of violation, or, if the owner shows the property is the owner's lawful homestead, in an amount not to exceed $10.00 per day for each violation, provided that: 
a.  The owner was notified of the requirements of the article and the owner's need to comply with the requirements; and 
b.  After notification, the owner committed an act in violation of the article or failed to take action necessary for compliance with the article. 
(2)  If such a civil penalty is assessed, the city secretary shall file a certified copy of the order containing such amount and duration of the penalty with the county district clerk's office no later than three working days after such order. 
(c)  Other remedies. 
(1)  The remedies provided herein shall be available to the city in addition to any penal or other remedy provided by law or equity which the city, state, or any other person may provide to remedy the unsafe building condition. 
(2)  The city may bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the amount due plus all associated costs and fees. 
(Ord. No. 891, § XII, 10-9-2012)  
Sec. 10-35. - Liability. 
Neither the city nor any authorized agent acting under the terms of this article shall be liable or have any liability by reason of orders issued or work done in compliance with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 891, § XIII, 10-9-2012)  
Secs. 10-36—10-58. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TECHNICAL CODES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 10-59—10-89. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PLUMBING CODE AND PLUMBERS 
 
Sec. 10-90. - Plumbers. 
(a)  A person designated by the state board of plumbing examiners as a responsible master plumber is authorized to submit applications and pull permits relating to the installation, repair, or construction of plumbing components within a building or other structure. A responsible master plumber may designate one person who is authorized to submit applications and pull permits on behalf of the responsible master plumber. A person so designated by a responsible master plumber shall be employed by and under the general supervision of the responsible master plumber, provided that nothing in this section may be construed to require the responsible master plumber to be present when the employee submits an application or pulls a permit. Responsible master plumbers so designating an employee shall submit the employee's name, home address, telephone number, electronic mail address, social security number or state driver's license number to the city plumbing and gas inspector. 
(b)  A responsible master plumber designating an employee under subsection (a) of this section shall notify the city plumbing and gas inspector upon the employee's ceasing to be employed by the responsible master plumber. After such notification, a responsible master plumber may designate a new employee as provided by subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 902, 5-14-2013)  
Sec. 10-91. - Plumbing code adopted. 
The book entitled "International Plumbing Code," 2012 edition, and appendices A, B and hereby adopted and hence forth shall be known as the plumbing code for the city. 
(Ord. No. 876, § 1, 5-12-2012)  
Sec. 10-92. - Code revisions adopted. 
The following regulations are hereby adopted for the administration of the plumbing code of the city, and shall be known as chapter 1 of said plumbing code: 
CHAPTER 1 
ADMINISTRATION 
SECTION 101—TITLE AND SCOPE 
101.1—TITLE 
This code shall be known and cited as "The Plumbing Code of the City of Taft," sometimes herein referred to as "the code" or "this code." The portions of this code other than this chapter shall be known as "Part I—Plumbing," which shall be comprised of the book entitled, "International Plumbing Code," 2012 edition, and Appendices A and B and Administration guidelines. 
101.2—CODE REMEDIAL 
101.2.1 GENERAL 
This code is hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interest and purpose thereof, which are health, sanitation, general public safety and welfare, by regulating installation and maintenance of all plumbing and consumer's gas piping. 
101.2.2 QUALITY CONTROL 
Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this code except as it relates to the purpose stated herein. 
101.2.3 PERMITTING AND INSPECTION 
The inspection or permitting of any building or plan by any jurisdiction, under the requirements of this code shall not be construed is any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building or the adequacy of such plan. No jurisdiction nor any employee thereof shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such building, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
101.3—SCOPE 
101.3.1 APPLICABILITY 
The provisions of this code shall apply to every plumbing and installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances thereto, which is located within the city; and the provisions of this code shall apply to every plumbing and piping installation which is located outside of the city when connected to water, sanitary sewer, or storm sewer of the city. 
101.3.2 FEDERAL AND STATE AUTHORITY 
The provisions of this code shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing body having jurisdiction of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of this code or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
101.3.3 MAINTENANCE 
All plumbing both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by this code shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, if any, shall be responsible for said maintenance. 
101.4—EXISTING BUILDINGS 
101.4.1 GENERAL 
Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing building without requiring the building to comply with all the requirements of this code provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of this code for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of this code for new construction. 
101.4.2 
If, within any period of 12 months, alterations or repairs costing in excess of 50 percent of the then physical value of the building are made to an existing building, such building shall be made to conform to the requirements of this code for new buildings. 
101.4.3 CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY 
If the occupancy classification of an existing building is changed, the building shall be made to conform to the intent of this code as required by the building official. 
SECTION 102—ORGANIZATION 
102.1—BUILDING OFFICIAL AND INSPECTORS 
The plumbing inspector is hereby designated as the person responsible for the administration and enforcement of the plumbing code, and who shall have the authority hereinafter provided for the plumbing official, and the administrative authority. The plumbing inspector may delegate said authority to assistants, inspectors, and other employees of the city that adhere to the states criteria. 
102.2—RESTRICTION ON EMPLOYEES 
No employee of the city shall be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the installation, alteration, or maintenance of plumbing installations, or in the making of plans or specifications therefor unless said employee is the owner of the property on which the installation exists or is planned to take place. 
102.3—LIABILITY 
Any officer or employee or member of any board charged with the enforcement of this code, acting for the city in the discharge of duties, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee because of such act performed in the enforcement of any provision of this code shall be defended by the city's insurance company until the final termination of the proceedings. 
SECTION 103—POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL 
103.1—RIGHT OF ENTRY 
The plumbing official is authorized to enter any building, structure, or premises to perform any duty imposed by this code. 
103.2—STOP WORK ORDERS 
Upon notice from the plumbing official that work on any plumbing installation is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed. Where any emergency exists, oral notice shall be sufficient. A written determination and record of such emergency notice shall be made by the plumbing official as soon as practicable after discovery of such emergency. 
103.4—REVOCATION OF PERMITS 
103.4.1 MISREPRESENTATION OF APPLICATION 
The plumbing official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this act, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based or whenever the permit or approval was issued in error. 
103.4.2 VIOLATION OF CODE PROVISIONS 
The plumbing official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving or demolition of the building for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this code. 
103.5—UNSAFE INSTALLATIONS 
All plumbing installations which are unsanitary or which constitute a hazard to human life, health, or welfare are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair or demolition. 
103.6—REQUIREMENTS NOT COVERED BY CODE 
Any requirement necessary for the strength or stability of an existing or proposed building or structure/or for the safety or health of the occupants thereof, not specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by the plumbing or building official. 
103.7—ALTERNATE MATERIALS AND ALTERNATE METHODS 
In case where no applicable accepted standard requirements have been adopted in the code for a given class of appliance, accessory device, material, or method of installation, approval of such class of appliance, accessory device, material or method of installation by the plumbing official. Any application for such approval shall be submitted to the plumbing official and shall include sufficient evidence or proof to reasonably substantiate any claim that may be made regarding the alternate material or method. A list of such approvals shall be maintained on file at the city hall available for inspection by the public during regular working hours. 
104—LOCAL ENVIRONMENTAL, ATMOSPHERIC AND SOIL CONDITIONS 
In consideration of the highly corrosive nature of the atmosphere and soil in the city area, and in consideration of the extreme heaving and shifting characteristics of the soil in the city area, and the city council hereby finding that certain additional standards are necessary to control environmental pollution, the following local standards are established to provide for the public health, safety, and welfare, and the plumbing or code official shall enforce said standards which shall take precedence when in conflict with other standards established by this code: 
(a) Underground water supply systems, water service pipe, and consumer's gas piping shall be at least 18 inches deep. Risers from such water systems, and above ground runs in locations protected from direct exposure to sunlight, may be of the same material approved for use in water systems underground, except that polyvinyl chloride shall be a minimum of schedule 40. 
(b) For water supply control an accessible shut-off valve shall be provided on the water service pipe within five feet of the point where the pipe enters the building. 
(c) Water pumps shall be connected indirectly to the water supply system through the use of water supply tanks and air gaps. An approved reduced pressure principal backflow preventer combined with a pump low pressure cut-off device may be used as an alternate method to connect water pumps provided that engineering plans and specifications detailing the installation accompany the application for permit, and further provided that the owner shall obtain the services of a plumber or manufacturer's representative to inspect and service the installation at intervals not to exceed one year. Fire pumps may be directly connected if approved by the plumbing official. 
(d) A two-way, double-riser cleanout shall be installed at the junction of the building drain and the building sewer. If said cleanout is located more than 15 feet from the junction of the building sewer and the sanitary sewer main then a wye-tape cleanout shall be installed and brought to finished grade at the junction of the building sewer and the main. 
(e) Galvanized steel shall not be used for the drainage system or vent piping. 
(f) Galvanized or black steel and galvanized ferrous alloys shall not be used for storm drain inside conductors. 
(g) Ferrous alloy piping and bituminized ferrous alloys shall not be used for building storm drains. 
(h) Restaurants, clubs, and lounges shall have at least two restrooms. 
SECTION 105—APPLICATION FOR PERMIT 
105.1—WHEN REQUIRED 
No person, firm or corporation shall connect any plumbing work with any sewer, sanitary or storm, septic tanks or sewage disposal of any kind, or private connection or install fixtures or appliances in new or existing systems, structures or premises, or repairs, or add to any existing plumbing without first applying for and obtaining a separate plumbing permit therefor from the city, except as provided herein. 
105.2—FORM 
The applicant shall furnish information as required to complete the application form furnished by city hall. 
105.3—DRAWINGS AND SPECIFICATIONS 
If the information in the application is not sufficient to ascertain whether or not the work for which the permit is requested complies with the code, then the applicant shall furnish drawings and specifications of the work in duplicate to accompany the application. 
SECTION 106—PERMITS 
106.1—ACTION OF APPLICATIONS 
(a) If the work described in an application for permit and the drawings and specifications which may be filed therewith appear to conform to the requirements of this code and all other pertinent laws and ordinances, an official shall issue a permit therefor to the applicants. 
(b) If the application for permit and the drawings and specifications which may be filed therewith describes work which does not appear to conform to the requirements of this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, the official shall not issue a permit, but shall notify the applicant of refusal to issue the permit and the reasons therefor. Such notification shall, when requested, be in writing. 
106.2—CONDITION OF THE PERMIT 
A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of this code nor shall such issuance of a permit prevent the plumbing official from thereafter requiring correction of any errors in plans' or in construction, or of violations of this code. Any permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within two months after its issuance. Any permit issued shall become invalid if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the work is commenced; provided, that for cause, one or more extensions of time for periods not exceeding 90 days each may be allowed in writing by the building official. Permits are not transferrable. 
106.3—PERMITS REQUIRED 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install, or cause to be installed, or permit any person to install any plumbing, or sanitary sewer or storm drain lines, or to make any alteration, addition, changer or repair, with the scope of this code, without having first procured a permit therefor except as provided herein. All water service, sanitary sewer, and storm sewer connections to city-owned, -leased, or -operated lines within or without the city shall be made and installed by the city at a point determined by the city; provided, however, charges for this service and for tap fees shall be in accordance with the established rates and fees therefor of the city. Every extension on and to private premises from each such city line shall be made only after a permit has been issued therefor. 
106.4—PERMITS NOT REQUIRED 
Ordinary minor repairs may be made without a permit subject to the approval of the building official. The making of such ordinary minor repairs without a permit but otherwise in compliance with the code technical requirements shall not be deemed violative of this code. 
106.6—EXEMPTED ACTIVITY 
The following acts, work and conduct shall be expressly permitted without license: 
(a) Home owner. Plumbing work done by a property owner in a building owned and occupied by him as his home. 
(b) Maintenance, utility and appliance work. Plumbing work done by anyone who is regularly employed as or acting as a maintenance person or maintenance engineer, incidental to and in. 
(c) When an inspection is made as required by this code and it has been found connection with the business in which he is employed and who does not engage in the occupation of a plumber for the general public; construction, installation and maintenance work done upon the premises or equipment of a railroad by an employee thereof who does not engage in the occupation of a plumber for the general public; and plumbing work done by persons engaged by any public service company in the laying, maintenance and operation of its service mains or lines; and the installation, alteration/adjustment, repair, removal and renovation of all types of appurtenances, equipment and appliances; appliance installation and service work done by anyone who is an appliance dealer or is employed by an appliance dealer, and acting as an appliance installation person or appliance service person in connecting appliances to existing piping installations; provided, however, that all work and service herein named or referred to shall be subject to inspection and approval in accordance with the provisions of the city ordinances. 
SECTION 107—FEES 
107.1—GENERAL 
No permit shall be issued until the charges prescribed in this section shall have been paid. 
107.2—SCHEDULE OF PERMIT FEES 
On all plumbing installations or alterations requiring a plumbing permit, a fee for each plumbing permit shall be paid as required in accordance with the schedule prescribed by separate ordinance. Said schedule shall set forth other fees for which payment is required by this code or otherwise provided for by ordinance. 
107.3—FAILURE TO OBTAIN A PERMIT 
In the event that work for which a permit is required by this code is commenced prior to the issuance of the required permit then the permit fee shall be doubled. The collection made is to help defray the additional cost of inspection of work already done and issuing a permit under such circumstances and is not a penalty and is not preclusive of any remedy otherwise available to the city to enforce this code. 
107.4—INVESTIGATION FEE 
In the event that an inspection is made and the resultant discovery is that work for which a permit is required by this code has been done, but the required permit has not been issued then an investigation fee shall be added to the permit fee. 
107.5—REINSPECTION FEE 
That the portion of construction for which an inspection was requested is not complete, or when corrections called for are not made, or when the premises are not made readily accessible for inspection, and a reinspection is therefore required, then the permit holder or his agent shall pay a reinspection fee prior to the conducting of said reinspection. 
SECTION 108—INSPECTIONS 
108.1—INSPECTION REQUIRED 
The plumbing official, upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, shall make the following inspections of plumbing or gas installations and such other inspections as may be necessary, and shall either approve that portion of the construction as completed or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations to comply with this code: 
(a) Underground piping inspection to be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
(b) Top out inspection to be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
(c) Final inspection to be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
108.2—NOTIFICATION; REINSPECTION 
It shall be the duty of the permittee to give reasonable advance notice to the building official when the work is ready for inspection. When the inspection reveals that the work as completed does not comply in all respects with the requirements of this code, then the permittee shall initiate and complete the corrections required and request reinspection. 
108.3—MATERIAL AND LABOR FOR TESTS 
The permit holder shall make the applicable tests to assist in compliance with the provisions of this code. The permit holder shall give reasonable advance notice to the plumbing official when the plumbing work is ready for tests. The equipment, material, power, and labor necessary for the inspection and test shall be furnished by the permit holder and he is responsible for incurring that the work will withstand the test pressure prescribed in the following tests. All the piping of the plumbing system shall be tested with either water or air. After the plumbing fixtures have been set and their traps filled with water, the entire drainage system shall be submitted to final tests. The plumbing official may require the removal of any cleanouts, to ascertain if the pressure has reached all parts of the system. 
108.5—TEST OF DRAINAGE AND VENT SYSTEMS 
A water test shall be applied to the drainage system either in its entirety or in sections. If applied to the entire system, all openings in the piping shall be tightly closed, except the highest opening and the system filled with water to point of overflow. If the system is tested in sections, each opening shall be tightly plugged except the highest openings of the section under test, and each section shall be filled with water, but no section shall be tested with less than 10-foot head of water. In testing successive sections at least the upper 10 feet of the next preceding section shall be tested, so that no joint or pipe in the building (except the uppermost 10 feet of the system) shall have been submitted to a test of less than a 10-foot head of water. The water shall be kept in the system, or in the portion under test, for at least 15 minutes before inspection starts; the system shall then be tight at all points. 
An air test shall be made by attaching an air compressor or testing apparatus to any suitable opening and after closing all other inlets and outlets to the system forcing air into the system until there is a uniform gauge pressure of 5 psi or sufficient to balance a column of mercury ten inches in height. This pressure shall be held without introduction of additional air for a period of at least 15 minutes. 
The final test of the completed drainage and vent system shall be visual and in sufficient detail to assure that the provisions of this code have been complied with, provided, however, that for cause, it may be reached to subject the plumbing to either a smoke or peppermint test. Where the smoke test is preferred, it shall be made by filling all traps with water and then introducing into the entire system a pungent, thick smoke produced by one or more smoke machines. When the smoke appears at stack openings on the roof, they shall be closed and a pressure equivalent to a one-inch water column shall be maintained for 15 minutes before inspection starts. Where the peppermint test is preferred, two ounces of oil of peppermint shall be introduced for each stack. 
108.6—TEST OF WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM 
Upon completion of a section or of the entire water supply system, it shall be tested and proved tight under a water pressure of not less than 100 psi prior to covering the piping, the water test shall be obtained from a potable water source and this will include the water supply in one and two family dwellings. 
108.7—TEST OF BUILDING SEWER 
Test shall consist of plugging the end of building sewer at its point of connection with the public sewer and filling the building sewer with the water and testing with not less than a ten-foot head of water. The test shall be maintained until back fill is completed. 
108.8—INTERIOR LEADERS OR DOWNSPOUTS 
Leaders or downspouts and branches within a building shall be tested by water or air in accordance with this section. 
108.8—COVERING THE WORK 
The plumbing system or any part thereof shall not be covered until it has been inspected tested and approved. If a plumbing system or any part is covered before being inspected, tested, and approved, it shall be uncovered upon the direction of the plumbing official. 
108.9—TEST OF DEFECTIVE PLUMBING 
The plumbing system of any building, where there is reason to believe that it has become defective shall be subjected to test or inspection. 
108.10—CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL 
Work shall not be done on any part of the plumbing installation beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the written approval of the plumbing official. Such written approval shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction as indicated by the foregoing inspections. 
SECTION 109—LICENSING OF PLUMBERS 
109.1—THE PLUMBING LICENSE LAW OF 1947 
Licensing of plumbers is regulated by the state Plumbing License Law of 1947. If an application for a permit indicates that the work to be done is required by said law to be performed by a licensed plumber then the building official shall issue the permit only if the applicant holds the required license. 
109.2—AGENTS 
A person licensed as a master plumber by the state may file an affidavit with the building official authorizing a designated agent to apply for and receive permits in said person's behalf, and affirming that said person assumes all responsibility for any permit obtained by said agent. 
109.3—IDENTIFICATION OF TRUCKS 
Every person who engages in the business of plumbing in the city shall have the firm name and plumbing license number conspicuously displayed on all trucks used in the transaction of business. 
109.4—PERMITS FOR PART JOBS 
When one person licensed as a master plumber obtains a permit and partially completes the work authorized by said permit, and then a second person licensed as a master plumber is called upon to complete the work, a second permit shall be required. Each person shall be responsible for the work he installed. When issuing the second permit, the building official shall notify the holder of the first permit that the second permit is to be issued. The issuance of the second permit shall cancel the first permit, and no refund of fees shall be made. 
(Ord. No. 876, § 2, 5-12-2012)  
Sec. 10-93. - Violation, penalty. 
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine not exceeding $200.00. If the violation is continuing, each day in which a person, firm, or corporation violates this Code shall constitute a separate offense and each item of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 876, § 4, 5-12-2012)  
Secs. 10-94—10-124. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - MECHANICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 10-125. - International Mechanical Code adopted. 
A certain document, which is on file in the office of the city secretary, being marked and designated as the International Mechanical Code, 2009 edition, including Appendix Chapter A, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the mechanical code of the city, regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said mechanical code on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this division, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 10-126. 
(Ord. No. 865, § 1, 9-13-2011)  
Sec. 10-126. - Revisions to adopted code. 
The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1. Insert: the City of Taft. 
Section 106.5.2. Insert: Attached Schedule C. 
Section 106.5.3. Insert: 75 percent. 
Section 108.4. Insert: Class C Misdemeanor, $500.00. 
Section 108.5. Insert: $200.00, $2,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 865, § 2, 9-13-2011)  
Secs. 10-127—10-145. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ELECTRICAL CODE AND ELECTRICIANS 
 
Sec. 10-146. - Electricians. 
(a)  A person designated by the state department of licensing and regulation as a master electrician is authorized to submit applications and pull permits relating to the installation, repair, or construction of electrical components within a building or other structure. A master electrician may designate one person who is authorized to submit applications and pull permits on behalf of the master electrician. A person so designated by a master electrician shall be employed by and under the general supervision of the master electrician, provided that nothing in this section may be construed to require the master plumber to be present when the employee submits an application or pulls a permit. Master electricians so designating an employee shall submit the employee's name, home address, telephone number, electronic mail address, social security number or state driver's license number to the city electrical and mechanical inspector. 
(b)  A master electrician designating an employee under subsection (a) of this section shall notify the city electrical and mechanical inspector upon the employee's ceasing to be employed by the master electrician. After such notification, a master electrician may designate a new employee as provided by subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 902, 5-14-2013)  
Sec. 10-147. - National Electrical Code adopted. 
A certain document is on file in the office of the city secretary/city manager, being marked and designated as the National Electrical Code, 2011 edition, as published by the National Electrical Code committee, is hereby adopted as the electrical code of the city regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of electrical systems as herein providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said electrical code on file in the office of the city and hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this legislation. 
(Ord. No. 878, § 1, 4-10-2012)  
Sec. 10-148. - Revisions to adopted electrical code. 
The following sections are hereby revised: 
National Electrical Code, article 80, Administration and Enforcement shall be replaced by the 2011 International Code Council Electrical Code, Administrative Provisions with the following revisions 
Section 101.1, Title. The regulations shall be known at the electrical code-administrative provisions of the city and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this code." 
Section 401.2, Types of permits. An authorized agent or contractor (licensed master electrician) who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace electrical systems or equipment, the installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause such work to be done, shall first make application. 
Section 404.2, Schedule of permit fees. A fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 878, § 2, 4-10-2012)  
Secs. 10-149—10-174. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RESIDENTIAL CODE 
 
Sec. 10-175. - International Residential Code adopted. 
A certain document, a copy of which are on file in the office of the city secretary, being marked and designated as the International Residential Code, 2009 edition, including Appendix Chapters A through Q, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the residential code of the city, for regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal and demolition of detached one-and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in height with separate means of egress as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said residential code on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this division, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 10-176. 
(Ord. No. 864, § 1, 9-13-2011)  
Sec. 10-176. - Revisions to adopted code. 
The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section R101.1. Insert: City of Taft 
(Ord. No. 864, § 2, 9-13-2011)  
Secs. 10-177—10-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 10-201. - International Building Code adopted. 
That a certain document being marked and designated as the International Building Code, 2009 edition, including appendix chapters A through K, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the building code of the city for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said building code on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this division, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 10-202. 
(Ord. No. 863, § 1, 9-13-2011)  
Sec. 10-202. - Revisions to adopted code. 
The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Taft. 
Section 1612.3. Insert: City of Taft. 
Section 1612.3. Insert: June 2002. 
Section 3412.2. Insert: September 8, 2011. 
(Ord. No. 863, § 2, 9-13-2011)  
Secs. 10-203—10-222. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - FUEL GAS CODE 
 
Sec. 10-223. - International Fuel Gas Code adopted. 
That the book entitled "International Fuel Gas Code," 2012 edition, and Appendices A, B, C, and D, but excluding chapter 2 Administration thereof; are hereby adopted as the "Fuel and Gas Code of the City of Taft," as fully as if copied at length in this section. 
(Ord. No. 877, § 1, 6-12-2012)  
Sec. 10-224. - Revisions to adopted code. 
The following regulations are hereby adopted for the administration of the city gas code, and shall be known as chapter 1 of said gas code: 
CHAPTER 1 
ADMINISTRATION 
SECTION 101—TITLE AND SCOPE 
101.1—TITLE 
This code shall be known and cited as "The Gas Code of the City of Taft," sometimes herein referred to as "the code" or "this code." The portions of this code other than this chapter shall be known as "Part I—Fuel and Gas," which shall be comprised of the book entitled, "International Fuel and Gas Code," 2012 edition, and appendices B, C, I, and J, but excluding chapter 1, Administration thereof; and "Part I—Fuel and Gas," which shall be comprised of the book entitled "International Fuel Gas Code," 2012 edition, but excluding chapter 2 Administration thereof. 
101.2—CODE REMEDIAL 
101.2.1 GENERAL 
This code is hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interest and purpose thereof, which are health, sanitation, general public safety and welfare, by regulating installation and maintenance of all plumbing and consumer's gas piping. 
101.2.2 QUALITY CONTROL 
Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this code except as it relates to the purpose stated herein. 
101.2.3 PERMITTING AND INSPECTION 
The inspection or permitting of any building or plan by any jurisdiction, under the requirements of this code shall not be construed is any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building or the adequacy of such plan. No jurisdiction nor any employee thereof shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such building, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
101.3—SCOPE 
101.3.1 APPLICABILITY 
The provisions of this code shall apply to all consumer's gas piping installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and appurtenances thereto, which is located within the city; and the provisions of this code shall apply to every plumbing and piping installation which is located outside of the city when connected to water, sanitary sewer, or storm sewer of the city. 
101.3.2 FEDERAL AND STATE AUTHORITY 
The provisions of this code shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing body having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of this code or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
101.3.3 MAINTENANCE 
All consumers' gas piping, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by this code shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, if any, shall be responsible for said maintenance. 
101.4—EXISTING BUILDINGS 
101.4.1 GENERAL 
Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing building without requiring the building to comply with all the requirements of this code provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of this code for new construction. The plumbing official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of this code for new construction. 
101.4.2 
If, within any period of 12 months, alterations or repairs costing in excess of 50 percent of the then physical value of the building are made to an existing building, such building shall be made to conform to the requirements of this code for new buildings. 
101.4.3 CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY 
If the occupancy classification of an existing building is changed, the building shall be made to conform to the intent of this code as required by the building official. 
SECTION 102—ORGANIZATION 
102.1—BUILDING OFFICIAL AND INSPECTORS 
The building official is hereby designated as the person responsible for the administration and enforcement of the city fuel and gas code, and who shall have the authority hereinafter provided for the gas official, and the administrative authority. The building official may delegate said authority to assistants, inspectors, and other employees of the building inspection department. 
102.2—RESTRICTION ON EMPLOYEES 
No employee of the building inspection department shall be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the installation, alteration, or maintenance of plumbing installations or consumer's gas piping, or in the making of plans or specifications therefor unless said employee is the owner of the property on which the installation exists or is planned to take place. 
102.3—LIABILITY 
Any officer or employee, or member of any board, charged with the enforcement of this code, acting for the city in the discharge of duties, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee because of such act performed in the enforcement of any provision of this code shall be defended by the city attorney until the final termination of the proceedings. 
SECTION 103—POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL 
103.1—RIGHT OF ENTRY 
The building official is authorized to enter any building, structure, or premises to perform any duty imposed by this code. 
103.2—STOP WORK ORDERS 
Upon notice from the building official that work on any consumer's gas piping installation is being done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed. Where any emergency exists, oral notice shall be sufficient. A written determination and record of such emergency notice shall be made by the building official as soon as practicable after discovery of such emergency. 
103.4—REVOCATION OF PERMITS 
103.4.1 MISREPRESENTATION OF APPLICATION 
The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this act, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based or whenever the permit or approval was issued in error. 
103.4.2 VIOLATION OF CODE PROVISIONS 
The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving or demolition of the building for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this code. 
103.5—UNSAFE INSTALLATIONS 
All consumer's gas piping installations which are unsanitary or which constitute a hazard to human life, health, or welfare are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair or demolition. 
103.6—REQUIREMENTS NOT COVERED BY CODE 
Any requirement necessary for the strength or stability of an existing or proposed building or structure, or for the safety or health of the occupants thereof, not specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by the building official. 
103.7—ALTERNATE MATERIALS AND ALTERNATE METHODS 
In case where no applicable accepted standard requirements have been adopted in the code for a given class of appliance, accessory device, material, or method of installation, approval of such class of appliance, accessory device, material or method of installation by the building official. Any application for such approval shall be submitted to the building official and shall include sufficient evidence or proof to reasonably substantiate any claim that may be made regarding the alternate material or method. A list of such approvals shall be maintained on file in the building official's office available for inspection by the public during regular working hours. 
SECTION 104—LOCAL ENVIRONMENTAL, ATMOSPHERIC AND SOIL CONDITIONS 
In consideration of the highly corrosive nature of the atmosphere and soil in the city area, and in consideration of the extreme heaving and shifting characteristics of the soil in the city area, and the city council hereby finding that certain additional standards are necessary to control environmental pollution, the following local standards are established to provide for the public health, safety, and welfare, and the building official shall enforce said standards which shall take precedence when in conflict with other standards established by this code: 
(a) Consumer's gas piping shall be at least 18 inches deep. 
(b) All gas appliances shall have accessible gas shut-off valves located no further than three feet from the appliance. 
(c) Gas appliances in residential garages shall be installed not less than 18 inches above the floor. Alternate methods of installation which adequately control input of combustion air may be used if approved by the building official. 
(d) Gas-fired incinerators shall be of the multiple chamber type. Other types of incinerators may be used only if approved by the building official. The owner is further required to submit evidence of compliance with state air pollution control laws, the city air pollution control ordinance, and applicable city health regulations. 
(e) Restaurants, clubs, and lounges shall have at least two restrooms. 
SECTION 105—APPLICATION FOR PERMIT 
105.1—WHEN REQUIRED 
No person, firm or corporation shall do any gas piping installation of fixtures or repairs without first applying for and obtaining a separate gas permit therefor from the building official, except as provided herein. 
105.2—FORM 
The applicant shall furnish information as required to complete the application form furnished by the building official. 
105.3—DRAWINGS AND SPECIFICATIONS 
If the information in the application is not sufficient to ascertain whether or not the work for which the permit is requested complies with the Code, then the applicant shall furnish drawings and specifications of the work in duplicate to accompany the application. 
SECTION 106—PERMITS 
106.1—ACTION OF APPLICATIONS 
a. If the work described in an application for permit and the drawings and specifications which may be filed therewith appear to conform to the requirements of this code and all other pertinent laws and ordinances, the building official shall issue a permit therefor to the applicants. 
b. If the application for permit and the drawings and specifications which may be filed therewith describes work which does not appear to conform to the requirements of this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall notify the applicant of refusal to issue the permit and the reasons therefor. Such notification shall, when requested, be in writing. 
106.2—CONDITION OF THE PERMIT 
A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of this code nor shall such issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring correction of any errors in plans or in construction, or of violations of this code. Any permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within two months after its issuance. Any permit issued shall become invalid if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the work is commenced; provided, that for cause, one or more extensions of time for periods not exceeding 90 days each may be allowed in writing by the building official. Permits are not transferrable. 
106.3—PERMITS REQUIRED 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install, or cause to be installed, or permit any person to install any consumer's gas piping, or gas appliance, or to make any alteration, addition, changer or repair, with the scope of this code, without having first procured a permit therefor except as provided herein. Every extension on and to private premises from each such city line shall be made only after a permit has been issued therefor. 
106.4—PERMITS NOT REQUIRED 
(a) Ordinary minor repairs may be made without a permit subject to the approval of the building official. The making of such ordinary minor repairs without a permit but otherwise in compliance with the code technical requirements shall not be deemed violative of this code. 
(b) Permits and inspections are not required for the installation, alteration, and repair of consumer's gas piping and gas appliances to be used for a manufacturing process, pilot plant, laboratory testing, mechanical process equipment, or chemical manufacturing equipment in a plant occupying a site of 20 acres or more which is inaccessible to the general public and in which the construction and alterations are supervised by a registered engineer or architect, provided that an affidavit to this effect filed by the owner in the office of the building official. Any building or structure used principally as an office building, shipping dock, assembly room, restroom, cafeteria, and warehousing and not for any purpose directly related to the manufacturing, testing, or operations shall not be exempt under this section from the requirements for permits and inspections. 
SECTION 107—FEES 
107.1—GENERAL 
No permit shall be issued until the charges prescribed in this section shall have been paid. 
107.2—SCHEDULE OF PERMIT FEES 
On all consumer's gas piping installations or alterations requiring a plumbing permit, a fee for each gas permit shall be paid as required in accordance with the schedule prescribed by separate ordinance. Said schedule shall set forth other fees for which payment is required by this code or otherwise provided for by ordinance. 
107.3—FAILURE TO OBTAIN A PERMIT 
In the event that work for which a permit is required by this code is commenced prior to the issuance of the required permit, then the permit fee shall be doubled. The collection made is to help defray the additional cost of inspection of work already done and issuing a permit under such circumstances and is not a penalty and is not preclusive of any remedy otherwise available to the city to enforce this code. 
107.4—INVESTIGATION FEE 
In the event that an inspection is made and the resultant discovery is that work for which a permit is required by this code has been done, but the required permit has not been issued, then an investigation fee shall be added to the permit fee. 
107.5—REINSPECTION FEE 
If the portion of construction for which an inspection was requested is not complete, or when corrections called for are not made, or when the premises are not made readily accessible for inspection, and a re-inspection is there for required, then the permit holder or his agent shall pay a reinspection fee prior to the conducting of said reinspection. 
SECTION 108—INSPECTIONS 
108.1—INSPECTION REQUIRED 
The building official, upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, shall make the following inspections of plumbing or gas installations and such other inspections as may be necessary, and shall either approve that portion of the construction as completed or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations to comply with this code: 
(a) Underground piping inspection to be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
(b) Top out inspection to be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
(c) Final inspection to be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
108.2—NOTIFICATION; REINSPECTION 
It shall be the duty of the permittee to give reasonable advance notice to the building official when the work is ready for inspection. When the inspection reveals that the work as completed does not comply in all respects with the requirements of this code, then the permittee shall initiate and complete the corrections required and request reinspection. 
108.3—MATERIAL AND LABOR FOR TESTS 
The permit holder shall make the applicable tests prescribed in 108.4 through 108.7 to assist in compliance with the provisions of this code. The permit holder shall give reasonable advance notice to the plumbing official when the plumbing work is ready for tests. The equipment, material, power, and labor necessary for the inspection and test shall be furnished by the permit holder and he is responsible for incurring that the work will withstand the test pressure prescribed in the following tests. All the piping of the plumbing system shall be tested with either water or air. After the plumbing fixtures have been set and their traps filled with water, the entire drainage system shall be submitted to final tests. The plumbing official may require the removal of any cleanouts, to ascertain if the pressure has reached all parts of the system. 
108.4—GAS TEST 
Consumers gas piping shall be pressure tested after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and all portions thereof which are to be concealed have been concealed, and before any fixtures or appliances are attached thereto. The piping shall withstand an air pressure equal to not less than the pressure of a column of mercury ten inches in height, and the piping shall hold this air pressure for a period of at least ten minutes without any perceptible drop. A mercury column gauge or other suitable testing apparatus shall be used for this test. 
108.8—COVERING THE WORK 
The gas system or any part thereof shall not be covered until it has been inspected, tested and approved. If a plumbing system or any part is covered before being inspected, tested, and approved, it shall be uncovered upon the direction of the plumbing official. 
108.9—TEST OF DEFECTIVE GAS SYSTEM 
The plumbing system of any building, where there is reason to believe that it has become defective, shall be subjected to test or inspection. 
108.10—CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL 
Work shall not be done on any part of the gas installation beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the written approval of the building official. Such written approval shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction as indicated by the foregoing inspections. 
(Ord. No. 877, § 2, 6-12-2012)  
Sec. 10-225. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine not exceeding $200.00. If the violation is continuing, each day in which a person, firm, or corporation violates this Code shall constitute a separate offense and each item of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 877, § 4, 6-12-2012)  
Secs. 10-226—10-253. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MOVING BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 10-254. - Permit; general standards. 
(a)  Permit required; issuance. No building shall be moved into or within the city limits or into the city limits and no structure removed, partially or wholly, or site work, including clearing, fills or excavations, begun without completion of all requirements for a permit. Permits shall be obtained prior to beginning work on any site or existing building or structure. A permit shall be issued upon meeting the requirements of the application, completion of the relevant check-off list and the payment of required fees and deposits. 
(b)  Duration of permit. The work permit shall be valid for 30 working days from the date of issue and may extend for an additional 30 days if a written request for extension is received prior to the expiration. 
(c)  Notice to property owners. The applicant shall give written notice of the proposed work, no less than 24 hours prior to work commencing, to property owners within 200 feet of the proposed work. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 1, 10-16-2012)  
Sec. 10-255. - Standards for moving. 
(a)  Moving shall include the removal, placement or transit of a structure of any size inside the city limits. The police department shall coordinate travel routes and other requirements specific to the public street. If special arrangement for relocation of utility lines is necessary, 48 hours' notice must be provided to the appropriate city department or entity. 
(b)  No moving permit shall be issued for a structure to be placed on a property without submittal of a site development application and receipt of a land development permit. 
(c)  No substandard buildings or structures will be allowed or permitted to be moved into the city limits. 
(d)  No unsafe or hazardous buildings, structures or containers shall be allowed to be moved into the city limits. 
(e)  Permits to move a building or a structure into the city limits shall first meet all the requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 2, 10-16-2012)  
Sec. 10-256. - Standards for site work. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, clearing of trees and brush, excavation, or placement of soil, spoils or other materials that requires mechanized equipment shall require a permit 24 hours prior to commencement. 
(b)  A site development permit may be required prior to commencing work if drainage, grading or other issues warrant. 
(c)  Proper disposition of all debris shall be documented on the permit, including locale of dumping of spoils. 
(d)  A site development permit may be required if spoils are dumped within the city limits. 
(e)  No burning shall be allowed without notification to and approval by the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 3, 10-16-2012)  
Sec. 10-257. - Standards for demolition. 
(a)  The proposed demolition site shall be inspected by the building official and requirements prior to commencing the work listed. 
(b)  Construction barricades, silt fencing or other site safety precautions may be required. 
(c)  Proper disposition of all debris shall be documented on the permit, including locale of dumping. 
(d)  Demolition of structures shall not commence until all utilities have been disconnected from the structure. 
(e)  Site restoration shall include removal of all debris, site work and revegetation when required. 
(f)  A site development permit may be required prior to commencing work if drainage, grading or other issues warrant. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 4, 10-16-2012)  
Sec. 10-258. - Fees, deposit and bond for moving buildings. 
(a)  Fees. Upon receiving a request for a building moving permit, the city staff shall determine whether the proposed move will require the relocation of utilities and/or police escorts. If utility relocation will not be required, the permit fee shall be $100.00. If utility relocation or escort service is required, additional permit fees will be required in an amount appropriate to cover such additional costs. 
(b)  Deposit and bond. If a proposed building move will require relocation of utility lines and/or police escort, the building official shall prepare an estimate of those costs and require the permit applicant to deposit cash with the city in an amount sufficient to cover those estimated costs. In addition, if the nature of the proposed move is likely to cause property damage, the building official shall require a surety bond satisfactory to the city prior to permit issuance. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 5, 10-16-2012)  
Sec. 10-259. - Moved buildings to comply with minimum building standards. 
(a)  Minimum standards. All buildings or structures moved into or within the city must meet the same standards for their continued use or occupancy as those that are applicable to similar existing or newly constructed buildings or structures located in the city, regardless of the date of their construction. These requirements shall apply equally to any previously constructed buildings which are moved within or into the city. Granting of a permit to move a building into or within the city does not exempt the moved building from these requirements; provided, however, that the building official may approve the moving of a building or structure on the condition that it shall be brought into compliance within a period of time stated on the permit. 
(b)  Notice and inspection. Persons receiving a permit to move or relocate a building into or within the city are required to notify the city building official, in writing, within 72 hours after such move is substantially completed. Failure to give such written notice will invalidate the moving permit. All moved or relocated buildings will be inspected by the building official within ten days from the date of receipt of the written notice of move completion. 
(c)  Time for compliance. All buildings or structures moved or relocated into or within the city must be brought into compliance with city minimum building standards within six months from the date the move is substantially completed. Failure to complete such repairs or renovations within six months will cause the building to be subject to the city regulations regarding abatement of substandard structures. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 6, 10-16-2012)  
Sec. 10-260. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
Any person who violates any portion of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be subject to a fine of not less than $50.00 and not more than $500.00 for each day of violation, each day on noncompliance being a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 892, § 7, 10-16-2012)  
Secs. 10-261—10-278. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY 
 
Sec. 10-279. - Certificate of occupancy—Defined. 
An official certificate issued by the city through the building official which indicates conformance with all applicable zoning regulations, building codes and other law. Such certificate authorizes the legal use of the premises for which it is issued. 
(Ord. No. 905, § 2.01, 6-13-2013; Ord. No. 969, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
Sec. 10-280. - Applications and issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  A certificate of occupancy shall be applied for and coincident with the application for a building or change of use permit, and will be issued before occupancy and connection of utilities to a structure, provided that the construction or change has been made in conformity with all applicable laws and building regulations. 
(b)  No land, structure, or portion of a structure shall be used or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building official stating that the building, or portion of the building, or the proposed use of land or building, has been inspected and is in compliance with the provisions of this article and all applicable laws and building regulations. 
(c)  Failure to obtain a certificate of occupancy as required by this article shall constitute a basis to deny connection of city utilities. 
(Ord. No. 905, § 2.02, 6-13-2013; Ord. No. 969, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
Sec. 10-281. - Inspection fee. 
A minimum inspection fee of $75.00 per inspection (building, electrical, plumbing, fire) shall be charged and collected by the city from all individuals or entities requesting a certificate of occupancy for structures located within the city. The minimum inspection fee is due and payable contemporaneous with the filing of the application for a building permit or the application for a certificate of occupancy. The minimum inspection fee may be amended from time to time as the city council deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 905, § 2.03, 6-13-2013; Ord. No. 908, § 2, 7-9-2013; Ord. No. 969, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
Sec. 10-282. - Revocation of certificate of occupancy; appeal. 
(a)  The building official or fire chief may revoke a certificate of occupancy for those structures in violation of this article or for failure to comply with the terms of this article, any applicable laws, or building regulations. 
(b)  If the building official or fire chief revokes a certificate of occupancy, the owner or manager may appeal the revocation to the board of adjustment. Such appeal shall be in writing, filed with the building official within seven calendar days of such revocation. 
(c)  Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with this section is a waiver of his or her right to a hearing and the building official's or fire chiefs decision shall be final. 
(d)  The revocation of a certificate of occupancy by the building official or fire chief is stayed pending appeal. 
(e)  If a certificate of occupancy for a structure is revoked in any manner, the city may notify all utility companies serving the building that the certificate of occupancy for the structure in violation has been withdrawn and request that all utility services be discontinued from those units in violation. 
(Ord. No. 905, § 2.04, 6-13-2013; Ord. No. 969, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
Sec. 10-283. - Record. 
A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be maintained on file in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 905, § 2.05, 6-13-2013; Ord. No. 969, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
Sec. 10-284. - Liability of city. 
Neither the city nor any authorized agent acting under the terms of this article shall be liable or have any liability by reason of orders issued or work done in compliance with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 905, § 2.06, 6-13-2013; Ord. No. 969, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
Sec. 10-285. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine not less than $200.00 in accordance with other ordinances adopted by the city council and state law. After ten calendar days, each day any such violation of this article occurs shall constitute a separate and punishable offense. 
(Ord. No. 905, § 2.07, 6-13-2013; Ord. No. 969, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
Secs. 10-286—10-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS FOR STRUCTURES INTENDED FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY 
 
Sec. 10-301. - Legislative findings of fact; purpose. 
There exists in the city structures used for human habitation and nonresidential purposes that are substandard in structure and maintenance. Furthermore, inadequate provision for light and air, insufficient protection against fire, lack of proper heating, insanitary conditions, and overcrowding constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, welfare, and reasonable comfort of the citizens of the city. The existence of such conditions will create slum and blighted areas requiring large scale clearance, if not remedied. Furthermore, in the absence of corrective measures, such areas will experience a deterioration of social values, a curtailment of investment and tax revenue, and an impairment of economic values. The establishment and maintenance of minimum structural and environmental standards are essential to the prevention of blight and decay and the safeguarding of public health, safety, morals, and welfare. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety, morals, and welfare of the citizens of the city by establishing minimum standards applicable to residential and nonresidential structures. Minimum standards are established with respect to utilities, facilities, and other physical components essential to make structures safe, sanitary, and fit for human use and habitation. This article is found to be remedial and essential to the public interest, and it is intended that this article be liberally construed to effect its purpose. All structures within the city on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives, or constructed thereafter, must comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 940, § 1, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 10-302. - Definitions. 
Basement means the portion of a structure that is partly underground and has more than one-half its height, measured from clear floor to ceiling, above the average finished grade of the ground adjoining a structure. 
Bathroom means an enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs, showers, or both, and which may also include toilets, lavatories, or fixtures serving similar purposes. 
Cellar means the lowermost portion of a structure partly or totally underground having one-half or more of its height, measured from clear floor to ceiling, below the average finished grade of the adjoining ground. 
Department means the department designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this article. 
Director means the director of the department designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this article and includes representatives, agents, or department employees designated by the director. 
Dwelling means a structure or building occupied as a residence. 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms in a multifamily property designed to accommodate one family and containing only one kitchen plus living, sanitary, and sleeping facilities. 
Floor space means the total area of all habitable space. 
Grade means the natural surface of the ground, or surface ground after completion of any change in contour. 
Graded inspection means an inspection of a multi-tenant property in which the property is given a score by the director based on the number of code violations found to exist on the premises. 
Guest room means any room in a multi-tenant property, other than a multifamily property, that is intended as a sleeping area, whether or not the room includes a kitchen or kitchenette and whether or not the property is operated for profit or charges for the services it offers. 
Habitable space means the space occupied by one or more persons while living, sleeping, eating, and cooking; excluding kitchenettes, bathrooms, toilet rooms, laundries, pantries, dressing rooms, closets, storage spaces, foyers, hallways, utility rooms, heater rooms, boiler rooms, and basement or cellar recreation rooms. 
Kitchen means a space, 60 square feet or more in floor area with a minimum width of five feet, used for cooking or preparation of food. 
Kitchenette means a space, less than 60 square feet in floor area, used for cooking or preparation of food. 
Non-owner occupied rental property means a single-family, duplex, townhouse, or condominium dwelling that is leased or rented to one or more persons other than the owner of the property, regardless of whether: 
(1)  The lease or rental agreement is oral or written; or 
(2)  The compensation received by the owner for the lease or rental of the property is in the form of money, services, or any other thing of value. 
Occupant means a person who has possessory rights to and is actually in possession of a premises. 
Open and vacant structure means a structure that is, regardless of its structural condition: 
(1)  Unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees; and 
(2)  Unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children. 
Operating condition means free of leaks, safe, sanitary, structurally sound, and in good working order. 
Owner means a person in whom is vested the ownership or title of real property: 
(1)  Including, but not limited to: 
a.  The holder of fee simple title; 
b.  The holder of a life estate; 
c.  The holder of a leasehold estate for an initial term of five years or more; 
d.  The buyer in a contract for deed; 
e.  A mortgagee, receiver, executor, or trustee in control of real property; and 
f.  The named grantee in the last recorded deed; and 
(2)  Not including the holder of a leasehold estate or tenancy for an initial term of less than five years. 
Person means any individual, corporation, organization, partnership, association, or any other legal entity. 
Plumbing fixtures means gas pipes, water pipes, toilets, lavatories, sinks, laundry tubs, dishwashers, garbage disposal units, clothes-washing machines, catch basins, wash basins, bathtubs, shower baths, sewer pipes, sewage system, septic tanks, drains, vents, traps, and other fuel-burning or water-using fixtures and appliances, together with all connections to pipes. 
Premises or property means a lot, plot, or parcel of land, including any structures on the land. 
Property manager means a person who for compensation has managing control of real property. 
Public sewer means a sewer operated by a public authority or public utility and available for public use. 
Sanitary means any condition of good order and cleanliness that precludes the probability of disease transmission. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
Unit means a dwelling unit or a guest room in a multi-tenant property. 
(Ord. No. 940, § 1, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 10-303. - Minimum housing standards. 
(a)  Property standards. An owner shall: 
(1)  Eliminate a hole, excavation, sharp protrusion, and any other object or condition that exists on the land and is reasonably capable of causing injury to a person; 
(2)  Securely cover or close a well, cesspool, or cistern; 
(3)  Provide solid waste receptacles or containers when required by city ordinances; 
(4)  Provide drainage to prevent standing water and flooding on the land; 
(5)  Remove dead trees and tree limbs that are reasonably capable of causing injury to a person; and 
(6)  Keep the doors and windows of a vacant structure or vacant portion of a structure securely closed to prevent unauthorized entry. 
(b)  Structural standards. An owner shall: 
(1)  Protect the exterior surfaces of a structure that are subject to decay by application of paint or other coating; 
(2)  Fill hollow, masonry supporting piers, if used, with concrete and anchor the piers to concrete footings with a 5/8 -inch steel dowel; 
(3)  Provide and maintain railings for stairs, steps, balconies, porches, and elsewhere as specified in the city building code; 
(4)  Repair holes, cracks, and other defects reasonably capable of causing injury to a person in stairs, porches, steps, and balconies; 
(5)  Maintain a structure intended for human occupancy and a structure used as an accessory to a structure intended for human occupancy in a weather-tight and water-tight condition; 
(6)  Maintain floors, walls, ceilings, and all supporting structural members in a sound condition, capable of bearing imposed loads safely; 
(7)  Provide cross-ventilation of not less than one and one-half square feet for each 25 lineal feet of wall in each basement, cellar, and crawl space; 
(8)  Repair or replace chimney flue and vent attachments that do not function properly; 
(9)  Repair holes, cracks, breaks, and loose surface materials that are health or safety hazards in or on floors, walls, and ceilings; and 
(10)  Maintain any fence on the property in compliance with the following standards: 
a.  Maintain a fence so that it is not out of vertical alignment more than one foot from the vertical, measured at the top of the fence, for a fence over four feet high, or more than six inches from the vertical, measured at the top of the fence, for a fence not more than four feet high, except that this provision does not apply to a masonry wall unless the wall encloses: 
1.  A multi-tenant property; or 
2.  A single-family or duplex property where the wall is not shared with another property; 
b.  Repair or replace rotted, fire damaged, or broken wooden slats and support posts; 
c.  Repair or replace broken or bent metal posts and torn, cut, bent, or ripped metal fencing materials; and 
d.  Repair or replace loose bricks, stones, rocks, mortar, and similar materials on any masonry wall that encloses: 
1.  A multi-tenant property; or 
2.  A single-family or duplex property where the wall is not shared with another property. 
(c)  Utility standards. An owner shall: 
(1)  Provide and maintain in operating condition connections to discharge sewage from a structure or land into a public sewer system where available; 
(2)  Provide and maintain in operating condition a toilet connected to a water source and to a public sewer, where available, in each structure intended for human habitation; 
(3)  Provide and maintain in operating condition connections and pipes to supply potable water at adequate pressure to a structure intended for human occupancy; 
(4)  Provide and maintain in operating condition a device to supply hot water of a minimum temperature of 120°F within each structure intended for human habitation; 
(5)  Provide and connect a kitchen sink, bathtub or shower, and lavatory to a cold and hot water source in each structure intended for human habitation; 
(6)  Connect plumbing fixtures and heating equipment that the owner supplies in accordance with the city plumbing code and city mechanical code; 
(7)  Provide and maintain heating equipment in operating condition so that it is capable of maintaining a minimum inside temperature of 68°F from November 16 through March 15 in each room of a structure intended for human occupancy; 
(8)  If screens are not provided as required in subsection (d)(2), provide and maintain in operating condition, from April 1 through November 1, refrigerated air equipment capable of maintaining a maximum inside temperature that is 20 degrees lower than the outside temperature or 85°F, whichever is warmer, in each room of a structure intended for human occupancy; 
(9)  Provide and maintain in operating condition supply lines for electrical service to each structure intended for human occupancy if electrical service is available within 300 feet; 
(10)  Connect each heating and cooking device that burns solid fuel to a chimney or flue; and 
(11)  Provide and maintain in operating condition electrical circuits and outlets sufficient to safely carry a load imposed by normal use of appliances and fixtures. 
(d)  Health standards. An owner shall: 
(1)  Eliminate rodents and vermin in or on the land; 
(2)  Provide a structure intended for human habitation with a screen for keeping out insects at each opening of the structure if the structure is not cooled with refrigerated air; 
(3)  Maintain the interior of a vacant structure or vacant portion of a structure free from rubbish and garbage; and 
(4)  Keep the interior of a structure free from insects, rodents, and vermin. 
(e)  Security standards. An owner or operator of a multifamily property shall: 
(1)  Provide and maintain security devices in each dwelling unit as required by V.T.C.A., Property Code §§ 92.153, 92.154, and 92.155, as amended; and 
(2)  If the multifamily property has 20 or more dwelling units, provide security lighting that adequately illuminates all parking areas, walkways, stairs and steps, doorways, and garbage storage areas so that persons moving in or around those areas can be easily seen. 
(f)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) that the premises concerned is the site of new construction and reasonable and continuous progress is being made to complete the construction. 
(g)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (d)(4) that the structure was treated to eliminate insects, rodents, and vermin by a person licensed under the Texas Structural Pest Control Act once within the preceding six months. 
(h)  An owner shall provide a tenant with alternative housing that meets the minimum standards required by this section when: 
(1)  After being issued a notice or citation for violation of subsection (c)(7), the owner fails to repair heating equipment within 72 hours after receiving such notice or citation and the overnight low temperature, as measured by the National Weather Service for the local area, is below 40°F for three consecutive days after receiving such notice or citation; or 
(2)  After being issued a notice or citation for violation of subsection (c)(8), the owner fails to repair refrigerated air equipment within 72 hours after receiving such notice or citation and the daytime high temperature, as measured by the National Weather Service for the local area, is 95°F or above for three consecutive days after receiving such notice or citation. 
(i)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (c)(7) and (c)(8) and to the alternative housing requirements of subsection (h) that: 
(1)  Failure to maintain heating and refrigerated air equipment in compliance with those subsections was the direct result of an act of nature or other cause beyond the reasonable control of the owner; or 
(2)  The owner is making diligent efforts to repair the heating and refrigerated air equipment in compliance with those subsections; if the owner demonstrates to the director that diligent efforts to repair are being made, the director will not issue a notice or citation for a violation of subsection (c)(7) or (c)(8). 
(j)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (c)(7) and to the alternative housing requirements of subsection (h)(1) that a written contract is in effect requiring the tenant to provide and maintain heating equipment and the owner has provided utility connections for heating equipment in compliance with the city mechanical code, as amended, in each room of the structure intended for human occupancy. 
(k)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (c)(8) and to the alternative housing requirement of subsection (h)(2) that the structure is provided with exterior windows and doors that are easily openable to provide air ventilation and covered with screens in compliance with subsection (d)(2). 
(Ord. No. 940, § 1, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 10-304. - Penalty for violation. 
Any violation of this article shall be a Class C misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, any person violating shall be fined any sum not exceeding $2,000.00, and each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 940, § 1, 8-25-2015)  
Secs. 10-305—10-330. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 
 
Sec. 10-331. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the property maintenance code of the city and shall be referred to herein as "this code." 
(Ord. No. 963, § 1(Exh. A), 11-18-2016)  
Sec. 10-332. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards and regulations to help safeguard and preserve life or limb, property and public welfare by regulating the use, occupancy, and maintenance of all structures, buildings and properties within the city. 
(Ord. No. 963, § 1(Exh. A), 11-18-2016)  
Sec. 10-333. - Applicability. 
This code shall apply to all zoning districts, land, properties, structures and buildings within the city, including all vacant, occupied, residential, nonresidential, improved or unimproved land, properties, structures and buildings. 
(Ord. No. 963, § 1(Exh. A), 11-18-2016)  
Sec. 10-334. - Conflicting regulations. 
If any other ordinances of the city conflict with this code and the standards and regulations established herein, the more stringent or stricter standards or regulations shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 963, § 1(Exh. A), 11-18-2016)  
Sec. 10-335. - Definitions. 
Where terms are not specially defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context within which they are used. Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged, Copyright 1981, shall be considered as providing ordinary accepted meanings. Words in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine. The following terms are defined as follows and shall apply to all sections of this code unless defined elsewhere in this article: 
Dangerous building means any building or structure which has any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be deemed to be a dangerous building, and a hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare and a public nuisance, provided that such conditions or defects of dilapidation, substandardness, or unfitness for human habitation pose a threat or potential threat to life, health, property, or human safety: 
(1)  Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(2)  Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn, or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic. 
(3)  Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half times the working stress or stresses allowed in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location. 
(4)  Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location. 
(5)  Whenever any portion, member, or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
(6)  Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance, or ornamentation on the exterior thereof, is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place, so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such buildings. 
(7)  Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of: 
a.  Dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; 
b.  Faulty construction; 
c.  The removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the ground necessary to support such building; 
d.  The deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its foundation; or 
e.  Any other cause; 
is likely to partially or completely collapse. 
(8)  Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used. 
(9)  Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumbline passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base. 
(10)  Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33 percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50 percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, or 50 percent damage or deterioration of enclosing or outside walls or coverings. 
(11)  Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated or neglected, as to become a harbor for vagrants or criminals. 
(12)  Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists, or is maintained in violation of the city's minimum housing standards or technical building codes, to the extent the violation poses a threat or potential threat to life, health, safety, or property. 
(13)  Whenever a building or structure used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction, arrangement, or inadequate light, air, or sanitation facilities, is determined by the health director to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease. 
(14)  Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections, or heating apparatus, or other mechanical, structural, or social cause, is determined by the fire chief to be a fire hazard. 
(15)  Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
(16)  Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains for any period of time on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure, unless such structure has been approved for partial demolition by the department of building inspections in its permitting process. 
(17)  Whenever any building or structure, regardless of its structural condition, is unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees and is unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered by children. 
(18)  Whenever any building or structure is secured by a means inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or use in the manner described in subsection (17) above. 
Distressed property means a property or premises on which there is located a building or structure believed by an appropriate city official or the city council to suffer from one or more of the conditions or defects described in this section. 
Enforcement authority means the code compliance officer of the city or the person or department to whom the city manager may, from time to time, delegate the enforcement responsibility. 
Fencing material. Fencing as described in this article falls within one of the listed categories: 
(1)  Ornamental. Typically constructed of wrought iron or galvanized steel, ornamental fencing creates a decorative and secure perimeter line around a property or area. Ornamental fences can be built using brick to accent and further strengthen the fence. 
(2)  Privacy. Constructed of wood or vinyl, privacy fences are typically six to nine feet in height, and obstruct visibility from the outside of a property or area to the inside. 
(3)  Wood. The traditional fencing material, wood fencing is available in spruce, treated pine, and cedar. Installation variations include wood posts, galvanized steel posts, and brick posts or footings. Styles include picket, shadowbox, ranch rail, lawn rail, split rail, arched picket, scalloped picket, crossbuck, and solid panel privacy. Does not include nontraditional wood material such as plywood, pallets or wooden sheeting. 
(4)  Vinyl. PVC "vinyl" is a low-maintenance, durable alternative to wood and ornamental iron fencing. 
(5)  Chainlink. Galvanized steel mesh fencing. 
(6)  Other fencing. Includes post and chain, brick cinderblock, barbed wire, pliable vinyl (temporary fencing for construction sites, etc.), and glass block. Other options include hinged gates, electronic security gates, and rollaway gates. 
Owner means any person claiming or in whom is vested the ownership, dominion or title of real or personal property, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The holder of the fee simple title. 
(2)  The holder of a life estate. 
(3)  The holder of a leasehold estate for an initial term of five years or more. 
(4)  A buyer in possession, or having right of possession under a contract for deed. 
(5)  A mortgagee, receiver, executor or trustee in possession or control, or having right of possession or control of real property. 
(6)  Any agent who is responsible for managing, leasing or operation of property who fails to take the necessary remedial action after having been notified in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the owners have declined to act accordingly. 
Premises means any parcel, lot or tract of land, including any structure, building, landscaping or trees thereon or other structure or improvement located thereon. 
Structure means any residential building, nonresidential building, dwelling, condominium, townhouse, apartment unit, detached garage, shed, awning, fence, screening wall, sign, swimming pool, excavation, or any other edifice, erection or material placed or located on any property within the city and any other improvement of any kind or nature. 
TRO means a temporary restraining order issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Weatherproof means the treatment of an object to allow it to be able to withstand exposure to weather without damage or loss of function. 
(Ord. No. 963, § 1(Exh. A), 11-18-2016)  
Sec. 10-336. - Enforcement; right of entry. 
(a)  The enforcement authority for this article shall be the code compliance officer of the city or the person or department to whom the city manager delegates the enforcement responsibility. 
(b)  Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce this code, or whenever the enforcement authority has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure or upon any property a condition or violation which is unsafe, dangerous or hazardous or detrimental to the public interest, the enforcement authority may enter such structure or property at all reasonable times to inspect the same; provided that, if such structure or property is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry, and if such entry is refused the enforcement authority shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(Ord. No. 963, § 1(Exh. A), 11-18-2016)  
Sec. 10-337. - Responsibility for compliance. 
(a)  Owner. Every owner of the premises shall maintain such premises in compliance with this article. An owner shall not let, rent or lease premises for occupancy or use which do not comply with the provisions of this code. 
(b)  Owner and tenant. Every owner and every tenant of the premises shall maintain the premises in a clean, sanitary and safe condition, including the disposal of rubbish, garbage, organic or inorganic waste, junk or other waste in a lawful manner. 
(c)  Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease, or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the code official and shall furnish to the code official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 963, § 1(Exh. A), 11-18-2016)  
Sec. 10-338. - Exterior grounds. 
(a)  Fences. All fences shall be maintained reasonably plumb and structurally sound. Each structural and decorative member of a fence shall be free of deterioration and be compatible in size, material and appearance with the remainder of the fence. A fence that has deteriorated to a condition that it is likely to fall shall be repaired or replaced. Fences shall not be externally braced in lieu of replacing or repairing posts, columns or other structural members. 
(b)  Accessory structures. Carports, awnings, patio covers, garages, sheds, storage buildings and other accessory structures shall be maintained structurally sound, and free of deterioration. All accessory structures shall be protected from the elements by periodic painting, staining or other weatherproofing or surface protection. 
(c)  Outside storage. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, to allow, permit, conduct or maintain any trash, rubbish, unused construction materials (unless being used in conjunction with a current building permit), plumbing fixtures, auto parts, discarded furniture, household appliances, objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter or any other items or personal property not customarily used or stored outside and which are not made of a material that is resistant to damage or deterioration from exposure to the outside environment, to accumulate thereon, unless otherwise allowed. 
(Ord. No. 963, § 1(Exh. A), 11-18-2016)  
Sec. 10-339. - Structural maintenance. 
(a)  Exterior surfaces. The foundation, exterior wall, floor, roof, windows, doors and frames and all exterior surfaces of every structure shall be maintained in a state of repair sufficient to exclude rats, rodents, birds, vermin or water intrusion. Peeling paint, cracked or loose plaster, broken glass, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be repaired, replaced, or restored. Garage doors shall be capable of being closed reasonably plumb, properly attached and the exterior surface maintained weatherproof as required to prevent deterioration. 
(b)  Exterior attachments. All exterior canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, stairways, standpipes, rain gutters, exhaust ducts and similar overhang extensions attached to a structure shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a safe and sound condition. Their exterior surface materials shall be maintained weatherproof and shall be painted or protected as required to prevent deterioration. 
(c)  Chimneys. All chimneys and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe, sound, properly mortared and in good repair. Their exterior surface material shall be maintained weatherproof and shall be painted or protected as required to prevent deterioration. 
(d)  Stairs and porches. Every stair, porch, balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads to which it is subjected. They shall be kept in sound condition and good repair, and their exterior surface shall be maintained weatherproof. 
(Ord. No. 963, § 1(Exh. A), 11-18-2016)  
Sec. 10-340. - Notice to owner; owner's due process rights. 
(a)  Whenever the enforcement authority/officer discovers a state of disrepair or a dangerous building as defined in this article, he, or his designated agent, shall give notice to the owner of the condition requiring remediation by: 
(1)  Personally serving the owner with written notice; 
(2)  Depositing the notice in the United States mail addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address; 
(3)  Publishing the notice at least twice within a ten-day period in a newspaper of general circulation in a county in which the building or structure is located if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown; or 
(4)  Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown, which notice the council finds to be reasonably calculated to give the owner notice of such violations. 
(b)  The notice must contain: 
(1)  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the property on which it is located; 
(2)  A description of the violation of the municipal standards that are present at the building; 
(3)  A statement that the municipality will secure the building as the case may be; 
(4)  A notice providing the owner with the date, time and location of a public hearing before the board of appeals to determine whether a structure complies with the standards set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 963, § 1(Exh. A), 11-18-2016)  
Sec. 10-341. - Board of appeals. 
(a)  The city council shall hereby act as the board of appeals and shall conduct hearings to determine whether a structure complies with the requirements of this article when the enforcement authority deems a structure a dangerous building or distressed property. 
(b)  The board of appeals shall: 
(1)  Schedule and hold a public hearing and hear testimony from the building official, the owner and other persons having an interest in the dangerous building or distressed property, and any person desiring to present factual evidence relevant to the unsafe building. Such testimony shall relate to the determination of the question of whether the building or structure in question is a dangerous building and the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article and the amount of time it will take to reasonably perform the work. The owner or a person having an interest in the dangerous building shall have the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. 
(2)  Upon conclusion of the hearing, the board of appeals shall determine by majority vote whether the building or structure in question is a dangerous building or distressed property. Upon a determination that the building or structure in question constitutes a dangerous building or distressed property, the board of appeals shall issue an order: 
a.  Containing an identification of the building and the property on which it is located; 
b.  Making written findings of the violations of the minimum standards that are present at the building; 
c.  Requiring the owner and persons having an interest in the building to repair, vacate, or demolish the building within 30 days from the issuance of such order, unless the owner or a person with an interest in the building establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within 30 days, in which instance the board of appeals shall specify a reasonable time for the completion of the work; 
d.  Containing a statement that the city will vacate, secure, remove or demolish the dangerous building and relocate the occupants of the building if the ordered action is not taken within the time specified by the board of appeals; and 
e.  The building official or city secretary shall deliver a copy of the order by hand delivery or certified mail to the owner and all persons having an interest in the property, as such persons appear in official public records, including all identifiable mortgagees and lienholders, within ten days after the date the board of appeals issues its order which shall include an identification and address of the building and the property on which it is located; a description of the violation of this article that is found to be present on the property; a statement that the municipality will vacate, secure, remove, repair, or demolish the building or relocate the occupants of the building if the ordered action is not taken within a reasonable time; or that the city will take no action; and instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained. 
(3)  If the board of appeals allows the owner or a person with an interest in the dangerous building more than 30 days to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the board of appeals in its written order shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner or person to secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed. The securing of the property shall be in a manner found to be acceptable by the building official. 
(4)  The board of appeals may not allow the owner or person with an interest in the dangerous building more than 90 days to repair, remove, or demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the written order unless the owner or person: 
a.  Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and 
b.  Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within 90 days because of the scope and complexity of the work. 
(5)  If the board of appeals allows the owner or person with an interest in the dangerous building more than 90 days to complete any part of the work required to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the board of appeals shall require the owner or person to regularly submit progress reports to the board of appeals to demonstrate that the owner or person has complied with the time schedules established for commencement and performance of the work. The written order may require that the owner or person with an interest in the building appear before the city building official to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules. 
(6)  Any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of record of property jointly or severally aggrieved by an order of the board of appeals may file in district court a verified petition stating that the decision is illegal, in whole or in part and specifying the grounds of the illegality. The petition must be filed by an owner, lienholder, or mortgagee within 30 calendar days after the respective dates a copy of the final decision of the board of appeals is personally delivered to them, mailed to them by first-class mail with certified return receipt requested, or delivered to them by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation service, or such decision of the board of appeals shall become final as to each of them upon the expiration of such 30 calendar day period. 
(7)  In the event the owner or a person with an interest in a dangerous building fails to appeal from the order issued pursuant to this section within 30 days, or fails to comply with such order within 30 days or such longer period of time as may be specified in the order, the city may, at any time after the expiration of 30 days from the date a copy of the final decision of the board of appeals is mailed to each known owner, lienholder or mortgagee, cause any occupants of the dangerous building to be relocated, and may cause the dangerous building to be secured, removed, or demolished at the city's expense. The city may assess the expenses on, and the city has a lien against, unless it is a homestead as protected by the state constitution, the property on which the dangerous building was located. The lien is extinguished if the property owner or a person having an interest in the building reimburses the city for the expenses. The lien arises and attaches to the property at the time the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the county clerk in the county in which the property is located. The notice of lien must contain the name and address of the owner of the dangerous building if that information can be determined by a diligent effort, a legal description of the real property on which the building was located, the amount of expenses incurred by the city, and the balance due. Such lien is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens and all previously recorded bona fide mortgage liens attached to real property. 
(8)  In addition to the authority set forth in subsection (7), after the expiration of the time allotted in the order for the repair, removal, or demolition of a dangerous building, the city may repair the building at its expense and assess the expenses on the land on which the building stands or to which it is attached. The repairs contemplated by this section may only be accomplished to the extent necessary to bring the building into compliance with the minimum standards established by this article, and to the extent such repairs do not exceed minimum housing standards. The city shall follow the procedures set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 214 for filing a lien on the property on which the building is located. 
(9)  After the public hearing, if a building is found in violation of standards set out in this article, the board of appeals may order that the occupants be relocated within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 963, § 1(Exh. A), 11-18-2016)  
Sec. 10-342. - Penalty; culpability. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, shall be assessed a fine of not less than $1.00 nor more than $500.00, and each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. It shall not be necessary to allege a culpable state of mind in complaints alleging a violation of this article, and same is hereby dispensed with. 
(Ord. No. 963, § 1(Exh. A), 11-18-2016)  
Sec. 10-343. - Emergency measures to secure substandard buildings. 
(a)  In addition to the procedures set forth in this article, the city may follow the procedures set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.0011, as amended, to secure a building that the city determines violates the minimum standards set forth in this article and is unoccupied or is occupied only by persons who do not have a right of possession to the building. Such buildings or structures may be ordered to be and shall be secured as an emergency precaution under the following conditions, regulations and procedure: 
(1)  When it shall appear that a building or structure in the city is a substandard building under the terms of this article and that such building or structure or the manner of its use constitutes an immediate and serious danger to life or property. When such conditions exist, the city manager or building official may order that the building or structure be immediately secured and any of the following emergency measures to be taken: 
a.  Immediate vacation of such building, structure, and/or adjoining buildings or structures; 
b.  Vacation of the danger area around such building or structure; 
c.  Such emergency shoring up and bracing of walls, roofs, and supports as are required to render such building or structure safe; or 
d.  The destruction of such walls, roofs, and supports or the entire structure or so much thereof as cannot be braced or made secure with safety, or post notices on or near such building or structure, or buildings or structures, notifying the public of such orders and ordering all persons to keep out of such building, buildings, structures, or structure and the areas of danger surrounding it or them. 
(b)  When any of the above-mentioned measures are ordered to be taken, notice of such order shall be given as follows: 
(1)  Such order shall be directed to the owner of such substandard building or structure, or his authorized representative, if the same shall be known. Where notification can be accomplished without increasing the danger to life or property, notice shall be given by personal service on the owner of the building or structure, or his said representative. 
(2)  In the event that such notification would create such a delay as would materially increase the danger of life or property, then such notice need not be given. 
(c)  In the event that such notification cannot be given before the building is secured or in the event such notice is given and the owner or his representative shall refuse or fail to carry out the orders of the city manager or building official, then, the city manager or building official may proceed to carry out such orders either by private contract, the city fire department, or through an agency of the city, and the cost thus incurred shall constitute a valid lien against the property so repaired. 
(d)  Right to request a public hearing. The board of appeals shall conduct a public hearing on the emergency securing of a building or structure as provided under this section is within 30 days after the date the building is secured the owner files with the city a written request for the hearing. A hearing requested under this subsection shall be conducted within 20 days after the date the request is filed. 
(Ord. No. 963, § 1(Exh. A), 11-18-2016)  
Chapter 12 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal governing body may impose and collect occupation taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 302.101; local occupational tax prohibited unless specifically permitted by state law, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 101.008; municipal regulatory authority concerning food service employees not preempted by state regulation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 438.037; municipality which is member of public health district not prohibited from regulating or administering permit system concerning food service establishments, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 437.004(d); state regulation of massage therapists does not preempt local zoning and limited regulation of massage establishments, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 455.005; automobile wrecking and salvage yards, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 396.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 12-1—12-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND CANVASSERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Type A municipality may regulate hawkers, peddlers, and pawnbrokers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.031. 
 
Sec. 12-19. - Definitions. 
As used in this article the following words have the meaning indicated: 
Canvasser is a person who attempts to make personal contact with a resident at his/her residence without prior specific invitation or appointment from the resident, for the primary purpose of: 
(1)  Attempting to enlist support for or against a particular religion, philosophy, ideology, political party, issue or candidate, even if incidental to such purpose the canvasser accepts the donation of money for or against such cause, or 
(2)  Distributing a handbill or flyer advertising a non-commercial event or service. 
Itinerant vendor or hawker is a person who sets up and operates a temporary business on privately owned property, whether improved or unimproved, in the city, soliciting, selling, or taking orders for, or offering to sell or take orders for any goods or services. A temporary business is one that continues for 45 days or less; and, exists whether solicitation is from a stand, vehicle, or freestanding. 
Peddler is a person who attempts to make personal contact with a resident at his/her residence without prior specific invitation or appointment from the resident, for the primary purpose of attempting to sell a good or service. A "peddler" does not include a person who distributes handbills or flyers for a commercial purpose, advertising an event, activity, good or service that is offered to the resident for purchase at a location away from the residence or at a time different from the time of visit. Such a person is a "solicitor." 
Solicitor is a person who attempts to make personal contact with a resident at his/her residence without prior specific invitation or appointment from the resident, for the primary purpose of: 
(1)  Attempting to obtain a donation to a particular patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, fraternal, charitable, political or religious purpose, even if incidental to such purpose there is the sale of some good or service, or 
(2)  Distributing a handbill or flyer advertising a commercial event or service. 
(Ord. No. 836, § 1, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 850, § 1, 5-25-2010; Ord. No. 954, § 1, 6-14-2016)  
Sec. 12-20. - Exception. 
This article shall not apply to a federal, state or local government employee or a public utility employee in the performance of his/her duty for his/her employer. 
(Ord. No. 836, § 2, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 954, § 2, 6-14-2016)  
Sec. 12-21. - License required for peddlers, hawkers, and solicitors, available for canvassers. 
No person shall act as a peddler, hawker, solicitor within the city without first obtaining a peddler license in accordance with this article. A canvasser is not required to have a peddler license but any canvasser wanting a peddler license for the purpose of reassuring city residents of the canvasser's good faith shall be issued one upon request. 
(Ord. No. 836, § 3, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 954, § 3, 6-14-2016)  
Sec. 12-22. - Fee. 
The fee for the issuance of each peddler license shall be: 
(1)  For a peddler acting on behalf of a merchant, a fee of $80.00 per month or $275.00 annual fee. 
(2)  For a solicitor (including a commercial solicitor advertising an event, activity, good or service for purchase at a location away from the residence): No fee. 
(3)  For a canvasser requesting a peddler license: No fee. 
(Ord. No. 836, § 4, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 954, § 4, 6-14-2016)  
Sec. 12-23. - Application for peddler license. 
Any person or organization (formal or informal) may apply for one or more peddler licenses by completing an application form at the office of the issuing officer, during regular office hours. 
The peddler license shall be issued promptly after application but in all cases within 24 business hours of completion of an application, unless it is determined within that time that: 
(1)  The applicant has been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the past seven years; 
(2)  With respect to a particular license, the individual for whom a card is requested has been convicted of any felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the past seven years; or 
(3)  Any statement upon the application is false, unless the applicant can demonstrate that the falsehood was the result of excusable neglect. 
(Ord. No. 836, § 5, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 954, § 5, 6-14-2016)  
Sec. 12-24. - Contents of application. 
The applicant (person or organization) shall provide the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant. 
(2)  Number of peddler licenses required. 
(3)  The name, physical description and photograph of each person for which a card is requested. In lieu of this information, a driver's license, state identification card, passport, or other government-issued identification card (issued by a government within the United States) containing this information may be provided, and a photocopy taken. If a photograph is not supplied, the city will take an instant photograph of each person for which a card is requested at the application site. The actual cost of the instant photograph will be paid by the applicant. 
(4)  The permanent and (if any) local address of the applicant. 
(5)  The permanent and (if any) local address of each person for whom a license is requested. 
(6)  A brief description of the proposed activity related to this peddler license. (Copies of literature to be distributed may be substituted for this description at the option of the applicant). 
(7)  Date and place of birth for each person for whom a card is requested. 
(8)  A list of all infraction, offense, misdemeanor and felony convictions of each person for whom a license is requested for the seven years immediately prior to the application. 
(9)  The motor vehicle make, model, year, color, and state license plate number of any vehicle which will be used by each person for whom a card is requested. 
(10)  If a license is requested for a peddler: 
a.  The name and permanent address of the business offering the event, activity, good or service (i.e., the peddler's principal). 
b.  A copy of the principal's sales tax license as issued by the state, provided that no copy of a license shall be required of any business which appears on the city's annual report of sales tax payees as provided by the state comptroller's office. 
c.  The location where books and records are kept of sales which occur within the city and which are available for city inspection to determine that all city sales taxes have been paid. 
(11)  If a license is requested for a solicitor: 
a.  The name and permanent address of the organization, person, or group for whom donations (or proceeds) are accepted. 
b.  The web address for this organization, person, or group (or other address) where residents having subsequent questions can go for more information. 
(12)  Any other information the applicant wishes to provide, perhaps including copies of literature to be distributed, references to other municipalities where similar activities have occurred, etc. 
(Ord. No. 836, § 6, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 954, § 6, 6-14-2016)  
Sec. 12-25. - Investigation. 
During the time following the application for one or more peddler licenses and its issuance, the city shall investigate as to the truth and accuracy of the information contained in the application. If the city has not completed this investigation within the 24 business hours provided in section seven, the identification card will nonetheless be issued, subject, however, to administrative revocation upon completion of the investigation. (If a canvasser requests a peddler license, the investigation will proceed as described above, but if the city refuses to issue the peddler license (or revokes it after issuance), the canvassers will be advised that the failure to procure a peddler license does not prevent him/her from canvassing the residents of the city.) 
(Ord. No. 836, § 7, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 954, § 7, 6-14-2016)  
Sec. 12-26. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  Grounds. Any license issued hereunder may be revoked if the license holder is convicted of a violation of any provisions of this article or has knowingly made a false material statement in the application or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a license under the terms of this article. 
(b)  Notice. If the issuing officer denies (or upon completion of an investigation revokes) the peddler license to one or more persons he shall immediately convey the decision to the applicant orally and shall within 16 working hours after the denial prepare a written report of the reason for the denial which shall be immediately made available to the applicant. 
(c)  Appeal; hearing. The licensee shall have ten days from the date of revocation or denial in which to file notice of his appeal to the city council from the order denying or revoking the license. The applicant shall have at his option an appeal of the denial of his application before the city council, at its next regular meeting, After holding the hearing on the revocation or denial, the city council shall by majority vote either sustain the action or issue an order reinstating the license. 
(d)  In the event of the filing of an appeal from a revocation issued under the provisions of this article, then, until such appeal has been determined by the city council such revocation order shall be stayed. 
(Ord. No. 836, § 8, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 954, § 8, 6-14-2016)  
Sec. 12-27. - Hearing on appeal. 
If the applicant requests a hearing under this section, the hearing shall be held in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act of the state, and review from the decision (on the record of the hearing) shall be had to the county court in which the city is located. The hearing shall also be subject to the Texas Open Meetings and Records law. 
(Ord. No. 836, § 9, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 954, § 9, 6-14-2016)  
Sec. 12-28. - Display of peddler license. 
Each peddler license shall be (when the individual for whom it was issued is acting as a peddler or solicitor) worn on the outer clothing of the individual or otherwise displayed, as so to be reasonably visible to any person who might be approached by said person. 
(Ord. No. 836, § 10, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 954, § 10, 6-14-2016)  
Sec. 12-29. - Validity of peddler license. 
A peddler license shall be valid within the meaning of this article for a period of one year from its date of issuance or the term requested, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 836, § 11, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 954, § 11, 6-14-2016)  
Sec. 12-30. - Revocation of card by municipal court judge. 
A municipal court judge, in addition to imposing a fine, may institute proceedings to suspend or revoke the license of a person if the person is required by law to obtain a peddler license from the city and the judge finds the person guilty of violating a city ordinance relating to peddlers. 
(Ord. No. 836, § 12, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 954, § 12, 6-14-2016)  
Sec. 12-31. - "No visit" list. 
The issuing officer shall maintain a list of persons within the city who restrict visits to their residential property (including their leasehold, in the case of a tenant) by peddlers, solicitors, and canvassers. The issuing officer may provide a form to assist residents, and this form may allow the resident to select certain types of visits that the resident finds acceptable while refusing permission to others. This "no visit" list shall be a public document, and may be reproduced on the city's web site and available for public inspection and copying. A copy of the "no visit" list shall be provided to each applicant for and each recipient of a peddler license. If a canvasser chooses not to apply for a peddler card, it will be the responsibility of that canvasser to obtain in some other way a copy of the current "no visit" list. 
(Ord. No. 836, § 13, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 954, § 13, 6-14-2016)  
Sec. 12-32. - Distribution of handbills and commercial flyers. 
In addition to the other regulations contained herein, a solicitor or canvasser leaving handbills or commercial flyers about the community shall observe the following regulations: 
(1)  No handbill or flyer shall be left at, or attached to any sign, utility pole, transit shelter or other structure within the public right-of-way. The police are authorized to remove any handbill or flyer found within the right-of-way. 
(2)  No handbill or flyer shall be left at, or attached to any privately owned property in a manner that causes damage to such privately owned property. 
(3)  No handbill or flyer shall be left at, or attached to any of the property: 
a.  Listed on the city "no visit" list, or 
b.  Having a "no solicitor" sign. 
(4)  No handbill or flyer shall be thrown into the yards of any of the property located within the corporate city. 
(5)  No handbill or flyer shall be left on the doors, within the mailboxes, or affixed to any part of the privately owned property. 
(6)  Any person observed distributing handbills or flyers shall be required to identify himself/herself to the police (either by producing a peddler's license or other form of identification). This is for the purpose of knowing the likely identity of the perpetrator if the city receives a complaint of damage caused to private property during the distribution of handbills or flyers. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 2, 5-25-2010; Ord. No. 954, § 14, 6-14-2016)  
Sec. 12-33. - General prohibitions. 
No peddler, hawker, solicitor or canvasser shall: 
(1)  Enter upon any private property where the property has clearly posted in the front yard a sign visible from the right of way (public or private) indicating a prohibition against peddling, soliciting and/or canvassing. Such sign need not exceed one square foot in size and may contain words such as "no soliciting" or "no solicitors" in letters of at least two inches in height. (The phrase "no soliciting" or "no solicitors" shall also prohibit peddlers, hawkers, and canvassers) 
(2)  Remain upon any private property where a notice in the form of a sign or sticker is placed upon any door or entrance way leading into the residence or dwelling at which guests would normally enter, which sign contains the words "no soliciting" or "no solicitors" and which is clearly visible to the peddler, solicitor or canvasser. 
(3)  Enter upon any private property where the current occupant has posted the property on the city's "no visit" list (except where the posting form indicates the occupant has given permission for this type of visit), regardless of whether a front yard sign is posted. 
(4)  Use or attempt to use any entrance other than the front or main entrance to the dwelling, or step from the sidewalk or indicated walkway (where one exists) leading from the right-of-way to the front or main entrance, except by express invitation of the resident or occupant of the property. 
a.  Remove any yard sign, door or entrance sign that gives notice to such person that the resident or occupant does not invite visitors. 
b.  Enter upon the property of another except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. except that the above prohibitions shall not apply when the peddler, hawker, solicitor, or canvassers has an express invitation from the resident or occupant of a dwelling allowing him/her to enter upon any posted property. 
(5)  For a commercial solicitor, peddler, or hawker to solicit for a purpose other than that set out in the application upon which the license was issued. 
(Ord. No. 836, § 15, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 954, § 15, 6-14-2016)  
Sec. 12-34. - Solicitation in public right-of-way. 
(a)  A person may solicit for a charitable or political purpose in or upon the public right-of-way, except those areas prohibited in this article. 
(b)  A person may conduct commercial solicitation in or upon the public right-of-way, except those areas prohibited in this article, if the solicitor has obtained a license or who is a member of an organization that has obtained a license. 
(c)  Solicitation for any purpose in the public right-of-way shall be conducted only during the hours of daylight, specifically one-half-hour after sunrise and one-half-hour before sunset. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a person younger than 18 years of age to solicit in the public right-of-way. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for a solicitor at any time to enter or remain in the traveled portion of the roadway unless the solicitor has been granted authorization pursuant to V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 552.0071 of ch. 552. The restriction on solicitation in the traveled portion of the roadway does not apply to public residential streets. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for a solicitor at any time to enter or remain in the traveled portion of the roadway of residential streets so that their presence impedes the flow of traffic. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for a person to solicit in the public right-of-way that is within 1,000 feet of any public or private elementary or secondary school between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on days when such school is in session. The measurement of the distance shall be made from the nearest property line of the public or private elementary or secondary school. 
(Ord. No. 836, § 16, 1-26-2010; Ord. No. 954, § 16, 6-14-2016)  
Sec. 12-35. - Violation. 
Any person violating any part of this article or failing to observe any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00. Every day the violation continues shall be deemed as a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 850, § 3, 5-25-2010; Ord. No. 954, § 17, 6-14-2016)  
Secs. 12-36—12-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OIL AND GAS DRILLING 
 
Sec. 12-90. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Person means and includes any natural person, corporation, association, partnership, receiver, trustee, guardian, executor, administrator and a fiduciary or representative of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 1, 12-3-1968)  
Sec. 12-91. - Oil and gas inspector. 
(a)  The city council shall appoint and oil and gas inspector (hereinafter called inspector) whose term of office, subject to the further provisions hereof, shall be concurrent with the term of the mayor of the city, and whose compensation shall be set by the city council. The city council may, at its pleasure, discharge such Inspector and employ another to fill such office from time to time. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the inspector to inspect the operations and facilities of each permittee hereunder for the purpose of determining whether such operations and facilities are in compliance with the provisions hereof. In the event any permittee's operations or facilities shall be found not to be in compliance, the inspector shall notify such permittee (in writing) of such fact, pointing out wherein the violation has occurred or is occurring. Unless such permittee shall remedy such situation in such manner as to conform to the provisions hereof within ten days from the date of such notice, his permit shall be subject to suspension, until such situation shall have been remedied, or to revocation. 
(c)  A permittee shall notify the inspector at least three days before constructing any pipeline or other facility in, under, over or across any city street, alley, easement or public way and shall comply with any and all reasonable requirements made by the Inspector in the interest of public safety and minimizing public inconvenience. 
(d)  The city council may delegate to the inspector such other and further responsibilities, as are place on the city council hereunder, as it may deem advisable; provided, however, that the city council may not delegate the duties imposed on it to conduct the public hearings on applications for permits and approve or disapprove the formation of drilling units in the manner provided in sections 12-93 through 12-96. 
(e)  Any permittee who shall be aggrieved by any decision of the inspector shall have the right to appeal the matter to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 2, 12-3-1968)  
Sec. 12-92. - Area and scope of article; permits. 
From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, it shall be unlawful for any person to drill or commence to drill a well for oil or gas within the limits of the city, or to work upon or assist in any way in the drilling of any such well, except as provided in sections 12-102 and 12-104, unless a permit for the drilling, completion and operation of such well has first been issued by authority of the city council to the permittee, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 3, 12-3-1968)  
Sec. 12-93. - Creation of drilling units. 
It shall be unlawful to complete more than one well to each oil reservoir on each 40-acre oil unit, as such phrase is later defined herein, and likewise, unlawful to complete more than one well to each no-associated gas reservoir on each 640-acre gas unit, as such phrase is later defined herein, subject to the following: 
(1)  In the event a well is lost or abandoned, the permittee may, subject to the provisions of section 12-101 thereof, relocate the well on the unit involved and drill and complete such relocated well under the permit for the replaced well by filing a plat and certificate showing the abandonment of the well to be replaced and the location of the substitute well; 
(2)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting multiple completions in the same well bore when authorized by the rules of the railroad commission of the state; 
(3)  In the event the spacing regulations of the railroad commission of the state permit the drilling in any oil reservoir or non-associated gas reservoir to a greater density than the density of one well to the 40-acre oil units or one well to the 640-acre gas units, then additional wells may be drilled in the various units tom the extent that the units may be developed in accordance with such spacing regulations, and in the event additional wells are drilled, same shall be drilled in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 4, 12-3-1968)  
Sec. 12-94. - Public ways and pipeline crossings. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to drill any well for oil or gas within any of the streets or alleys of the city or to block or encumber or close up any street or alley in any drilling or producing operations except by special permit by order of the city council and then only temporarily. 
(b)  In order to enable the holder of each permit to remove oil, gas, water or other products from each drilling unit within the city limits, the holder of each permit issued under this article for the drilling and operation of a well for oil or gas in the city is hereby granted rights-of-way and easements on, over, under, along or across the city streets, sidewalks, alleys and other city property in the city for the purpose of constructing, laying, maintaining, operating, repairing, replacing and removing pipelines so long as production or operations may be continued under any permit issued pursuant to this article; provided, however, permittees shall not interfere with or damage existing water, sewer, or gas lines, the facilities of public utilities, or any other improvement or facility located on, under or across the course of such rights of way. All crossings for pipelines under all paved or black-topped streets shall be bored or jacked, whenever required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 5, 12-3-1968)  
Sec. 12-95. - Application for permit. 
(a)  An application for a permit to drill, complete and operate a well for oil or gas shall be in writing, signed by the applicant or by some person duly authorized to sign on his behalf. The application shall be filed with the city secretary and accompanied with a deposit of $300.00 cash as a fee to the city. If the application is for a permit to drill an oil well, the application shall be accompanied by a plat designating a 40-acre oil unit. If the application is for a permit to drill a gas well, the application shall be accompanied by a plat designating a 640-acre gas unit, if the application is for a permit to drill a well which may be multiply-completed, i.e., one or more completions as anticipated oil completions and one or more completions as anticipated gas completions, the application shall be accompanied by a plat designating both a 40-acre oil unit and a 640-acre gas unit. Each such unit shall consist of continuous acreage and shall be in as nearly the shape of a square or a rectangle the length of which shall not exceed twice its width as is reasonably practical, taking into consideration, however, such matters as existing property and lease lines, boundaries of previously designated oil or gas units, natural boundaries, availability of drill sites and other pertinent factors. None of the acreage included in an oil unit shall have previously been included in a prior oil unit which has been designated under the provisions hereof and none of the acreage included in a gas unit shall have previously been included in a prior gas unit which has been designated under the provisions hereof. Issuance of the permit shall constitute approval of each such designation of unit, and the city secretary shall maintain a map of the city showing designated oil units and designated gas units. 
(b)  Each such application shall state the particular lot and location in the unit where the proposed oil or gas well is to be located, and shall have attached to it a description of the oil and gas leases or drilling contracts with the owners of land covering the lots, blocks or tracts in said drilling unit over which the applicant has control of oil rights or gas rights, to the end that the application will show what proportion and what parts of the drilling unit the applicant owns in fee or holds under lease or drilling contract from the owners. The application shall also be accompanied by a plat or map of the drilling unit, showing the designation of the lots, blocks or tracts owned or controlled by the applicant and showing the proposed site of the well. 
(c)  Insurance. The holder of any permit issued hereunder shall obtain and maintain in force a policy of public liability and property damage insurance issued by a reliable insurance company authorized to do business in the state and having a policyholder rating of excellent or better and financial rating of BBB or better according to the ratings issued by the Best Insurance Guide, insuring the permittee against claims for bodily injury or property damage which might be sustained by the city or any member of the public by reason of any operations conducted under said permit, with coverage limits for bodily injury or death to any one person of not less than $100,000.00 and not less than $300,000.00 for any one accident, and for property damage of not less than $300,000.00 for any one occurrence; with endorsements to said policies running to the city for the benefit of it and members of the public, and obligating the insurers to give the city secretary written notice of cancellation of such insurance not less than 15 days prior to the date of cancellation. 
(d)  Bonds. The holder of any permit issued hereunder shall post a corporate surety bond in the sum of $25,000.00 executed by the permittee as principal and by a surety company acceptable to the city, as surety, and conditioned that the principal named in the bond shall faithfully comply with all of the provisions of this article and of the permit until the said permit shall have been released by the principal and the release shall have been approved by the city as provided herein. Such bond shall secure the city against all costs, charges and expenses incurred by it by reason of the failure of the principal to fully comply with the provisions of the permit and of this section. In lieu of a bond for each permit held: 
(1)  Any permittee may post a blanket bond covering all permits issued to the permittee hereunder in the sum of $100,000.00 which shall be conditioned in the same manner aforesaid; or 
(2)  In the sole discretion of the city council, a permittee may be allowed to post an indemnity agreement with the city conditioned in the same manner as a bond required hereunder if such permittee files a balance sheet and statement certified by a recognized firm of certified public accountants reflecting the net worth of permittee to be in excess of $10,000,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 6, 12-3-1968)  
Sec. 12-96. - Notice and hearing. 
(a)  Notice of the filing of each application for permit shall be given by the applicant as follows: At least ten days prior to the date of hearing on the application, a copy of notice in the form hereinafter prescribed shall be sent by registered mail to each owner and lessee of lots, blocks and tracts in said drilling unit not owned by or under lease to the applicant, addressed to the last known address of such land and lease owners if known to the applicant; and a copy of such notice shall likewise be posted at three public places in the city at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing. Such notice shall state the lot and block number (or otherwise adequately identify the premises) on which the applicant is asking for a permit to drill and the date and place of hearing, and shall be in words and figures as follows: 
"Notice is hereby given that ___________, acting under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of an ordinance regulating the drilling, completion and operation of oil and gas wells within the limits of the city of Taft, Texas, and providing for the public safety in connection therewith, being Ordinance No._____, did, on the ___ day of ___________, 20___, file with the city secretary of the City of Taft an application for a permit to drill a well for oil or gas upon Lot No. _____, Block No. _____, _____, Taft, Texas, in (Oil) (Gas) Unit shown on plat attached hereto. A hearing upon such application will be held in the Chamber of the city council at the City Hall of the City of Taft, Texas, at _____ on the _____ day of ___________, 20___, at ___ ___.M." 
(b)  Proof of notice shall be made by the applicant by filing with the city secretary an affidavit containing a copy of the notice and stating the date on which such notice was posted at three public places in the city, and an affidavit of the applicant showing the date and persons to whom and the addresses to which the notice was mailed by the applicant. 
(c)  At the time fixed in said notice a hearing on such application shall be held by the city council in the chamber of the city council at the city hall. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 7, 12-3-1968)  
Sec. 12-97. - Drilling unit royalty and working interest owners. 
(a)  In the event an application for a permit for the drilling, completion and operation of a well either for oil or gas shall be made by any person not owning or not holding leases of oil or gas rights or drilling contracts from the owners of all lots, blocks or parcels of land included in or embraced within a drilling unit a permit shall be issued to such applicant, his or its heirs, successors and assigns, only upon the following conditions, in addition to such other conditions as may be provided for in other sections of this article, to wit; the applicant shall be free to enter into such contracts and agreements with the owners of such other lots, blocks or tracts as he may be able to make. If agreements are not reached with all owners of lots, blocks and tracts within the drilling units, then the owner or owners of any given lot, block, or tract shall have the right or option, by notice to the permittee given in writing within 30 days after the issuance of a permit for a well on the drilling unit involved, either: 
(1)  To treat his interest as a working interest and contribute toward the actual cost and expense of drilling, completing and operating said well with all necessary appurtenances currently each month in the proportion that the number of square feet in area owned by him in the drilling unit bears to the total number of square feet embraced in said unit, and thereupon receive the same proportion of the oil produced and saved from such well, or its value at the well, at the option of the permittee, and a like proportion of gas well gas and casinghead gas produced, saved and utilized or sold, or the value of same at the well, at the option of the permittee; or 
(2)  Treat his interest as a royalty interest and receive, delivered free of cost in the pipeline to which the well may be connected, a share of all oil produced and saved from such well equal to one-eighth of the proportion of the whole quantity of oil so produced and saved that the number of square feet in the area owned by him bears to the total number of square feet in such drilling unit, or at the election of permittee, to receive such proportion of the value at the well of the oil so produced, and to receive a like proportion of the gas well gas and casinghead gas produced, saved and utilized or sold, or at the election of permittee, the market value at the well of such proportion of gas well gas or casinghead gas produced and sold or used off the premises, or for gas sold at the well, such proportion of the amount realized from such sale. 
(b)  If any owner does not exercise the right and option above provided, and give notice to the permittee within the period above provided, the obligation shall then be upon the permittee, his heirs, successors and assigns, to make settlement with such owner on the terms provided in the option provided in subsection (a)(2) of this section, providing for the payment of a one-eighth royalty. If the owner of a lot, block, or tract shall exercise the option provided in subsection (a)(1) of this section and treat his interest as a working interest, as therein provided, the permittee shall be entitled to reimburse himself for such owner's proportionate part of the costs out of such owner's proportionate part of the oil, gas well gas and casinghead gas, or the value thereof, before making deliveries of products or settlement for the value thereof. If the option provided in subsection (a)(1) of this section is exercised by the owner of any lot, block, or tract, such owner shall, within the time provided for notice of his election above set forth, file with the city secretary a bond or other obligation executed by such owner as principal and by an authorized surety company as surety, in which such principal and surety agree, bind and obligate themselves to pay to the permittee, his heirs, successors and assigns currently each month that proportion of the actual and necessary costs and expenses involved in the drilling, completion and operation of such well that the number of square feet embraced within the lot, block, or tract tracts of such owner bears to the total number of square feet in such drilling block, such bond to be approved by the mayor and held by the city secretary for the benefit of the beneficiaries therein. Permits shall be issued in all such cases and shall be subject to the provisions of section 12-102 and upon the condition that the permittee, his or its heirs, successors and assigns, shall make settlement in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 8, 12-3-1968)  
Sec. 12-98. - Multiple applications; priority. 
(a)  In case there should be filed with the city secretary, and pending at the time, applications made by more than one applicant for permits to drill to the same reservoir on any single drilling units, or a portion of the same area, within the limits of the city, that application shall be granted, if otherwise sufficient, which shall be made by the person holding the greater area of ground within the drilling block by ownership in fee or by lease or other contract authorizing the drilling and operation on land for oil and gas. 
(b)  The granting and issuance of a permit for a well on a drilling unit as provided in this article shall automatically operate as a rejection and denial of all other pending application or applications for a well or wells to be completed in the same reservoir upon the drilling unit involved, or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 9, 12-3-1968)  
Sec. 12-99. - Permittee's rights and duties. 
(a)  The permittee in any drilling unit, or his assigns, shall be only one person and such person shall be known as the operator thereof for oil or gas, and shall be held primarily accountable under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The interests of persons other than the operator who hold oil and gas leases or equivalent contracts in any drilling unit shall be treated as part of the total working interest of said block, and such other persons holding such interests shall each make the following election with operator prior to the time a well is commenced on said block, either: 
(1)  To agree in writing with the operator to contribute their share of all costs and expenses, properly allocated to said well and drilling unit by the operator in accordance with accepted accounting practice, currently each month in the proportion that the number of square feet in area held by them or each of them in the drilling unit bears to the total number of square feet embraced in said unit; and to execute a bond or deposit securities to be held in escrow by such depository as the city council may designate to secure such agreement; said bond or securities to be in an amount at any given time sufficient reasonable to protect the interests of the operator under such agreement; and thereupon said persons so acting shall be entitled to participate in the total working interest under said unit; and said persons so acting shall have the right, upon reasonable notice given to the operator, upon the furnishing of storage tanks or facilities for handling the same, and upon the payment of, or securing the payment of, their share of the royalty interests and any overriding royalty or oil payment interests thereof, to receive in kind their proportionate share of oil or gas produced and saved from the well in said drilling unit and allocated to the working interest of said well; or 
(2)  If such other persons, or any one of them, fails to elect under subsection (b)(1) of this section prior to the time the operator commences drilling such well, then he or they shall be deemed to have elected to agree that the operator shall be entitled to reimburse himself currently each month from such other persons' proportionate share of the proceeds of sale or production in kind for twice the amount of such other persons' proportionate part of the costs and expenses as set out in subsection (b)(1) of this section; provided, however, that the operator and such other persons, or any one of them, shall be able to alter the obligations as set out in this section by an agreement made by them in writing; provided, further, that such agreement is not repugnant to other rules and regulations set out in this article. 
(c)  Such other persons, as described in this section, shall have ten days after receiving written notice of the intention of the operator to commence drilling operations, within which to make the election set out in this section; and such other persons may advise the operator as to drilling or operating the well on said drilling unit, but final authority and responsibility therefor shall rest solely on operator. 
(d)  No permit shall be granted or issued for the drilling of a well except upon ground owned by the applicant or held by him under oil and gas lease or drilling contract from the owner, giving the owner's permission or authority to drill a well thereon. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 10, 12-3-1968)  
Sec. 12-100. - City council may issue or refuse permit. 
The city council shall have the power, and reserves the authority to refuse any application for a permit when, by reason of the location of the proposed well and the character and value of the permanent improvements already erected on the drilling unit in question or adjacent thereto, and the use to which the land and surroundings are adapted for civic purposes, or for sanitary reasons, the drilling of an oil or gas well will be a serious disadvantage to either the health, safety, morals or welfare of the city and its inhabitants. When a permit shall be refused for any of these reasons, but not otherwise, the deposit in cash as a fee made with the application shall be returned to the applicant. Except as hereinbefore provided, if an application be found by the city council to comply in all respects with the terms of this article, the city secretary shall issue a permit for the drilling, completion and operation of the well applied for. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 11, 12-3-1968)  
Sec. 12-101. - Abandonment of well and termination of permits. 
When a permit shall have been issued, the same shall terminate and become inoperative without any action on the part of the city council unless within 180 days from the date of issue actual operations for drilling of the well shall have been commenced; and after the operations for drilling of the well shall have commenced, the cessation of operations for drilling prior to the completion of the well for a period of six months shall operate to terminate and cancel the permit (except as otherwise provided with respect to the relocation of such well according to section 12-93) and the well shall be considered as abandoned for all purposes of this section and it shall be unlawful thereafter to continue the operation or drilling of such well without the issuance of another permit, provided that, if said well shall be completed as a well capable of production and shall thereafter cease to be capable of production, the permittee shall have the right to conduct reworking operations on said well within six months after it becomes incapable of production without having to procure a new permit. If and when any permit shall terminate and become inoperative as in this section provided, or if and when the permittee or his assigns shall file with the city council written notice of his or their election to surrender his or their permit and abandon the premises covered thereby, then if no claims under the bond or undertaking shall have been filed within 90 days thereafter, the city secretary shall return the bond, insurance policy, undertaking and/or the security theretofore furnished by the permitted in connection with such permit; and if claims are filed within such time, upon the satisfaction or defeat of such claims such bond, insurance policy, undertaking and/or the security shall thereupon be returned to the permittee or his assigns. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 12, 12-3-1968)  
Sec. 12-102. - Article or permit confers no surface rights. 
Neither this article nor any permit issued hereunder shall be interpreted to grant any right or license to the permittee to enter upon or occupy in any respect in drilling or production operations any land except by the written consent of the owner; nor shall it limit or prevent the free right of any lot owner to contract for the amount of royalty to be paid with respect to his own land or other consideration therefor, or for damages, rights or privileges with respect thereto. Nothing contained herein shall be interpreted to require a permit for the reworking, deepening or plugging back of any well or completing of any well for the sole purpose of injection of water, gas or other substances. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 13, 12-3-1968)  
Sec. 12-103. - Operating rules. 
In operations under a permit the permittee or his assigns must observe the following rules, and the failure to observe same shall be unlawful, to-wit: 
(1)  It shall be the duty of a permittee to periodically paint or maintain all tanks, gunbarrels, meter runs and other surface facilities in good and sightly condition at all times. All permanent oil tanks or battery of tanks which are constructed above ground must be surrounded by a dike of at least 1½ times the capacity of the tank or battery of tanks. 
(2)  No oil tank shall be placed nearer than 400 feet to any residence, church, hospital, school (either public or private), power plant, or other public buildings of any description without the permittee having first secured the written permission of the owner or owners of such property and/or buildings. 
(3)  No field working tank having a capacity of more than 10,000 barrels shall hereafter be built nearer than 200 feet (measured from shell to shell) to any other like tank or tanks. 
(4)  Printed signs reading "Danger—No Smoking Allowed" or similar words, shall be posted in conspicuous places near each producing well and tank battery. 
(5)  Open earthen storage for oil is prohibited. 
(6)  All oil tanks in use shall be gastight and provided with a proper gas vent line equipped with a flame arrester. 
(7)  No open flame shall be placed inside the derrick of a well showing oil or gas. 
(8)  All oil and gas pipelines laid upon or across a public road or highway must be buried to a reasonable safe depth. 
(9)  Standard operating procedures under the applicable rules and regulations of the railroad commission of the state, as well as those ordinary practices adhered to by prudent operators in this area shall be followed in: 
a.  The setting and cementing of surface casing and oil strings. 
b.  The testing of surface pipe and oil strings. 
(10)  Two fluid-operated blowout preventers shall be used for all drilling or completion operations involving the use of drill pipe, casing or tubing after surface casing has been set. The mechanical operation of blowout preventers shall be tested at reasonable intervals and in addition they shall be tested with pump pressure frequently enough to ensure good working order at all times. 
(11)  All wells shall be equipped with wellhead assemblies and Christmas trees of working and test pressures as provided in applicable rules and regulations of the railroad commission of the state and in addition shall conform with standard practice and procedures used by prudent operators in this area. 
(12)  No boiler or electric lighting generator shall be placed or remain nearer than 150 feet to any producing well or oil tank. 
(13)  Any vegetation, rubbish or debris that might constitute a fire hazard shall be removed to a distance of at least 150 feet from the vicinity of wells, tanks and pump stations. All waste shall be burned or disposed of in such manner as to avoid creating a fire hazard or polluting streams and fresh water strata. 
(14)  All producing wells, pits and tank batteries shall be protected with a six-foot woven fence having a barbed wire guard at the top and a gate with lock. 
(15)  Only portable slush tanks for mud or water shall be permitted in connection with the drilling and reworking operations. Said tanks and their contents shall be removed from the premises and the drilling site within ten days after completion of the well. 
(16)  Motive power for all operations after completion of drilling operations shall be electric or properly muffled gas or gasoline engines. All pumping wells shall be equipped with electric motor, gas lift facilities, or properly muffled gas or gasoline engines. 
(17)  Permittee shall make adequate provisions for the disposal of all salt water or other impurities which he may bring to the surface, such disposal to be made in such manner as not to contaminate the fresh water supply, present or prospective, or to injure surface vegetation. 
(18)  In order to protect the fresh water sands which are the source of water supply for this city, the casing program of all wells drilled hereafter in this city not otherwise excepted from the terms of this article shall include new surface casing. To protect fresh water, a permittee shall set surface casing to the depth stipulated by the state water commission or the state railroad commission, in the event special field rules are adopted, but in no instance to a depth less than 1,150 feet and cement with sufficient cement to fill the annulus from the casing set depth to the surface and provide return of uncontaminated cement at the surface. 
a.  Cementing shall be by pump and plug method. Cement shall be allowed to stand a minimum of 12 hours under pressure and 24 hours before drilling plug or initiating test. After cementing, the surface casing shall be tested by pump pressure of at least 750 pounds per square inch. If at the end of 30 minutes the pressure shows a drop of 150 pounds per square inch, or more, the casing shall be condemned. After the corrective operations the casing shall again be tested in the same manner. 
b.  It is controllingly provided, however, that in the event a permittee can establish to the satisfaction of the city council that said fresh water sands can be adequately protected by use of other means or measures, any or all of the foregoing requirements may be waived by the city council. 
(19)  Any and all the provisions of this article (except the well spacing requirement) may be waived by the city council upon a showing by the permittee to the satisfaction of the city council that the planned manner of operation by the permittee or the equipment to be used by the permittee will adequately protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 14, 12-3-1968)  
Sec. 12-104. - Emergency operations by permittee without first obtaining a permit. 
(a)  In the event that an emergency arises in the course of conducting its operations which, in the good faith opinion of the permittee, constitutes a serious hazard to life and property, the permittee may undertake such emergency operations as the permittee deems necessary under the circumstances without first obtaining a permit, such emergency action to include, without limitation, the drilling of a relief well (as elsewhere herein provided), or other emergency operations. Such emergency operations shall not be considered as a violation or offense of this article or any other ordinance of the city. 
(b)  Within 24 hours after the commencement of any such emergency operations, the permittee shall notify the city secretary that such operations have been commenced, and as soon as practicable but in any event within seven days, permittee shall file a written report to the city secretary setting forth a summary of the emergency and the actions taken by the permittee to combat it. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 15, 12-3-1968)  
Sec. 12-105. - Continuation of prior permits. 
An permit or license granted by the city prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived with respect to any matter for which a permit is required by this article is hereby declared to be a valid and subsisting permit under this article, provided that all such permits and licenses shall be subject to all of the provisions of this article (except that a new permit need not be obtained hereunder). 
(Ord. No. 316, § 16, 12-3-1968)  
Sec. 12-106. - Prospective effect; existing facilities. 
This article is prospective in its effect. All wells and all equipment, structures or installations in existence upon the effective date of this article within the area defined in section 12-92, and for which no permit has been issued hereunder, shall be deemed to be permitted under this section and the owner and operator thereof is deemed to be the holder of a permit duly issued and accepted under this article for all purposes. Except as otherwise particularly required hereunder, no application for or issuance of a formal permit is required as to such existing facilities. But any and all other requirements of this article as to permits and permittees shall apply, and the city council may hereafter require application for an issuance of a formal permit for any such existing and heretofore non-permitted facility. In such case, the application and permit may cover more than one subject matter, and no fee shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 17, 12-3-1968)  
Sec. 12-107. - Effect of zoning ordinance. 
It is hereby determined by the council that any well structure, facility or installation as herein regulated shall, if permitted by a permit duly issued and subsisting hereunder, in no wise be considered in violation of the zoning ordinance of the city, or to require compliance with the building code. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 18, 12-3-1968)  
Sec. 12-108. - Non-repeal of certain ordinances. 
This article shall not be construed as repealing, altering, or otherwise affecting the validity and binding force of any ordinance pertaining to fire prevention, health, sanitation, or safety of persons or property heretofore enacted by the city, except as specifically repealed hereby. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 19, 12-3-1968)  
Sec. 12-109. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with any of the provisions of this article are hereby expressly repealed. If ever and whenever in this article, restrictions, prohibitions, or provisions conflict, and if every and whenever restrictions, prohibitions or provisions in this article conflict with laws of the state, or with regulations of state or federal regulatory bodies having jurisdiction, in each instance the more restrictive restriction, regulation, prohibition, or provision shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 20, 12-3-1968)  
Secs. 12-110—12-131. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 958, §§ 1—9, adopted August 9, 2016, amended article IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article IV, sections 12-132—12-141 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 819, §§ I—X, adopted November 18, 2008. 
 
Sec. 12-132. - Adoption of state food establishment rules. 
(a)  The city adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules or rules as amended by The Executive Commissioner of the Health and Human Services Commission found in 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 228, regarding the regulation of food establishments in this jurisdiction. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Authorized agent or employee means the employees of the regulatory authority. 
Food establishment means a food service establishment, a retail food store, a temporary food establishment, a mobile food unit, and/or a roadside food vendor. 
Municipality in this article shall be understood to refer to the City of Taft. 
Regulatory authority means the San Patricio County Department of Public Health having jurisdiction over food establishments. 
State rules mean the state rules found at 25 Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 228. These rules are also known as the Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
(Ord. No. 958, § 1, 8-9-2016)  
Sec. 12-133. - Permits and exemptions. 
(a)  A person may not operate a food establishment without a permit issued by the regulatory authority. Permits are not transferrable from one person to another or from one location to another location, except as otherwise permitted by this article. A valid permit must be posted in or on every food establishment regulated by this article. 
(b)  A food establishment operated solely by a nonprofit organization is exempt from the permitting requirements of this article, but is not exempt from compliance with state rules. The regulatory authority may require any information necessary to determine whether an organization is nonprofit for purposes of this exemption. 
(Ord. No. 958, § 2, 8-9-2016)  
Sec. 12-134. - Application for permit and fees. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must make a written application for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority. The application must contain the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food establishment and the applicable fee. An incomplete application will not be accepted. Failure to provide all required information, or falsifying information required may result in denial or revocation of the permit. Renewals of permits are required on an annual basis and the same information is required for a renewal permit as for an initial permit. 
(b)  Prior to the approval of an initial permit or the renewal of an existing permit, the regulatory authority shall inspect the proposed food establishment to determine compliance with state laws and rules. A food establishment that does not comply with state laws and rules will be denied a permit or the renewal of a permit. 
(c)  The retail food service establishment fee schedule will be adopted by the San Patricio County Commissioner's Court. These fees will be payable to San Patricio County. The fees collected will be expended to defray the cost of issuance of permits and inspections of facilities regulated under this article. San Patricio County agrees to give a 90-day notice of any changes in fees. 
(Ord. No. 958, § 3, 8-9-2016)  
Sec. 12-135. - Review of plans. 
(a)  Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review before work is begun. Extensive remodeling means that 20 percent or greater of the area of the food establishment is to be remodeled. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical plans and construction of materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The plans and specifications will be approved by the regulatory authority if they meet the requirements of the rules adopted by this article. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in construction, remodeling or conversion. 
(b)  Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will result in a permit denial, suspension, or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 958, § 4, 8-9-2016)  
Sec. 12-136. - Suspension of permit. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing suspend any permit to operate a food establishment if the operation of the food establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by subsection (b). When a permit is suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within 20 days of receipt of a request for a hearing. 
(b)  Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within ten days. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten days, the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
(Ord. No. 958, § 5, 8-9-2016)  
Sec. 12-137. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within such ten-day period. 
(b)  If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 958, § 6, 8-9-2016)  
Sec. 12-138. - Administrative process. 
(a)  A notice as required in these rules is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(b)  The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall make final findings, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 958, § 7, 8-9-2016)  
Sec. 12-139. - Education requirements. 
(a)  Employees of food establishments, mobile food units, roadside food vendors, temporary events, and employees of food services within a retail food store who handle open exposed foods shall attend a two-hour food service sanitation course offered under the supervision of the regulatory authority. Upon completion of the course the regulatory authority will issue food handlers permit valid for a period of two years. A food handler certificate will be obtained by new employees within 30 days after being hired. An employee's card may be revoked at any time by the regulatory authority if an employee demonstrates unsanitary work habits. 
(b)  Any classroom or online food handler training programs accredited by the Texas Department of State Health Services (TXDSHS) or the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) certified will also be acceptable. 
(c)  The permit holder or designated person in charge is required to obtain food manager certification status. A food manager certification is a document obtained by the permit holder or person in charge who demonstrates knowledge by being a food protection manager that is certified by a food protection manager certification program that is evaluated and listed by a conference for food recognized accrediting agency as conforming to the conference for food protection standards for accreditation of food manager certification programs. Suitable certificates issued for passing an approved examination must be presented to the regulatory authority. Furthermore, each permitted establishment must have "during all hours of operation" a certified food manager on duty. The certified food manager on duty shall have supervisor/management responsibilities with the authority to direct and control food preparation and service. Food manager certificates may be revoked if inspection reveals inadequate sanitation practices. 
(Ord. No. 958, § 8, 8-9-2016)  
Sec. 12-140. - Remedies. 
(a)  Any person who violates a provision of these rules and any person who is the permit holder of or otherwise operates a food service establishment that does not comply with the requirements of these rules and any responsible officer of that permit holder or those persons shall be fined not more than $500.00. 
(b)  The regulatory authority may seek to enjoin violations of these rules. 
(Ord. No. 958, § 9, 8-9-2016)  
Chapter 14 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local regulation of cemeteries, V.T.C.A., Health & Safety Code § 713.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Definition; application of chapter. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cemetery means and includes that cemetery belonging to the city and generally known as the Bellevue Cemetery, and the provisions of this chapter shall apply to such cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 1, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-2. - General supervision. 
The city council grants to the director of public works the necessary authority to execute its orders and to put into effect the rules and regulations prescribed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 2, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-3. - Price of lots. 
All lots in the cemetery shall be sold at such price as is set from time to time by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 3, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-4. - Purchase price of lot and other charges must be paid prior to burial. 
The cost for purchase of a lot and for opening and closing of a grave and other final costs for interment may be prepaid in lump sum or by installment. An agreement for installment payment shall be entered into by person making payment and the city. Installments shall be paid in accordance with said agreement and shall be paid in full prior to interment. The city shall deposit prepayment funds in a prepayment account and shall maintain necessary records and pay out said prepaid funds for interment to cemetery operations at time of interment. All charges properly payable to the city must be paid in advance of any interment, except that the city manager may allow interment prior to payment when the costs are to be paid by a funeral home and the funeral home makes contractual arrangements guaranteeing payment. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 4, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-5. - Title to lot not valid until purchase money paid. 
No title to a cemetery lot shall be valid until the amount of the purchase money shall have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 5, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-6. - General restrictions on use. 
The cemetery shall be used for cemetery purposes only. The city council reserves the right to refuse to sell to, or to allow the burial of any person who, in its judgement, is deemed objectionable. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 6, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-7. - Interment permitted only on order of lot owner. 
The city will not permit any interment to be made on any cemetery lot except under an order from the owner or his heirs, representatives, or assigns, delivered at the office of the director of public works and indicating the desired location for such interment. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 7, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-8. - Lot holders not to allow interments for remuneration. 
Cemetery lot holders shall not allow interments to be made on their lots for a remuneration. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 8, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-9. - When gates to be open. 
The gates of the cemetery will be open from sunrise to sunset to all lot owners and visitors, and shall be closed from sunset to sunrise. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 9, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-10. - Vehicles to be driven slowly and must not turn around in avenues. 
Vehicles must be driven slowly, at a speed not to exceed five miles per hour in the cemetery and must not turn around in the avenues. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 10, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-11. - Vehicle not to be driven or ridden on lots, lawns, or walks; animals shall not be allowed in the cemetery. 
The driving or riding of vehicles will not be allowed on lots or upon the lawns or walks of the cemetery, except vehicles used in the operation and maintenance of the cemetery. Animals shall not be allowed in the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 11, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-12. - Sitting, standing, etc., on lots, graves, monuments, etc. 
Sitting, lounging or lying on lots, mounds, or ornamental grounds at the cemetery and sitting or standing on graves or monuments therein is strictly prohibited, except that the standing or walking on graves by workers in the operation and maintenance of the cemetery and those in attendance at a funeral shall be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 12, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-13. - Grave digging. 
The digging of a grave for an interment in the cemetery will only be permitted by the city employees. A notice of not less than five working hours must be given to ensure proper preparation of the grave. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 13, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-14. - Changing lot grades. 
The grades of cemetery lots, once established, cannot be changed without the consent of the city council or appointed authority. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 14, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-15. - Signs prohibited. 
Signs indicating that a lot is for sale shall not be permitted in the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 15, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-16. - Order and permit for work on lots. 
The city will not allow work of any description to be placed upon any cemetery lot, unless a written order from the lot holder or his representative is presented and a permit is obtained from the director of public works. This section applies to the cutting of inscriptions, setting of markers, etc., and also to the removal of anything from the lot. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 16, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-17. - Permit for workman. 
No workman, except one employed in the erection of stone work under a regular permit, will be allowed to work in the grounds of the cemetery, except by special permit from the city. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 17, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-18. - Exclusion of persons from grounds; refusal of permits. 
The city authorities shall have the right to exclude from the grounds of the cemetery any person who disobeys any provision of this chapter. They shall also have the right to refuse permits to persons or firms whose work is not satisfactory, or whose employees disobey the rules of the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 18, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-19. - Work orders are subject to council rules. 
All orders taken for work in the cemetery shall be subject to the rules of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 19, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-20. - Prohibited enclosures, curbing, ornaments, walks, etc. 
Enclosures of any kind, curbing or coping around a lot, ornaments, chairs, settees, vases, glass jars, pitchers, artificial flowers, flowers, toys, watering cans or other articles that may be considered objectionable by the authorities are prohibited in the cemetery and the right to remove the same without notice to lot owners is reserved. Objects of wood of any kind will not be permitted in the cemetery, and no gravel, brick, stone, cement or other kind of artificial walk will be allowed on any lot. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 20, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-21. - Authority of council to lay out and alter walks and avenues and make rules and regulations. 
The city council or appointed authority may, from time to time, lay out and alter avenues or walks and make such rules and regulations for the government of the grounds and care and control of the lots in the cemetery as they may deem requisite and proper to secure and promote the general objects of the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 21, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-22. - Boundary markers to remain undisturbed. 
All boundary markers set up in the cemetery by the city authorities must remain undisturbed. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 22, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-23. - Marker plans to be submitted to city. 
Plans for markers must be submitted to the city to secure permit for erection in the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 23, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-24. - Markers to be in accord with filed plans. 
All markers in the cemetery shall be in accordance with plans on file with the city. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 24, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-25. - Above-ground mausoleums, vaults, or tombs prohibited. 
No special authority will be granted for the erection of mausoleums or vaults or tombs above the grounds, and no such mausoleums, vaults, or tombs shall be erected. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 25, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-26. - Loud conversation prohibited; workmen to cease operations during interment. 
Loud conversation in the cemetery shall not be permitted and all workmen must cease operations while in the immediate vicinity of an interment. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 26, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-27. - City not responsible for articles placed on lots or graves. 
The city will not be responsible for any funeral design, floral pieces, or other article or thing placed on any lot or grave in the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 27, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-28. - Right of city to remove and plant trees and shrubs and mow grass. 
If any trees or shrubs situated on any cemetery lot shall, by mean of their roots or branches, become detrimental to the adjacent lots or avenues, or become unsightly or inconvenient for visitors, it shall be the duty of the city authorities, and they shall have the right to enter the lot for such purpose, to remove the trees or shrubbery or such part thereof as they determine to be unsightly or inconvenient. The city authorities shall have the right to remove any trees or shrub that may be infected by scales or other diseases and to plant and mow the grass on all lots and graves. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 28, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-29. - Removal of funeral designs and floral pieces. 
Funeral designs and floral pieces will be removed from the graves when they become wilted and unsightly. Persons desiring to retain any such design or piece must remove the same within 48 hours after the interment. In no case will employees attempt to locate designs or floral pieces after their removal from the lots. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 29, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-30. - Right of city authorities to fill and level graves and plant grass thereon. 
The cemetery authorities shall have full right to fill and level graves and plant grass thereon, when desired. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 30, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-31. - Material to be moved on paths or planks. 
All materials must be moved on the paths of the cemetery and over planks laid for the purpose, and not over adjoining lots. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 31, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-32. - Right of council to prohibit erection of markers and monuments. 
The city council or appointed authority may prohibit erection of markers and monuments as they may deem requisite and proper to secure and promote the general objectives of the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 32, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-33. - Removal of offensive monuments, etc. 
If any monument or any structure, whatever is placed in or upon any cemetery lot which is determined by the authorities of the cemetery to be offensive, improper or injurious to the appearance of the surrounding lots or grounds, they shall have the right, and it shall be their duty to enter upon such lot and remove the offensive or improper object and they may do so without notice to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 33, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-34. - Responsibility of undertakers for conduct of employees. 
Undertakers will be held responsible for the action of all vehicle drivers or others employed by them while within the grounds of the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 34, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-35. - Suspension of work when chapter violated. 
The city shall have the power to suspend work in the cemetery immediately whenever there is a failure to conform to the rules and regulations prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 35, 2-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-36. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the rules and regulations of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $200.00 for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 36, 2-19-1991)  
Secs. 14-37—14-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CEMETERY MEMORIAL FUND 
 
Sec. 14-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cemetery means and refers to that certain 20 acres of land, more or less, described by the official map (1967) of Bellevue Cemetery, now the Taft Cemetery, and the official map being a composite map of the Bellevue Cemetery showing all of the plats that have been filed on record in the plat records of the county, and according to the office records of the city (successor to Taft Cemetery Association). 
Cemetery improvements means capital improvements only, and shall not include the day-to-day care and upkeep of the cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 591, § 1, 4-9-1991)  
Sec. 14-62. - Creation of cemetery memorial fund. 
(a)  There is created by this article a cemetery memorial fund for cemetery improvements to the city cemetery, formerly the Bellevue Cemetery. 
(b)  The city is authorized and empowered to receive grants, gifts, and donations from any source for cemetery improvements. 
(Ord. No. 591, § 2, 4-9-1991)  
Sec. 14-63. - Contributions; acknowledgements; expenditures, budgeting and investments; recordkeeping of cemetery memorial fund. 
(a)  A person, association, or corporation may contribute or donate money or property to the city for cemetery improvements. If property, other than money, is donated the city shall have the right to liquidate the property, in its discretion, notwithstanding any contrary provisions contained in the terms of any donative instrument. 
(b)  Acknowledgement of contributions on gifts shall be made to all contributors by a numbered receipt showing the contributor's name, address, amount, and date. If the contribution or gift is given in honor or memory of one or more, appropriate acknowledgement shall also be made to the family of the one being honored or remembered, mailed to person named by the contributor to the address provided. 
(c)  Expenditures shall be made for cemetery improvements by the city only in accordance with the city's cemetery memorial fund budget. The city shall have the right, power, and authority to invest and reinvest all funds and the proceeds of property other than money advanced or contributed to it for the purposes herein specified. 
(d)  The city secretary shall maintain a permanent record of all contributors and additional information the city may deem necessary or proper and shall be responsible for all acknowledgements. 
(Ord. No. 591, § 3, 4-9-1991)  
Chapter 16 - COURTS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Municipal court technology fund. 
The provisions of Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.0172, added by Acts 1999, 76th Leg. Ch. 285 § 1, effective September 1, 1999, are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 711, 6-11-2002)  
Sec. 16-2. - Municipal court building security fund. 
The provisions of Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.017 are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 727, 8-12-2003)  
Secs. 16-3—16-22. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - JUDGES 
 
Sec. 16-23. - Municipal court judge to be appointed. 
There shall be appointed for the city a judge for the municipal court of the city, such persons so appointed pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 1, 2-14-1978)  
Sec. 16-24. - Holding office for term. 
All persons appointed under this article to serve as judge of the municipal court of the city shall hold their terms of office for their term appointed as described herein and until their successors have been appointed and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 3, 2-14-1978)  
Sec. 16-25. - State laws applicable. 
All laws of the state and ordinances of the city pertaining to judges of municipal courts and the judge of the municipal court of the city shall remain in full force and effect and specifically all laws and statutes requiring oath of office and qualification and training shall be applicable to any judge appointed pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 6, 2-14-1978)  
Secs. 16-26—16-53. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FEES AND COSTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 16-54—16-79. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - JUVENILE CASE MANAGER FUND 
 
Sec. 16-80. - Cost payable upon conviction. 
A defendant convicted of a fine-only misdemeanor offense in the municipal court is required to pay a juvenile case manager fee not to exceed $5.00 as a cost of court. 
(Ord. No. 775, § 2, 1-10-2006)  
Sec. 16-81. - Waiver of case manager fee. 
The municipal court judge is authorized to waive the juvenile case manager fee in a case of financial hardship. 
(Ord. No. 775, § 3, 1-10-2006)  
Sec. 16-82. - Status as convicted. 
A defendant is considered convicted if: 
(1)  A sentence is imposed on the defendant; 
(2)  The defendant receives deferred disposition, including deferred proceedings under Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.052 or 45.053. 
(Ord. No. 775, § 4, 1-10-2006)  
Sec. 16-83. - Collection of cost. 
The clerk of the municipal court shall collect the cost and pay them to the municipal treasurer or to any individual commonly delegated as the municipal treasurer for deposit in the fund. 
(Ord. No. 775, § 5, 1-10-2006)  
Sec. 16-84. - Use of fund. 
The fund created under this division will be used only to finance the salary and benefits of the juvenile case manager employed under Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.056. 
(Ord. No. 775, § 6, 1-10-2006)  
Sec. 16-85. - Administration of fund. 
The juvenile case manager fund will be administered under the direction of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 775, § 7, 1-10-2006)  
Sec. 16-86. - State law adopted by reference. 
The provisions of Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.0174 are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 775, § 1, 1-10-2006)  
Chapter 18 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Candidates for municipal office, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 143.001 et seq.; elections, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 1.01 et seq.; conduct of elections, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 61.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-1. - State law applicable. 
All elections pertaining to municipal affairs shall be governed by the election laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 127, § 1, 2-28-1950)  
Sec. 18-2. - Application for ballot. 
Any eligible and qualified person may have his name printed upon the official ballot as a nonpartisan candidate for the office of mayor, councilmember or other city office by filing his sworn application with the mayor at least 30 days prior to the election day. The application shall state the specific office or place being sought by the applicant and that the applicant is eligible and qualified under the laws of the state to become a candidate for and hold the office being sought, if elected. 
(Ord. No. 127, § 2, 2-28-1950)  
Sec. 18-3. - Withdrawal of candidacy. 
Any person eligible to the office of mayor, commissioner, or other for office who has filed his sworn application in accordance with the provisions of this section shall have his name printed on the official ballots. Any such person may cause his name to be withdrawn at any time before the official ballots are actually printed, by filing in writing with the city secretary a request to that effect over his own signature, duly attested to by a notary public. No name so withdrawn shall be printed on the ballots. Not later than 20 days before the city general election, the city secretary shall have the official ballots printed. 
(Ord. No. 127, § 5, 2-28-1950)  
Chapter 20 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Texas Disaster Act of 1975, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.001 et seq.; municipal programs, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.103; local planning required, 37 Tex. Admin. Code § 7.12; local government responsibility, 37 Tex. Admin. Code § 7.23; requesting state assistance, 37 Tex. Admin. Code § 7.24; local government control affirmed, 37 Tex. Admin. Code § 7.26. 
 
Sec. 20-1. - City committee established. 
There is hereby created the municipal emergency management and disaster relief committee which shall consist of the following: 
(1)  The mayor, who shall serve as chairperson of the committee, and who shall also be known as municipal emergency management director. 
(2)  The emergency management coordinator of the city, who shall be charged with the preparation of an emergency management plan for the city, together with such other duties as the director may prescribe. The coordinator shall be appointed by and hold his position at the pleasure of the emergency management director. The coordinator shall serve as vice-chairperson of the municipal emergency management and disaster relief committee. 
(3)  The directors of divisions and chiefs of services of such divisions as may be provided for by resolution by the city council or by direction of the municipal emergency management director. 
(4)  Representatives from civic, business, industry, labor, veterans, professional, or other groups, to be selected and appointed by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 644, § 1, 10-8-1996)  
Sec. 20-2. - Committee powers and duties. 
(a)  The powers and duties of the municipal emergency management and disaster relief committee shall include the recommendation for adoption by the city council of a emergency management plan for the city, and the recommendation for adoption by the city council of any and all mutual aid plans and agreements which are deemed essential for the implementation of such emergency management plan. 
(b)  The duties of such emergency management and disaster relief committees shall also include the making of a survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during an emergency, as provided for herein, as well as a continuing study of the need for amendments and improvements in the emergency management plan adopted by the city council. The emergency management and disaster relief committee of the city, shall meet upon the call of either the director or coordinator. 
(Ord. No. 644, § 2, 10-8-1996)  
Sec. 20-3. - Joint planning. 
The mayor of the city is hereby authorized to join with the county judge, and the mayors of other cities in the county in the formation of a emergency management and disaster relief council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the formation of a emergency management plan for the county and in the appointment of a emergency management coordinator for the county, as well as all other powers necessary to participate in a county wide program of emergency management and disaster relief insofar as said program may affect the city. 
(Ord. No. 644, § 3, 10-8-1996)  
Sec. 20-4. - Emergency management director. 
(a)  The office of municipal emergency management director is hereby created. The municipal emergency management director shall have the authority to request the declaration of the existence of an emergency by the city council or higher authority. In the event it is deemed necessary to declare the existence of an emergency without delay, the director may, if the city council is not in session, do so, but such action shall be subject to confirmation by the city council at its next meeting. 
(b)  The duties and responsibilities of the municipal emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)  The control and direction of the actual operation or training efforts of the emergency management and disaster relief organization of the city; 
(2)  The determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management and disaster relief organization of the city; 
(3)  The maintenance of necessary liaison with other municipal, district, state, county, regional, federal, or other emergency management organizations; 
(4)  The marshaling, after declaration of an emergency as provided for above, of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the emergency management plan; 
(5)  The issuance of all necessary proclamations as to the existence of an emergency and the immediate operational effectiveness of the emergency management plan; 
(6)  The issuance of reasonable rules, regulations or directives which are necessary for the protection of life and property in the city, such rules and regulations shall be filed in the office of the city secretary and shall receive widespread publicity unless publicity will be of aid and comfort to the enemy; 
(7)  The supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of efforts in defense and disaster relief; 
(8)  The supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions; and 
(9)  The authorizing of agreements, after approval of the city attorney, for the use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 644, § 4, 10-8-1996)  
Sec. 20-5. - Organization composition. 
The operational emergency management and disaster relief organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city designated by the municipal emergency management director as well as all volunteer municipal emergency management workers. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such divisions, services and special staff as the city council shall prescribe by resolution or the municipal emergency management director shall provide by directive. Any such resolution or directive shall set forth the form of organization, establish and designate divisions and services, assign functions, duties and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles, and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the State Emergency Response Committee (SERC) of the state and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(Ord. No. 644, § 5, 10-8-1996)  
Sec. 20-6. - Oath for committee members and others. 
Each person serving as a member of the municipal emergency management and disaster relief committee, or as an officer, employee or volunteer in any capacity in the municipal emergency management and disaster relief organization created by resolution or directive pursuant to the authority herein conferred shall, prior to assuming their duty or duties, take an oath which shall be substantially as follows: 
"I, ___________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I have not directly or indirectly paid, offered, or promised to pay, contributed, or promised to contribute any money, or valuable thing, or promised any public office or employment, as a reward to secure my appointment or confirmation thereof, so help me God. I do further solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the duties of the office to which I am appointed, and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution and laws of the United States and of this state, so help me God." 
(Ord. No. 644, § 6, 10-8-1996)  
Sec. 20-7. - Wrongful operation of warning signal. 
Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 644, § 7, 10-8-1996)  
Sec. 20-8. - Priority of regulations. 
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 644, § 8, 10-8-1996)  
Sec. 20-9. - Interpretation. 
This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 644, § 9, 10-8-1996)  
Sec. 20-10. - Liability. 
This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of said city, or any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, or any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons or property as the result of said activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real estate for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual impending or practice enemy attack shall, together with his successor in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privileges or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Ord. No. 644, § 10, 10-8-1996)  
Sec. 20-11. - Funding of emergency management activities. 
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have the right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 644, § 11, 10-8-1996)  
Sec. 20-12. - Unlawful obstruction. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or to do any act forbidden by any rules or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization, except as authorized by the proper official. Convictions for violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $200.00 upon conviction. 
(Ord. No. 644, § 12, 10-8-1996)  
Sec. 20-13. - NIMS adopted. 
The city adopts the National Incident Management System dated March 1, 2004. 
(Ord. No. 759, 7-12-2005)  
Sec. 20-14. - Volunteer corporation is autonomous entity. 
The Taft Volunteer Emergency Medical Service, Inc., a nonprofit corporation, is an entity autonomous from the city. 
(Ord. No. 849, § 4, 5-25-2010)  
Chapter 22 - ENVIRONMENT AND NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal power concerning weeds and other unsanitary matter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.004; assessment of expenses and lien for abatement by municipality, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.007; persons not to permit abandoned property to become public health nuisance, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 341.013(e); junked vehicles as nuisance, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.072; abatement of nuisance of junked vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 683.071—683.078. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 22-1—22-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 953, adopted May 10, 2016, amended article II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article II, divisions 1—6 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 875, adopted April 10, 2012. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-19. - Title. 
The following provisions shall be and constitute the Taft nuisance abatement ordinance addressing property and environmental safety. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-20. - Statutory references. 
V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 342.001—342.007 
V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 365.001—465.015 
V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 54.001—54.019 
V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 54.011—54.019 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-21. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article represents an aggregated number of causes to eliminate; stagnant water; litter; and debris throughout the city. Said conditions; breed disease; rodents; fire hazards and compromise the citizen's quality of life, property values and investments. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-22. - Definitions. 
Approved citizens collection station. See division 7. 
Brush means decaying remains of cut or broken vegetation. 
Code enforcement official means the designated authority charged with the enforcement of this article, or his duly authorized representative. 
Cultivated includes but is not limited to tending, maintaining, and removal of litter and brush. 
Dispose means to discharge, deposit, bury, spill, leak, or place litter on or into land or water. 
Improved lot means a lot on which a structure is located. 
Litter means: 
(1)  Decayed waste from a public or private establishment, residence, or restaurant, including yard trimmings, leaves or similar materials, animals and vegetation, waste material from a market or storage facility handling or storing produce, other food products, but not including sewage, body wastes, or industrial by-products, or 
(2)  Non-decayable solid waste: 
a.  Combustible waste material, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, furniture, rubber and plastics; 
b.  Noncombustible waste material, including glass, crockery, tin or aluminum cans, metal furniture, and similar materials that do not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures of 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit or less; and 
c.  Discarded or worn-out manufactured materials and machinery, including motor vehicles and parts of motor vehicles, tires, aircraft, farm implements, building or construction materials, appliances, and scrap metal. 
Lot means any piece or parcel of land or a portion of a sub division, the boundaries of which have been established by legal instrument of record. 
Maintain means to provide for upkeep or support; to keep unimpaired or in proper condition. 
Person means an individual, corporation, organization, government, business trust, partnership, association, or other legal entity. 
Sanitary means a condition of good order and cleanliness that precludes the probability of disease transmission. 
Shrub means all trees or shrubbery less than four feet in height with trunk or stems less than two inches in diameter which are not maintained, cared for, or cultivated. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-23. - Administrative liability. 
No officer, agent, or employee of the city shall be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the city as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article shall be defended by the city until the final determination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Secs. 22-24—22-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC NUISANCES 
 
Sec. 22-51. - Unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit or allow a public nuisance as herein defined to exist or remain on any premises under their control. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-52. - Stagnant water. 
Accumulations of water which may attract or harbor mosquitoes or produce disease are hereby declared a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-53. - Unsanitary conditions. 
Unwholesome, impure or unsanitary conditions that may produce disease or are likely to attract or harbor insects, rodents, vermin, snakes or disease carrying pests are hereby declared a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-54. - Vacant lots not exempted. 
Vacant lots in their natural state that share a common boundary with an improved lot shall be maintained by its owner of record so as to address the requirements specified in section 22-21 under "purpose." 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-55. - Litter. 
Accumulations of litter are hereby declared a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-56. - Compost piles. 
Personal compost piles which are maintained and kept for residential use are encouraged and are exempt. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-57. - Brush and bulky items. 
(a)  The city will collect, once a month (obtain schedule of pickup from the City of Taft), from active residential customers, old furniture, appliances, junk, and bulk items placed at the curb on regular brush/bulk collection schedule. Materials shall be placed for pick up no more than three days prior to scheduled pickup. The following residential uses are not provided bulk pick up: 
(1)  Apartments with more than two units. 
(2)  No material generated at a location other than the residence from which it is collected shall be placed in any place or pile for pick up and disposal. 
(3)  No material generated by a hired, commercial, or contracted person or service shall be placed in any place or pile for pick up and disposal. 
(4)  No boards, lumber, drywall, or other building and remodeling materials shall be placed in any place or pile for pick up and disposal. Small quantities can be brought to the collection station. 
(5)  All persons utilizing the services must: 
a.  Place only materials in the place specified on or adjacent to his or her property (or the property managed, rented, or occupied by him or her) only. 
b.  Place no more than six cubic yards of brush or bulky items per monthly collection. Small amounts can be disposed of in your garbage container. 
c.  Items that cannot be effectively disposed of in the garbage container shall be placed behind the street curb within eight feet of the curb line of the street. Items should not be placed under any low wires or limbs and shall be placed at least six feet from any other objects (mailboxes, cars, garbage containers, etc.). Items placed in violation of this provision shall constitute a request for service. 
d.  Items placed out at the curb on non-collection days or non-compliant items placed at the curb will constitute a request for service for which a special pickup charge of $100.00 per six cubic yards will be assessed. By requesting this service, the resident will be charged the fee and it will be added to your City of Taft utility bill. The additional fee will be effective October 1, 2016. 
(b)  Enforcement. 
(1)  No person shall violate the terms of this section and enforcement may be taken against any person who violates the terms of this section. Enforcement is in addition to any charges assessed to the property for items being removed and properly disposed. 
(2)  Additionally, failure to comply with the terms of this section shall he deemed to be-a public nuisance. 
(3)  Any materials placed out for collection shall be presumed to belong to and be the responsibility of the utility customer, owner, manager, tenant, or occupant of any dwelling, building, or premises in front of which, or adjacent to which, the materials are placed. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Secs. 22-58—22-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE 
 
Sec. 22-81. - Notice to abate public nuisance. 
The code enforcement official shall give written notice to the owner of a lot to abate a violation found on the premises. The notice shall require the abatement of the violation within ten days of the date of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-82. - Method of notice. 
Method of notice must be given: 
(1)  Personally, to the owner in writing; 
(2)  By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address; or 
(3)  By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or 
a.  If personal service cannot be obtained: 
1.  By publication at least once; 
2.  By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates; or 
3.  By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates. 
(4)  If the United States Postal Service returns the notice sent to a property owner in accordance with subsection (2) as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered. 
(5)  Notice under subsection (2) shall also inform the property owner(s) that another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city, without further notice, will correct the violation at the owner's expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within the one-year period, and the city has not been informed in writing, without notice, will take any action permitted by subsections (1)a. and b., and assess its expenses as provided by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.007. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-83. - Abatement by city. 
If the owner of the property does not comply with the requirements of a notice to abate a violation, the city may perform or cause to be performed the work or improvements required. The city may pay for the work done or improvements made and charge the expenses to the owner of the property as outlined in division 4. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Secs. 22-84—22-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ASSESSMENT OF EXPENSES; LIEN 
 
Sec. 22-101. - Assessment. 
Required work or improvements performed or cause to be performed by the city shall be charged to the owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-102. - Established fees. 
Administrative fees 	$100.00 per case 
Backhoe (1.75 Yd.) 	$40.00 per hour 
Utility truck 	$25.00 per hour 
Half-ton truck 	$25.00 per hour 
Dump truck (10 Yd.) 	$50.00 per hour 
Flatbed truck 	$25.00 per hour 
Brush truck 	$60.00 per hour 
Pickup truck 	$25.00 per hour 
Personnel—Laborer 	$15.00 per hour 
Personnel—Supervisor 	$25.00 per hour 
Backhoe operator 	$25.00 per hour 
Dump/brush truck driver 	$20.00 per hour 
Small equipment 	$10.00 per hour 
 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-103. - Expenses. 
Related expenses shall include but are not limited to the costs of inspection or testing by third parties, photography, publication costs, title search fees, attorney's fees, costs incurred in identifying, locating, or contacting the owner, landfill fees, etc. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-104. - Invoice. 
The code enforcement official shall certify the expense incurred in enforcing the provisions of this article for invoicing to the owner of the property. The invoice becomes an account receivable upon completion and shall be due within 30 days of invoicing. The invoice shall be delivered personally or by certified mailed to the owner's address at post office address. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-105. - Lien after certification. 
If personal service cannot be obtained or the owner's post office address is unknown, the lien may be filed after certification of the expenses. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-106. - Lien. 
If payment in full has not been received after 30 days from invoicing, the city shall assess the expenses against the property in the form of a lien. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-107. - Execution of lien. 
The mayor, or other city official designated by the mayor, shall execute the lien on behalf of the city. The lien shall be filed with the county clerk. The lien arises and attaches to the property at the time the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the county clerk. The lien should contain the name of the owner, a legal description of the real property, the amount of expenses incurred by the city, the interest rate to be charged, and the balance due. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-108. - Lien priveleged. 
The city's lien is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-109. - Release of lien. 
The lien shall be extinguished and released if the city is reimbursed for the total amount due. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-110. - Foreclosure. 
The city may authorize its attorney to bring a suit of foreclosure of lien in the name of the city to recover expenditures and interest due. Such suit may be filed in any court having jurisdiction over such matter, against any property for which such bill has remained unpaid 60 days after it has been rendered. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Secs. 22-111—22-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PROHIBITED ACTS 
 
Sec. 22-131. - Obstruction. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or interfere with the implementation of any action required by the order of the code enforcement official. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-132. - Disposal of litter. 
It shall be unlawful to dispose or allow or permit the disposal of litter at a place that is not an approved solid waste site, including a place on or within 300 feet of a public highway, on a right-of-way, or other public or private property. (Refer to V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 365.012) 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-133. - Receive litter. 
It shall be unlawful to receive litter for disposal at a place that is not an approved solid waste site. (Refer to V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 365.012) 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-134. - Transport litter. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to transport litter to a place that is not an approved solid waste site for disposal at the site. (Refer to V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 365.012) 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-135. - Public nuisance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit or allow a public nuisance as herein defined to exist or remain on any premises in the city. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Secs. 22-136—22-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES 
 
Sec. 22-161. - Criminal. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor (Class C), and upon conviction shall be fined $200.00 on the first offense, $400.00 fine on the second offense and up to $1,000.00 for the third or more offense. Each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-162. - Disposal of litter. 
Certain violations specified in sections 22-132—22-134 of this article may be classified as Class C, B, or A misdemeanors, or third degree felonies. Consult V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 365, subch. B. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-163. - Civil. 
The city may direct its attorney to bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Secs. 22-164—22-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - CITIZEN'S COLLECTION STATION POLICIES AND FEES 
 
Sec. 22-181. - Location. 
501 Industrial 
Taft, Texas 78390 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-182. - Hours of operation. 
Tuesday: 1:00 p.m.—4:30 p.m. 
First Saturday of every month: 9:00 a.m.—1:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-183. - Purpose. 
The Citizens Collection Station is provided for the convenience and exclusive use of residents/businesses to dispose of solid waste items which they would have normally taken to a landfill. It is not meant to be used for disposal of regular household and kitchen garbage, but instead for disposal of other than usual solid waste items homeowners/businesses sometimes need to dispose of. These items might include the larger than normal items the person wants to dispose of rather than placing them in front of their house for curbside collection. Some examples include furniture, mattresses, used clothing, old appliances, or debris from a homeowner's remodeling job. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-184. - Prohibited users. 
(a)  A person, or company, collecting solid waste items for someone else in exchange for a fee. 
(b)  A person, or company, transporting debris generated by themselves at a worksite where they are being paid to work. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-185. - Prohibited items. 
(a)  Organic household waste which may generate odor during decomposition, or attract rodents or flies. 
(b)  Brush or tree limbs of all sizes. 
(c)  Dead animals or slaughterhouse wastes. 
(d)  Used tires and oil filters. 
(e)  Wastewater treatment plant sludge, septic tank waste, or grease and grit trap wastes. 
(f)  Burned material. 
(g)  Batteries. 
(h)  Discarded materials containing asbestos. 
(i)  Any devices containing. Freon unless they have been drained of Freon and tagged by a certified inspector. 
(j)  Hazardous waste as defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the federal Solid Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 USC 6901 et. seq., as amended. 
(k)  Metal and plastic containers may be accepted if they are clean and dry, and the lids or bottoms removed. 
(l)  Roof debris (shingles, felt paper, etc.) shall not be accepted in quantities exceeding one pick-up load. 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Sec. 22-186. - Fees. 
(a)  Citizens/businesses are allowed to dispose of one load of the equivalent of two cubic yards (4'x6'x2' filled level) at no charge upon presentation of their receipt for payment of city utility services. This shall apply to all acceptable items with the exception of roof debris (see subsection (f)). The receipt must be marked as paid within the last 30 days. Residents will need to present identification to city hall staff, the address on which must match the utility account service address in order to dispose of debris at no charge. Business employees must present a current employee identification card. If the driver's license address does not match the utility account service address, citizen must present copy of the account holders identification card along with a contact phone number that staff can call and verify permission to dispose. If resident has neither of these, the city manager will make the final decision. 
(b)  $10.00 minimum fee for small loads up to two cubic yards. 
(c)  $20.00 fee for trucks or trailers containing up to three cubic yards (approximately 4'x6'x4' high). 
(d)  $40.00 fee for trucks or trailers containing up to four cubic yards (approximately 4'x9'x3' high). 
(e)  Loads exceeding four cubic yards shall be charged the equivalent of $15.00/cy. 
(f)  $30.00/cy for any roof debris (limited to one cubic yard per customer). 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 957, 8-9-2016; Ord. No. 970, 5-9-2017; Ord. No. 1033, 5-28-2019)  
Secs. 22-187—22-214. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - NOISE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Type A municipality may regulate certain noises, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 217.003(d); restricted regulation of sport shooting ranges, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 250.001. 
 
Sec. 22-215. - Permit for playing musical instrument on street or sidewalk. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to play upon any kind of musical instrument upon any of the streets or sidewalks of the city, unless a parade or assembly permit has been obtained as required in this article. A permit shall be obtained as outlined in section 22-216. The city manager shall have the authority to waive any or all permit fees for school and chamber of commerce parades only. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 1, 6-8-2004)  
Sec. 22-216. - Permit for operation of vehicle carrying loudspeaker, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or permit to be operated upon the streets of the city any vehicle carrying loudspeakers or megaphones to which are attached audio equipment or other musical instruments at a time when such megaphones or loudspeakers are emitting sound music or voice, or to drive or permit to be operated upon the streets of the city any vehicle carrying loudspeakers or megaphones through which the human voice is emitted directly or through which the human voice or sound is indirectly emitted by means of mechanical or electrical reproduction and amplification of sound, without first obtaining from the chief of police a written permit thereof. Such permit may be withheld if the volume of sound is such as to disturb persons of ordinary sensibilities in any place for which the permit is sought. A fee of $25.00 shall be paid prior to issuance of a permit. Such permit shall be valid for a period of no more than ten days from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 2, 6-8-2004)  
Sec. 22-217. - Use of loudspeakers, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or to permit to be operated in any public place or any premises owned, controlled or occupied by him, any mechanical or electrical, musical instrument, loudspeaker or megaphone to which is attached an audio system, or other musical instrument of any nature in such a manner and to such a degree of sound as to disturb or molest the rest, health, or peace of persons occupying premises in the vicinity of the place from which such sound is emitted. The enforcement of this section shall not apply to community events held at schools, churches or institutions scheduled between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on weekdays and 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on Fridays and Saturdays. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 3, 6-8-2004)  
Sec. 22-218. - Vehicle loads producing unreasonably loud sounds. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive along or upon any public street or alley in the city any vehicle, which is loaded with iron or other material likely to produce an unreasonably loud sound without using proper deadening substance to prevent noises disturbing to reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities within 150 feet of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 4, 6-8-2004)  
Sec. 22-219. - Certain acts declared as nuisances; nonexclusive. 
The following acts, among others, are declared to be nuisances in violation of this article, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Radios, television sets, musical instruments, and similar devices. The operation or permitting the use or operation of any radio, television, audio system or musical instrument in such a manner or at such volume as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of neighboring inhabitants or at a volume which is plainly audible to persons other than those who are in the room in which such device or instrument is played and who are voluntary listeners thereto. 
(2)  Stationary loudspeakers or amplifiers. Except for organized events which have obtained any type of permit from the city in conjunction with the event, no person shall play any radio, music player, television or audio system upon a public right-of-way or upon other public property in such a manner or at such a volume as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of other persons. 
(3)  Parties and other social events. It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of a party or other social event to allow that party or event to produce noise in a loud or offensive manner such that the noise interferes with the peace or health of members of the public or is audible through walls between units within the same building, from property or from the street. A person shall be deemed to be in charge of a party or social event when that event occurs on private property and the person is present at the event and is the property owner or has authorization for the use of the premises. 
(4)  Animals and birds. The keeping of any animal or bird, which by causing frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb the comfort and repose of reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity. 
(5)  Sound devices in motor vehicles. The playing of any radio, music player or audio system in a motor vehicle at such volume as to disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of other persons or at a volume which is plainly audible to persons other than the occupants of said vehicle. 
(6)  Horns and signal devices on automobiles, etc. The continued or frequent sounding of any horn or signal device of any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a danger or warning signal or the creation by means of such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh noise for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time, so as to disturb reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity. 
(7)  Noise near school, church, etc. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school or institution of learning or adjacent to any church or institution while the same is in session or which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution or church, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such manner indicating that the same is a school or church, so as to disturb persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity. 
(8)  Loading and unloading operations. The creation of any loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle, so as to disturb reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 5, 6-8-2004)  
Sec. 22-220. - Unreasonably loud noises declared a nuisance. 
Any unreasonably loud, disturbing, noise which causes material distress, discomfort or injury to reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity thereof is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 6, 6-8-2004)  
Sec. 22-221. - Noise of such character as to interfere with enjoyment of homes. 
Any noise of such character, intensity and continued duration as to substantially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of private homes by reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities is declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 7, 6-8-2004)  
Sec. 22-222. - Penalties. 
Any person guilty of violating any provisions of this article, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $500.00 for each offense. In addition, after a fourth conviction, the equipment or devices which shall include, but are not limited to, compact disc/tape player, stereo receiver, amplifier, pre-amplifier, speakers, and speaker boxes used in the commission of a violation of this article is hereby declared to be contraband and the court shall order that these items be seized and disposed of by the city. Each day any violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 8, 6-8-2004)  
Sec. 22-223. - Engine brakes (Jake Brakes) prohibited. 
(a)  Engine brakes prohibited. 
(1)  Engine brakes. This section applies to the use or operation of an auxiliary or compression engine brake (also known as "Jake Brake") which produces any noise in addition to the normal operating engine noise is prohibited within the city limits. This provision is not intended to prohibit the passage of vehicles equipped with engine brakes or "Jake Brakes" in posted areas but rather prohibit the use of such equipment in posted areas. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any driver of a truck or truck-tractor to activate or use the unit's engine brake within the city limits except in an emergency situation. 
(3)  The term "emergency situation", for the purposes of this section, shall mean one in which there is imminent danger of collision with property, persons or animals. 
(4)  City-owned and other emergency vehicles are exempt from this section. 
(b)  Penalty. Any person, or persons, violating or failing to comply with any provision of this section shall be fined, upon conviction, not less than $1.00, or more than $500.00, for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 998, § I, 10-9-2018)  
Secs. 22-224—22-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WEEDS, GRASS, AND VEGETATION 
 
Sec. 22-251. - Growth to certain height prohibited; offenses. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he is an owner, occupant, or person in control of occupied and unoccupied premises in the city; and 
(1)  Permits weeds or grass located on the premises to grow to a height greater than 12 inches, or 
(2)  Fails to remove weeds or grass from the premises after they have been cut. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under: 
(1)  Subsection (a)(1) that the weeds or grass are maintained at or below a height of 12 inches at all points on the premises within 100 feet of its perimeters, and 
(2)  Subsection (a)(2) that the weeds and grass have been mulched, raked, or composted in a manner approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 939, § 1, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 22-252. - Duty to prevent weeds, grass or vegetation from becoming a nuisance or fire hazard. 
Every owner, occupant, or person in control of any occupied or unoccupied premises in the city shall use every precaution to prevent weeds, grass or other vegetation from growing on the premises so as to become a nuisance or fire hazard. 
(Ord. No. 939, § 1, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 22-253. - Vegetation in alley, street, or sidewalk. 
(a)  An owner, occupant, or person in control of any private premises abutting an alley, street, or sidewalk within the city commits an offense if he allows any vegetation, including, but not limited to, trees, shrubbery, bushes, and vines to grow on the premises so as to project across the property line over or into the right-of-way of the alley, street, or sidewalk. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) that: 
(1)  The vegetation consisted solely of weeds or grass not more than 12 inches high; 
(2)  No part of the vegetation projected over or into the alley or street at a height of less than 15 feet above the ground; or 
(3)  No part of the vegetation projected over or into the sidewalk at a height of less than eight feet above the ground, except that this defense does not apply if the vegetation obstructed the visibility of a traffic control sign, signal, or device or interfered with garbage or trash collection adjacent to the sidewalk. 
(c)  Vegetation growing in violation of this section is a nuisance and may be abated by the city in accordance with section 22-255. 
(Ord. No. 939, § 1, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 22-254. - Enforcement. 
For the purposes of this article, "director" means the director of the department designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this article or the director's authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 939, § 1, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 22-255. - City removal of weeds and vegetation upon failure of owner, occupant, or person in control to do so; notice required. 
(a)  Upon failure of the owner, occupant or person in control of private premises to comply with section 22-251, the director shall have the weeds or grass cut, mulched, raked, and removed from the premises. 
(b)  Upon the failure of the owner, occupant or person in control of private premises abutting an alley, street, or sidewalk within the city comply with section 22-253, the director shall have the noncomplying vegetation cut or trimmed, and removed from the alley, street, or sidewalk, whichever applies. 
(c)  Before performing work, or causing work to be performed, under subsection (a) or (b), the director must notify the owner of the premises to bring the premises into compliance within seven days. The notice must be in writing and may be served by handing it to the owner in person or by sending it United States regular mail, address to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the premises are located. 
(d)  If personal service to the owner cannot be obtained, then the owner may be notified by: 
(1)  Publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city; 
(2)  Posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the premises to which the violation relates; or 
(3)  Posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the premises to which the violation relates. 
(e)  If the director mails a notice to a property owner in accordance with subsection (c), and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed", the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered. 
(f)  In a notice provided under this section, the director may, by regular mail and by a posting on the property, inform the owner of the property on which the violation exists that, if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city may, without further notice, correct the violation at the owner's expense and then, in case of a violation of section 22-251, assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within the one-year period, and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of a change in ownership, then the city may, without notice, take any action permitted by subsection (a) or (b) and assess its expenses as provided in section 22-256. 
(g)  The director may issue citations and prosecute persons for violating section 22-251 or 22-253 regardless of whether a notice is issued under this section. 
(Ord. No. 939, § 1, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 22-256. - Charges to be collected from the property owner; lien on premises for failure to pay charges. 
(a)  If the city cuts, mulches, rakes, or removes weeds or grass on or from private premises under subsection 22-255(a) or cuts, trims or removes vegetation projecting over or into an alley, street, or sidewalk right-of-way under subsection 22-255(b) (either at the request of the owner or upon the failure of the owner to comply with the notice required under subsection 22-255(c), charges in the amount of the total actual costs incurred by the city in performing the work will be collected from the owner by the city comptroller. If the work was performed under subsection 22-255(a), the charges may be levied, assessed, and collected against the premises on which the work is performed and the city controller shall file a statement by the director with the county clerk of the county in which the property is located setting out the total actual costs incurred by the city, the name of the property owner if known, and a legal description of the property, as required by state law. 
(b)  At the time a statement is filed under subsection (a) for work performed under subsection 22-255(a), as required by state law, the city shall have a privileged lien against the premises, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, in the amount of the actual costs incurred, plus ten percent interest on that amount from the date the costs were incurred. 
(c)  The city may file a suit in an appropriate court of law to foreclose upon its lien and recover its actual costs incurred plus interest. The suit may be filed in the name of the city. The statement filed under Subsection (a), or a certified copy of the statement, is prima facie proof of the amount of actual costs incurred by the city. 
(Ord. No. 939, § 1, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 22-257. - Administrative fee. 
The code enforcement department is hereby authorized to assess an administrative fee of $100.00 for actions taken by the city to correct, remove or remedy such conditions in accordance with section 22-255. Said administrative fee shall be added to all other charges incurred by the city. 
(Ord. No. 939, § 1, 8-25-2015)  
Sec. 22-258. - Penalty for violation. 
Any violation of this article shall be a Class C misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, any person violating shall be fined any sum not exceeding $200.00, and each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 939, § 1, 8-25-2015)  
Secs. 22-259—22-275. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - LITTER 
 
Sec. 22-276. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Taft Anti-Litter Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 22-277. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Aircraft means any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft" shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons. 
Authorized private receptacle means a litter storage and collection receptacle as required and authorized by city ordinance. 
City means the City of Taft, Texas. 
Commercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature: 
(1)  Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing; 
(2)  Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; 
(3)  Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order. Nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any ordinance of this city; or 
(4)  Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
Director means the director of the department designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this article or the city manager's authorized representative. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Litter means "garbage", "refuse" and "rubbish" as defined herein and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public. 
Noncommercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper. 
Park means a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Private premises means any dwelling, house, building or other structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, including any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
Public place means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleaning, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 22-278. - Throwing or depositing litter in public places prohibited; exceptions. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city, except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection or in official city dumps. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 22-279. - Manner of placing litter in receptacles. 
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 22-280. - Sweeping litter into gutters, etc. prohibited; sidewalks to be kept free of litter by abutting property owners or occupants. 
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 22-281. - Duty of merchants and contractors as to litter in abutting sidewalks, etc. 
(a)  No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter. 
(b)  A person doing construction work within the city shall at all times keep the sidewalk, street, alley and public or private property abutting the construction site free of construction trash, litter and debris. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 22-282. - Throwing litter from vehicles prohibited. 
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 22-283. - Removal of injurious material from streets. 
A person who drops or throws or permits to be dropped or thrown upon a street any destructive or injurious material, shall immediately remove the material or cause the material to be removed. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 22-284. - Litter in parks. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 22-285. - Litter in fountains, lakes, etc. 
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 22-286. - Prohibiting the posting of notices on poles, trees, and structures; presumptions; defenses. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he posts or affixes or causes to be posted or affixed any notice, poster, paper, or device, which is calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamp post, utility pole, telephone pole, cellular telephone pole, or tree that is located on any public right-of-way or other public property, or to any public structure or building. 
(b)  Whenever any notice, poster, paper, or device is posted or affixed, or caused to be posted or affixed, in violation of subsection (a), it is presumed that the person whose address or telephone number is listed in the notice, poster, paper, or device, or who is otherwise named, described, or identified in the notice, poster, paper, or device, is the person who committed the violation, either personally or through an agent or employee. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) that the notice, poster, paper, or device was posted or affixed in a manner and location authorized or required by another city ordinance or by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 22-287. - Throwing or depositing litter on private premises. 
A person commits an offense if he throws or deposits litter on any occupied private premises within the city, whether owned by the person or not, or in or on any gutter, parkway, sidewalk, or alley adjacent to the private premises; except, that the owner, occupant, or person in control of private premises may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, gutter, parkway, sidewalk, alley, or other public place or upon any private premises. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 22-288. - Duty to maintain premises free from litter. 
An owner, occupant, or person in control of private premises commits an offense if he places, deposits, or throws; permits to accumulate; or permits or causes to be placed, deposited, or thrown, any litter on the premises or in or on any gutter or parkway adjacent to the premises or on one-half of that portion of an alley adjacent to the premises, unless the litter has been deposited in an authorized private receptacle for collection. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 22-289. - Depositing litter on vacant lots prohibited. 
A person commits an offense if he throws or deposits litter on any open or vacant private property within the city, whether owned by the person or not, or in or on any gutter, parkway, sidewalk, or alley adjacent to the private property. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 22-290. - City removal of litter from private premises; notice required. 
(a)  Upon the failure of the owner, occupant, or person in control of private premises to comply with section 22-288, the director shall have the litter removed from the premises. 
(b)  Before having the litter removed, the director must notify the owner of the premises to bring the premises into compliance with section 22-288 within seven days. The notice must be in writing and may be served by handing it to the owner in person or by sending it United States regular mail, addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the premises are located. 
(c)  If personal service to the owner cannot be obtained, then the owner may be notified by: 
(1)  Publication at least once in the official newspaper adopted by the city council; 
(2)  Posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the premises to which the violation relates; or 
(3)  Posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the premises to which the violation relates. 
(d)  If the director mails a notice to a property owner in accordance with subsection (b) and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered. 
(e)  In a notice provided under this section, the director may, by regular mail and by a posting on the property, inform the owner of the property on which the violation exists that, if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city may, without further notice, correct the violation at the owner's expense and then assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within the one-year period, and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of a change in ownership of the property, then the city may, without notice, take any action permitted by subsection (a) and assess its expenses as provided in section 22-291. 
(f)  The director may issue citations and prosecute persons for violating section 22-288 regardless of whether a notice is issued under this section. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 22-291. - Charges to be levied against the premises; lien on premises for failure to pay charges. 
(a)  If the city removes litter on or from the private premises at the request of the owner or upon the failure of the owner to comply with the notice required under section 22-290, charges in the amount of the total actual costs incurred by the city in performing the work will be collected from the owner, or levied, assessed, and collected against the premises on which the work is performed. The charges will be collected by the city controller. The city controller shall file a statement by the director with the county clerk of the county in which the property is located setting out the actual costs incurred by the city, the name of the property owner if known, and a legal description of the property, as required by state law. 
(b)  At the time a statement is filed under subsection (a) as required by state law, the city shall have a privileged lien against the premises, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, in the amount of the actual costs incurred, plus ten percent interest on that amount from the date costs were incurred. 
(c)  The city may file a suit in an appropriate court of law to foreclose upon its lien and recover its actual costs incurred plus interest. The suit must be filed in the name of the city. The statement filed under subsection (a), or a certified copy of the statement, is prima facie proof of the amount of actual costs incurred by the city. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 10-13-2015)  
Sec. 22-292. - Penalty for violation of article; enforcement of article. 
(a)  Penalty for violation of article. A person who violates a provision of this article, or who fails to perform an act required of him by this article, commits an offense. A person is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. 
(b)  An offense under this article is punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000.00 nor less than: 
(1)  $50.00 for a first conviction of a violation of section 22-286, 22-287, or 22-289; 
(2)  $100.00 for a first conviction of a violation of section 22-288; and 
(3)  $200.00 for a first conviction of a violation of section 22-283. 
(c)  The minimum fines established in subsection (b) shall be doubled for the second conviction of the same offense within any 24-month period and trebled for the third and subsequent convictions of the same offense within any 24-month period. At no time shall the minimum fine exceed the maximum fine established in subsection (b). 
(d)  Except where otherwise specified, a culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this article. 
(e)  Authority to enforce article. The director shall enforce this article when violations occur on private property; except that, when a fire hazard exists on private property, this article shall be enforced by the fire marshal. Any police officer of the city shall enforce this article when a violation occurs in a public place, and any member of the park patrol of the city is empowered to enforce this article when a violation occurs in any public park in the city. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 10-13-2015)  
Chapter 24 - FIRE PREVENTION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 24-1—24-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE MARSHAL 
 
Sec. 24-19. - Office created; qualifications. 
The office of city fire marshal is hereby created. The city fire marshal shall be properly qualified for the duties of the office. The fire marshal shall receive appropriate compensation for his services. The office of the city fire marshal shall be the arson investigating unit of the city, and shall be designated an arson investigator as that term is used in Vernon's Ann C.C.P. art. 2.12(7). The city fire marshal and any additional arson investigators must obtain and maintain certification and license as a peace officer from the state commission on law enforcement standards and education as set out in state law. The city fire marshal may designate one or more individuals who have the proper qualifications to assist him with carrying out the duties and functions of the office of city fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 899, § 2, 4-9-2013)  
Sec. 24-20. - Investigation and records of fires. 
The city fire marshal, or designee, shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within the city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be begun within 24 hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The city fire marshal shall keep a record of all fires occurring within the city, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this section. Such record shall at all times be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 899, § 3, 4-9-2013)  
Sec. 24-21. - Taking testimony; charging suspected offenders; referring matter to prosecutor. 
The city fire marshal, or designee, when of the opinion that further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony on oath of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter as to which an examination is herein required to be made, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing, and if he shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with such fire, he shall cause such person to be arrested and charged with such offense, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence together with the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. 
(Ord. No. 899, § 4, 4-9-2013)  
Sec. 24-22. - Summoning witnesses; compelling production of documents. 
The city fire marshal shall have the power to summon and compel the attendance of witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is by the provisions of this article a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document being pertinent thereto. 
(Ord. No. 899, § 5, 4-9-2013)  
Sec. 24-23. - Administering oaths; false swearing; contempt. 
The city fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. False swearing in any matter or proceeding aforesaid shall be perjury and shall be punished as such. Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to testify or who disobeys any lawful order of the city fire marshal or who fails or refuses to produce any evidence touching any matter under investigation or inquiry, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and it shall be the duty of the city fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. 
(Ord. No. 899, § 6, 4-9-2013)  
Sec. 24-24. - Privacy of investigation; separation of witnesses. 
The city fire marshal shall have discretion to determine whether any or all investigations held by or under his direction may be private, and persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined. 
(Ord. No. 899, § 7, 4-9-2013)  
Sec. 24-25. - Right of entry at location of fire. 
(a)  The city fire marshal, or designee, shall have the authority at all times of day or night in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article to enter upon and examine any building or premises when any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion and in accordance with proper legal procedure. 
(b)  Pursuant to Vernon's Ann C.C.P. art. 18.05, as may be amended, an administrative search warrant may be issued to the city fire marshal or through the city fire marshal on behalf of any designee for the purpose of allowing the inspection of any specified premises to determine the presence of a fire or health hazard or unsafe building condition or a violation of any fire, health, or building regulation, statute or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 899, § 8, 4-9-2013)  
Sec. 24-26. - Right of entry for examination; discovery of dangerous conditions. 
The city fire marshal, or designee, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent thereto and without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the city; and it shall be a duty, monthly or more often, to enter upon and make or cause to be entered upon and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever the fire marshal shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property or so occupied that fire would endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind, whatsoever, including chimneys, flues and pipes with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, flammables and refuse materials, or other conditions which in the opinion of the city fire marshal may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the firefighters or occupants, the city fire marshal shall order the same to be removed or remedied and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of said building or premises; provided, however, if the owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he may within five days appeal to the mayor, who shall investigate the cause of the complaint, and unless by his or her authority the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by said owner or occupant. At the end of each month the city fire marshal shall report to the state fire marshal all existing hazardous conditions, together with a separate report on each fire which occurred in the city during the month. 
(Ord. No. 899, § 9, 4-9-2013)  
Secs. 24-27—24-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIREWORKS 
 
Sec. 24-56. - Use of fireworks prohibited. 
No person, firm, company, corporation or association shall cast, throw or fire any squib, rocket, cracker, torpedo, grenade, gun, revolver, pistol, cap or cartridge, or other combustible fireworks of any kind in the city. 
(Ord. No. 180, § 1, 12-15-1955)  
Sec. 24-57. - Possession prohibited. 
No person, firm, company, corporation or association shall exhibit or have in his possession, with intent to give away or sell or offer for sale or sell within the city, any squib, rocket, cracker, torpedo, grenade, or other combustible fireworks of any kind in the city, provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the sale of any such articles by wholesalers to each other or to the sale of any such articles at wholesale to merchants conducting business entirely without the city, or to the sale by wholesalers for private or public demonstration as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 180, § 2, 12-15-1955)  
Sec. 24-58. - Exceptions to general prohibition. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to apply to the sale, storage or use of railroad track torpedoes, or other signaling devices used by railroads, nor to the sale, storage or use of flashlight composition by photographers or dealers in photographic supplies or prevent any public or private demonstration or display of fireworks of any kind if conducted under proper police supervision after application made and permit issued by the board of commissioners of the city for such demonstration. Said permit shall not be granted unless such demonstration or display shall be of such a character, and so located, discharged or fired, as in the opinion of the said board of commissioners after proper inspection, shall not be hazardous to property or endanger any person. The city manager may issue permits for the private or public display or demonstration of fireworks. 
(Ord. No. 180, § 3, 12-15-1955; Ord. No. 660, 3-10-1998)  
Secs. 24-59—24-106. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE CODE 
 
Sec. 24-107. - Fire code adopted. 
(a)  Title. The provisions of the 2009 edition of the International Fire Code are hereby adopted as the "Fire Code of the City of Taft," hereinafter referred to as "this code," and are declared to be effective within the city limits of the city immediately upon receipt by the city and filing with the city secretary one copy of said code. 
(b)  Scope. This code establishes regulations affecting or relating to structures, processes, premises and safeguards regarding: 
(1)  The hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of structures, materials or devices; 
(2)  Conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the occupancy of structures or premises; 
(3)  Fire hazards in the structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation; 
(4)  Matters related to the construction, extension, repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression or alarm systems; and 
(5)  Conditions affecting the safety of fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency operations. 
(c)  Intent. The purpose of this code is to establish the minimum requirements consistent with nationally recognized good practice for providing a reasonable level of life safety and property protection from the hazards of fire, explosion or dangerous conditions in new and existing buildings, structures and premises and to provide safety to fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency operations. 
(Ord. No. 900, § 2, 4-9-2013)  
Sec. 24-108. - Technical code sections revised. 
The following sections of the adopted fire code are hereby revised: 
(1)  Section 101.1: Title. These regulations shall be known as the fire code of the city, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(2)  Section 109.3: Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of the code, shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $2,000.00. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(3)  Section 111.4: Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $2,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 774, § 2, 2-20-2006)  
Sec. 24-109. - Geographic limits. 
The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2009 International Fire Code are hereby established as follows: 
(1)  Section 3204.3.1.1: Location. Stationary containers shall be located in accordance with section 3203.6. Containers of cryogenic fluids shall not be located within diked areas containing other hazardous materials. Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is prohibited within the limits established by law as the limits of district in which such storage is prohibited in all of the city as now established. 
(2)  Section 3404.2.9.5.1: Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. Storage of Class I and II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of building is prohibited within the limits established by law as the limits of districts in which such storage is prohibited in all of the city as now established. 
(3)  Section 3406.2.4.4: Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. The storage of Class I and II liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited within the limits established by law as the limits of districts in which such storage is prohibited in all of the city as now established. 
(4)  Section 3804.2: Maximum capacity within established limits. Within the limits established by law restricting the storage of liquefied petroleum gas for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas, the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of 2,000 gallons (7,570 L) in all of the city as now established. 
(5)  Exception. In particular installation, this capacity limit shall be determined by the fire code official, after consideration of special features such as topographical conditions, nature of occupancy, and proximity to buildings, capacity of proposed containers, degree of fire protection to be provided and capabilities of the local fire department. 
(Ord. No. 774, § 3, 2-20-2006)  
Sec. 24-110. - Code adoption, non-effect on current proceedings. 
Nothing in this article or in the fire code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court as cited in the fire code adopted in this article, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this article. 
(Ord. No. 774, § 6, 2-20-2006)  
Chapter 26 - FLOOD DAMAGE AND PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 961, §§ 1, 2, adopted October 11, 2016, repealed and reenacted chapter 26 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 26 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 626, adopted June 13, 1995. 
State Law reference— Local governments must adopt ordinances necessary for jurisdiction to qualify for National Flood Insurance Program, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.3145; political subdivisions to comply with federal requirements, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.315. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Statutory authorization. 
The legislature of the state has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city council does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 10-11-2016)  
Sec. 26-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 10-11-2016)  
Sec. 26-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 10-11-2016)  
Sec. 26-4. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 10-11-2016)  
Sec. 26-5. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure 
Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. Also called the "base flood." 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
Development means any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS). See "Flood elevation study." 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "flooding"). 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway. See "Regulatory floodway." 
Functionally dependent use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior, or 
b.  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Special flood hazard area. See "Area of special flood hazard." 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 10-11-2016)  
Sec. 26-6. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
The chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 10-11-2016)  
Sec. 26-7. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for San Patricio County, Texas and Incorporated Areas," dated November 4, 2016, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and/or flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and/or FBFM) dated November 4, 2016 and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 10-11-2016)  
Sec. 26-8. - Establishment of development permit. 
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 10-11-2016)  
Sec. 26-9. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 10-11-2016)  
Sec. 26-10. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 10-11-2016)  
Sec. 26-11. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 10-11-2016)  
Sec. 26-12. - Warning and disclaimer or liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 10-11-2016)  
Sec. 26-13. - Penalties for non-compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this court order and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this court order by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this court order or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $500.00 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent city council from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 10-11-2016)  
Secs. 26-14—26-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 26-41. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
The city manager is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 10-11-2016)  
Sec. 26-42. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this chapter. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 26-7, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article III. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 10-11-2016)  
Sec. 26-43. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 26-72(2); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection 26-42(1); 
(b)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the flooplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 10-11-2016)  
Sec. 26-44. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection 26-43(b) of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter (section 26-3). 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(k)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
(1)  The criteria outlined in subsections (a)—(i) are met, and 
(2)  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 10-11-2016)  
Secs. 26-45—26-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 26-71. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 10-11-2016)  
Sec. 26-72. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) section 26-7, (ii) subsection 26-42(8), or (iii) subsection 26-73(c), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in subsection 26-43(a)(1), is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either (i) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements of subsection 26-43(a), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in subsection (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 10-11-2016)  
Sec. 26-73. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 26-2, 26-3, and 26-4 of this chapter. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section 26-8, section 26-43, and the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 26-7 or subsection 26-42(8). 
(d)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 10-11-2016)  
Sec. 26-74. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 26-7, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures; 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified), or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 26-43 are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 10-11-2016)  
Sec. 26-75. - Floodways. 
Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 26-7, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If subsection (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article III. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 2, 10-11-2016)  
Chapter 28 - HUMAN RELATIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 28-1—28-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DISCRIMINATION AGAINST THE DISABLED 
 
Sec. 28-19. - Grievance procedure established. 
This article establishes the procedures to be utilized to provide a prompt internal hearing and resolution of grievances and complaints which allege any action prohibited by the federal regulations implementing section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended (29 USC 794). Section 504 states, in part, that "no otherwise qualified handicapped individual … shall, solely by reason of his handicap, be excluded from the participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving federal financial assistance." 
(Ord. No. 495, § 1, 10-9-1984)  
Sec. 28-20. - Complaint and investigation rules. 
The procedure to be utilized is as follows: 
(1)  A complaint should be filed in writing, contain the name and address of the person filing it, and briefly describe the alleged violation of the regulations. Complaints should be addressed to the city manager, 501 Green Avenue, Taft, Texas 78390, who has been designated to coordinate section 504 compliance efforts. 
(2)  A complaint should be filed within 30 days after the complainant becomes aware of the alleged violation. 
(3)  An investigation, as may be appropriate, shall follow a filing of a complaint. The investigation will be conducted by the city manager. These rules contemplate informal but thorough investigations, affording all interested persons and their representatives, if any, an opportunity to submit evidence relevant to a complaint Under 31 CFR 51.55(d)(2), the city, need not process complaints from applicants for employment. 
(4)  A written determination as to the validity of the complaint and description of the resolution, if any, shall be issued by the city manager and a copy forwarded to the complainant no later than 60 days after its filing. 
(5)  The city manager, serving in his capacity as section 504 coordinator, shall maintain the files and records of the city relating to the complaints filed. 
(6)  The complaint can request a reconsideration of the case in instances where he or she is dissatisfied with the resolution. The request for reconsideration should be made within 15 days to the city secretary for submittal to the mayor and city council. 
(7)  The right of a person to a prompt and equitable resolution of the complaint filed hereunder shall not be impaired by the person's pursuit of other remedies such as the filing of a section 504 complaint with the Office of Revenue Sharing, U.S. Department of the Treasury. Utilization of this grievance procedure is not a pre-requisite to the pursuit of other remedies. 
(8)  These rules shall be construed to protect the substantive rights of interested person, to meet appropriate due process standards and to ensure that the city complies with section 504 and the ORS regulations. 
(Ord. No. 495, § 2, 10-9-1984)  
Secs. 28-21—28-43. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FAIR HOUSING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipality may adopt fair housing ordinance substantially equivalent to federal provisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.903. 
 
Sec. 28-44. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to bring about through fair, orderly and lawful procedures, the opportunity for each person to obtain housing without regard to their race, color, religion or national origin. 
(b)  It is further declared that this policy is grounded upon a recognition of the inalienable right of each individual to provide for himself and his family a dwelling according to his own choosing; and further, that the denial of such rights through considerations based upon race, color, religion or national origin is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes an unjust denial or deprivation of such inalienable right which is within the power and the proper responsibility of government to prevent. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 1, 10-8-1991)  
Sec. 28-45. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the individual designated housing director by the city council. 
Committee means the city committee on human relations, which shall be the current city council of the city. 
Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under sections 28-46 through 26-48. 
Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
Family includes a single individual. 
Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, fiduciaries, and any other organization or entity of whatever character. 
To rent means and includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by occupant. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 2, 10-8-1991)  
Sec. 28-46. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
Except as exempted by section 28-49, it shall be unlawful; 
(1)  To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise, make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, or national origin. 
(2)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or provision of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion or national origin. 
(3)  To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published a notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, religion or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination. 
(4)  To represent to any person because of race, color, religion or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)  For profit, or with the hope or expectation of profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 3, 10-8-1991)  
Sec. 28-47. - Discrimination in the financing of housing. 
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of the race, color, religion or national origin of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or for the purposes of such loan or other financial assistance, or because of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 4, 10-8-1991)  
Sec. 28-48. - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services. 
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions or such access, membership, or participation, on account of race, color, religion or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 5, 10-8-1991)  
Sec. 28-49. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
(a)  Exemptions from the application of section 28-46 shall be limited to: 
(1)  Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses, wherever located, at any one time; provided, further, that in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner, not residing in such house at the time of such sale, or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24 month period; provided, further, that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one time; provided, further, that the sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from the application of this title only if such house is sold or rented: 
a.  Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman; and 
b.  Without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement or written notice in violation of section 28-46(3); 
but nothing in this section shall prohibit the use by the owner of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title. 
(2)  The rental of rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. 
a.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy dwellings which it owns or operates, for other than a commercial purpose, to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color or national origin. 
b.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting to its members the rental or occupancy of such lodgings. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 6, 10-8-1991)  
Sec. 28-50. - Complaints. 
(a)  Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereafter referred to as "person aggrieved") may file a complaint with the administrator. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be about to commit the discriminatory housing practice and shall set forth the particulars thereof. The administrator and employees of his office may assist in the clerical preparation of such complaints. 
(b)  The administrator shall receive and accept notification and referral of complaints from the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and shall treat such complaints in the same manner, as complaints filed directly by the person aggrieved. 
(c)  If, in the course of any investigation, as provided in section 28-51, on a complaint filed with or referred to the administrator, the administrator receives credible evidence and has probable cause to believe that the person named in such complaint has committed a discriminatory housing practice on grounds not stated in such complaint, he may prepare and file a supplementary complaint, which shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as an original complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(d)  If at any time the administrator receives or discovers credible evidence and has probable cause to believe that any person has committed a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint has been filed or is about to be filed, the administrator may prepare and file a complaint upon his own notion and in his own name, and such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(e)  Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the administrator shall furnish a copy of the same to the person or persons named in the complaint. 
(f)  A complaint under subsections (a), (c), (d) and (e) of this section shall be filed within 180 days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice has occurred. Complaints shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may be reasonably and fairly amended at any time. A respondent may file an answer to the complaint against him and, with the leave of the administrator which shall be granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, may amend his answer at any time. Both complaints and answers shall be signed. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 7, 10-8-1991)  
Sec. 28-51. - Investigation. 
(a)  Upon the filing of a complaint as herein provided, the administrator shall cause to be made a prompt investigation of the matter stated in the complaint. 
(b)  In connection with such investigation, the administrator may question and take and record testimony and statements of such persons who appear and may examine, record and copy documents which are produced. 
(c)  During or after the investigation, the administrator shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice act has occurred, or is about to occur, attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary compliance and adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  In the event conciliation is effected, the administrator shall disclose nothing said or done in the course of such conciliation in such a way as to make public identification of the person named in the complaint without the written consent of the persons concerned. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 8, 10-8-1991)  
Sec. 28-52. - Committee hearing. 
(a)  Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at conciliation by the administrator, but within 30 days of the filing of the complaint with the administrator, and if conciliation has not been effected, the administrator shall refer the complaint to the committee, together with the answer of the respondent, if any, and a full report of his investigation and activities in the matter. 
(b)  The committee shall promptly set a date for the hearing. This date shall be within 30 days of the date on which the administrator referred the complaint. At least five days prior, written notice of the hearing shall be given to the person alleged to have committed or to be about to commit the discriminatory housing practice. The hearing shall be conducted in a fair and impartial manner and shall be public. Proof of the matters alleged within the complaint may be presented by the administrator. The complainant and the person alleged to have committed or to be about to commit the discriminatory housing practice may appear personally or by representative and with or without legal counsel and shall have the right to present proof and cross-examine witnesses in all matters relating to the complaint and subsequent related matters. In the event that a person alleged to have committed or to be about to commit a discriminatory housing practice shall fail to appear at the committee hearing either personally or by representative, after notice as provided in this subsection, then such hearing shall be deemed waived by such person. 
(c)  If, after such hearing, a majority of the committee has determined on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing that the complaint is well founded, the committee shall, by persuasion, education and entreaty, attempt to secure within a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, voluntary discontinuance of any discriminatory housing practice. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 9, 10-8-1991)  
Sec. 28-53. - Certification to city attorney. 
If the committee determines that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred and if a hearing before the committee on the complaint alleging such violation has been waived or if the committee has held a hearing and the efforts of the committee to secure voluntary compliance have been unsuccessful, the committee shall instruct the administrator to certify in writing to the city attorney that such discriminatory housing practice has occurred and request the city attorney to forthwith prosecute such violation in the corporation court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 10, 10-8-1991)  
Sec. 28-54. - Legal proceedings. 
(a)  Upon certification by the administrator pursuant to the direction of the committee, the city attorney shall institute a charge in corporation court and prosecute the same to final conclusion. 
(b)  The certification to the city attorney and the actions to be taken by the city attorney shall be cumulative of all other remedies and procedures for the effectuation and enforcement of this article, and the prosecution of alleged violators of this article. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 11, 10-8-1991)  
Sec. 28-55. - Cooperation with secretary of housing and urban development. 
The committee and the administrator are authorized and encouraged to cooperate with the Secretary for Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and may render such service to the Secretary as they shall deem appropriate to further the policies of this article and may accept reimbursement from the Secretary for services rendered to assist him in carrying out the provisions of the cited federal law. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 12, 10-8-1991)  
Sec. 28-56. - Unlawful intimidation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether acting under the color of the law or not, to willfully injure, intimidate or interfere with or attempt same with: 
(1)  Any person or group of persons who are, or have been, or will be, or wish to assist other persons who are engaged in the selling, purchasing, renting, financing, or occupying of a dwelling or who are contracting or negotiating, for same, or who are applying for or participating in any service, organization, or facility related to the business of renting or selling dwellings, because of their race, color, religion or national origin; or 
(2)  Any person participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly, opposing a denial of their opportunity to participate in any of the activities, services, organizations or facilities described in subsection (1) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 13, 10-8-1991)  
Sec. 28-57. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation, violating the terms and provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be fined in a sum not to exceed $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 14, 10-8-1991)  
Chapter 30 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Police force of Type A municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.001; municipal authority to establish police reserve force, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.012(a); governing authority may establish qualifications of police reserve, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.012(b); qualifications for basic peace officer proficiency certificate, 37 Tex. Admin. Code § 221.3 ; watchmen in Type A municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.901. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 30-1—30-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 30-19. - Police chief appointed. 
The city manager shall at once appoint a chief of police, which police officer shall hold his office at the pleasure of the city manager. Such police officer shall give a bond for the faithful performance of his duties and the city shall pay the premium on such bond. 
(Ord. No. 171, § 1, 3-15-1955; Ord. No. 984, § 1, 1-9-2018)  
Sec. 30-20. - Subordinate officers, salaries and qualifications. 
The qualifications, hiring, and salaries of subordinate officers shall be determined by the chief of police and approved by the city manager in a manner consistent with the personnel policies of the city and the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 2, 1-9-2018) 
Editor's note— At the discretion of the editor, Ord. No. 984, § 2, adopted January 9, 2018, has been treated as superseding the provisions of the former sections 30-20 and 30-21, which pertained to subordinate police officers and compensation for police, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. 171, §§ 2, 3, adopted March 15, 1955.  
Secs. 30-21—30-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - INTERLOCAL ASSISTANCE 
 
Sec. 30-46. - Adoption of state law. 
The city adopts V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 362.001 et seq.  
Secs. 30-47—30-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - POLICE RESERVE FORCE 
 
Sec. 30-66. - Chief of police; police department. 
The chief of the police department shall be the director and sponsor of the city police reserve unit. He shall, with the approval of the city manager and mayor, establish operating procedures, and training programs of the unit. He shall appoint the commanding officer of the police reserve unit who shall be given the rank of sergeant of the police reserve unit. 
(Ord. No. 465, 9-14-1982)  
Chapter 32 - LIBRARY  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 32-1. - Public library created. 
A public library to be known as the Taft Public Library is hereby created for the use and benefit of the public. 
(Ord. No. 317, § 1, 1-14-1968)  
Secs. 32-2—32-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LIBRARY BOARD 
 
Sec. 32-21. - Library board membership and rules. 
(a)  The city public library board shall consist of seven members who are active library patrons and library volunteers who live in the city independent school district, who are appointed by the mayor, with advice and consent of the city council from recommendations supplied by the current library board. Each member shall serve for a term of three years, which may be renewed at the end of each term with approval of the majority of the library board. A chairperson and a vice-chairperson shall be appointed every three years by the members of the board. Vacancies in the office of the chairperson and the vice-chairperson shall be filled by the board for the remainder of the unexpired term. The chairperson, or in his absence, the vice-chairperson, shall preside at all meetings of the board and perform the other duties required by this article. A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum to transact business. 
(b)  All other offices of the board shall remain the same. 
(Ord. No. 739, § 2, 4-13-2004)  
Sec. 32-22. - City manager to hire librarian. 
The city manager, with cooperation from a member of the library board, is authorized and directed to hire a librarian who shall be classified as a city employee. 
(Ord. No. 739, § 3, 4-13-2004)  
Sec. 32-23. - Board to comply with state rules. 
The library board will be responsible for compliance with the rules and regulations handed down by the state library. Each year, the public library board shall furnish to the city council a copy of the annual report that is submitted to the state library showing a statement of all monies received, disbursements, and a statement briefly outlining the operation of the library and its condition. 
(Ord. No. 739, § 4, 4-13-2004)  
Sec. 32-24. - Librarian appointment of assistants and employees. 
The librarian, with the recommendation of the public library board and the city manager, shall select and appoint such assistants and employees as are necessary. The librarian, with the advice of the public library board, shall select the books, periodicals, newspapers, furniture and equipment to be purchased for the public library and shall have general supervision of the volunteers of the public library. 
(Ord. No. 739, § 5, 4-13-2004)  
Sec. 32-25. - Ex officio members. 
The mayor and the city council shall be ex officio members of the public library board, but shall have no vote. 
(Ord. No. 739, § 8, 4-13-2004)  
Chapter 34 - MANUFACTURED HOUSING  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 34-1—34-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SAFETY REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 34-19. - Scope. 
All mobile homes shall have tiedowns with provisions for distributing the load of these tiedowns and provisions for the attachment to ground anchors. 
(Ord. No. 463, § I, 8-10-1982)  
Sec. 34-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Diagonal tie means any tiedown designed to resist horizontal or shear forces and which deviates not less than 30 degrees from a vertical direction. 
Ground anchor means any device at the mobile home stand designed for the purpose of securing a mobile home to the ground. 
Tiedown means any device designed for the purpose to anchor a mobile home to ground anchors. 
(Ord. No. 463, § II, 8-10-1982)  
Sec. 34-21. - Fastening of structural systems. 
Mobile homes owners shall have roof framing securely fastened to wall framing, walls to floor structure, and floor structure to chassis to secure and maintain continuity between the floor and chassis, so as to resist wind overturning and sliding as imposed by design loads as follows: 
(1)  Hurricane zone (first two tiers of coastal counties). Designed to withstand minimum hurricane force wind. 
(2)  Non-hurricane zone (all other counties). Designed to withstand minimum gale force winds. 
(3)  Each tiedown shall be designed to resist an allowable working load equal to or exceeding 3,150 pounds and shall be capable of withstanding a 50 percent overload without failure. 
(4)  Tiedowns shall be placed as follows for hurricane zones: Not more than 12 feet on centers beginning from the front wall (first stud and/or first cross member) not more than 6 feet open-end spacing shall be provided at the rear wall of the mobile home unless additional tiedowns are installed. 
(5)  Provision for diagonal ties between ground anchors and the mobile home shall be made in conjunction with each vertical tiedown. 
(6)  Tiedowns exposed to weathering shall be resistant to weathering deterioration at least equivalent to that provided by a coating of zinc on steel of not less than 0.30 ounces per square foot of surface coated. 
(7)  The owner shall provide printed instructions with each mobile home specifying the location and required capacity of stabilizing devices (tiedowns, piers, blocking, etc.) on which the design is based. 
(Ord. No. 463, § III, 8-10-1982)  
Sec. 34-22. - Mobile homes. 
Mobile homes purchased after March 20, 1974, but manufactured prior to March 20, 1974, shall meet the minimum tiedown systems as follows, unless the alternate tiedown system is designed by a registered professional engineer or city inspector: 
(1)  Hurricane zone (first two tiers of coastal counties). 
a.  Designed to withstand minimum hurricane force wind as required. 
b.  Tiedowns: 
1.  Homes 32 feet to 50 feet: four frame ties each side, two over the top ties. 
2.  Homes over 51 feet (and up to 70 feet): five frame ties, each side, three over the top ties. 
3.  Homes over 71 feet: six frame ties each side, three over the top ties. 
4.  Doublewide homes: frame ties up to 50 feet, three on each side. 
5.  Doublewide homes 51 feet and over-: our on each side. 
(Ord. No. 463, § IV, 8-10-1982)  
Sec. 34-23. - Minimum blocking standard for mobile homes. 
(a)  Pier foundations shall be installed directly under the main frame (or chassis) of the mobile home. The piers shall not be further apart than ten feet on centers, and the main frame, front or face, shall not extend further than one foot beyond the centerline of the end of the piers. 
(b)  All grass and organic material shall be removed and the pier foundation placed on stable soil. The pier foundation shall be a 16-inch by 16-inch by four-inch solid concrete pad, precast or poured in place. 
(c)  Piers must be constructed of regular eight-inch by eight-inch by 16-inch concrete blocks, open cells or solid (with open cells vertical), or in combination with two-inch by-eight inch by 16-inch solid concrete blocks placed above the foundation block. A two-inch by eight-inch by 16-inch wood plate shall be placed on top of the pier with hardwood shims fitted and driven tight between the wood plate and the main frame. Shims shall not occupy more than one inch of vertical space. Piers shall be installed perpendicular to the I-beam. 
(d)  All piers over 30 inches in height (measured from top of foundation block to the I-beam) shall be double tiered with blocks interlocked and capped with a four-inch by 16-inch by 16-inch solid concrete block and cushioned with wood blocking as required. Piers not to exceed 48 inches in height unless designed by a registered professional engineer or architect. 
(Ord. No. 463, § V, 8-10-1982)  
Sec. 34-24. - Anchor specifications. 
Each anchor shall meet the Texas Administrative Code regulatory requirements.  
Sec. 34-25. - Electrical. 
All electrical shall meet the city electrical code requirements. 
(Ord. No. 463, § VII, 8-10-1982)  
Sec. 34-26. - Recreational trailer. 
Recreational trailers shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Three week special renewable permit. 
(2)  Do not need tiedown first week. 
(3)  Need tiedown if used for permanent resident. 
(4)  Need tiedown 24 hours after storm warning is reported in hurricane area. 
(Ord. No. 463, § VIII, 8-10-1982)  
Sec. 34-27. - Post-inspection. 
After inspection, if a trailer tiedown or electrical becomes unsafe, the owner shall be given ten days to bring trailer up to safe standards. 
(Ord. No. 463, § IX, 8-10-1982)  
Sec. 34-28. - Violation. 
Violation of this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00, not to exceed $200.00 each day of violation. 
(Ord. No. 463, § X, 8-10-1982)  
Chapter 36 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipality may not enact or enforce law making conduct covered under state Penal Code as an offense subject to criminal penalty, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 1.08; municipality may regulate discharge of firearms, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 229.001(b)(2); trespass by holder of license to carry concealed handgun, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 30.06; places where weapons are prohibited, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 46.03. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 36-1—36-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SEXUAL OFFENDER RESTRICTIONS 
 
Sec. 36-19. - Purpose, intent. 
The city council finds that sex offenders who are required to register as a sexual predator under the Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. ch. 62, present an extreme threat to the health, safety and welfare of children. It is the intent of this article to serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain registered sex offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from loitering or prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residency. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 1, 5-25-2010)  
Sec. 36-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Child means any person under 17 years of age. 
Child care facility means a family day care home which provides regular care to no more than four children under 14 years of age, excluding children related to the caretaker, and provides care after school hours for not more than six additional elementary school children, but the total number of children, including those related to the caretaker, shall not exceed 12 at any given time. 
Child care institution means a commercial day care center, provides regular care to any number of adults or children for less than 24 hours a day. 
Child safety zone means public parks, private and public schools, public library, amusement arcades, video arcades, indoor and outdoor amusement centers, amusement parks, public or commercial and semi-private swimming pools, child care facility, child care institution, public or private youth soccer or baseball field, crisis center or shelter, skate park or rink, public or private youth center, movie theater, bowling alley, scouting facilities and offices for child protective services. 
Database means the state department of public safety's sex offender database or the sex offender registration files maintained by the sex offender registration officer of the police department. 
Loiter means standing, sitting idly, whether or not the person is in a vehicle or remaining in or around an area. 
Park orplayground means one of the following: 
(1)  Any land, including improvements to the land that is administered, operated or managed by the city for the use of the general public as a recreational area. 
(2)  City recreational areas which include, but are not limited to, conservation area, jogging trail, hiking trail, bicycle trail, recreational center, water park, swimming pool, soccer field or baseball field. 
Permanent residence means a place where the person abides, lodges or resides for 14 or more consecutive days. 
Places where children regularly congregate means the same as the term "child safety zone." 
Public way means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, shopping centers, parking lots, transportation facilities, restaurants, shops and similar areas that are open to the use of the public. 
School means a private or public pre-school, private or public elementary school or private or public secondary school. 
Sex offender means an individual who has been convicted of or placed on deferred adjudication for a sexual offense involving a person under 17 years of age for which the individual is required to register as a sex offender under Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. ch. 62. 
Temporary residence means a place where a person abides, lodges or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate, during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the person routinely abides, lodges or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 2, 5-25-2010)  
Sec. 36-21. - Sex offender prohibition. 
(a)  It is an offense for a sex offender to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of the real property comprising a school, child care facility, child care institution, park or playground or other places where children regularly congregate. 
(b)  It is an offense for a sex offender to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence establish a residence within 1,000 feet of a residence of another sex offender. 
(c)  It is an offense for a sex offender to knowingly enter a child safety zone. 
(d)  It is an offense for a sex offender to knowingly loiter on a public way within 300 feet of a child safety zone. 
(e)  A sex offender shall not, on each October 30 and 31 (or any other date set by the city for trick or treaters) between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m., leave an exterior porch light on or otherwise invite trick or treaters to solicit the premises. Inviting also includes posting any type of Halloween decoration or written signs announcing Halloween then in return giving any person under 17 years of age an invite to trick-or-treat at the residence of the sex offender. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 3, 5-25-2010)  
Sec. 36-22. - Property owners prohibited from renting real property to registered sex offenders. 
It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure or part thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or any other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to the terms of this article, if such place, structure, or part thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance is located within 1,000 feet from a child safety zone, as defined in section 36-20. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 4, 5-25-2010)  
Sec. 36-23. - Evidentiary matters. 
(a)  If a sex offender that is prohibited from being in a child safety zone is found in a child safety zone by a police officer, the sex offender is subject to punishment in accordance with this article. 
(b)  It shall be prima facie evidence that this section applies to such a person if that person's record appears in/on the database and the database indicates that the victim was less than 17 years of age. 
(c)  The distance of 300 feet from a child safety zone shall be measured on a straight line from the closest boundary of the child safety zone. 
(d)  The distance of 1,000 feet from a place where children congregate shall be measured on a straight line from the closest boundary line of the sex offender's residence to the closest boundary line of the school, child care facility, child care institution, park or playground or other places where children regularly congregate. 
(e)  In the case of multiple residences on one property, measuring from the nearest property line of the residences to the nearest property line of the school, child care facility, child care institution, park or playground or other places where children regularly congregate. 
(f)  In cases of a dispute over measured distances, it shall be incumbent upon the person challenging the measurement to prove otherwise. 
(g)  A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be created by the city and maintained by the police department. The city shall review the map annually for changes. Said map will be available to the public at the police department. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 5, 5-25-2010)  
Sec. 36-24. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The person required to register in/on the database established the permanent residence or temporary residence and residency prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived has been consistently maintained and the person has complied with all of the sex offender registration laws of the state, prior to the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(b)  The place where children regularly congregate, as specified herein, within 1,000 feet of the permanent or temporary residence of the person required to register on/in the database was opened after the person established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex offender registration laws of the state. 
(c)  The information on/in the database is incorrect, and, if corrected, this section would not apply to the person who was erroneously listed on/in the database. 
(d)  The person required to register on/in the database was a minor when he or she committed the offense requiring such registration and was not convicted as an adult. 
(e)  The person required to register is required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile facility or other correctional institution located within 1,000 feet of the real property comprising a school, child care facility, child care institution, park or playground or other places where children regularly congregate. 
(f)  The person required to register is under 18 years of age or a ward under a guardianship, who resides with a parent or guardian. 
(g)  The person required to register has been exempted by a court order from registration as a sex offender under Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. ch. 62. 
(h)  The person required to register has had the offense for which the sex offender registration was required reversed on appeal or pardoned. 
(i)  The person's duty to register on/in the database has expired. 
(j)  Nothing in this provision shall require any person to sell or otherwise dispose of any real estate or home acquired or owned prior to the conviction of the person as a sex offender. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 6, 5-25-2010)  
Sec. 36-25. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof may be fined an amount not to exceed $2,000.00 as allowed by law. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 848, § 7, 5-25-2010)  
Secs. 36-26—36-53. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - JUVENILES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 36-54. - Halloween restrictions. 
(a)  The practice known as "trick or treating" shall be restricted to the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 8:30 p.m. on October 31 of each year. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any parent or person in loco parentis entitled to the custody or control of any person under 17 years of age to knowingly to allow such person under 17 years of age to do any act in violation of the preceding subsection. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to induce, encourage, or assist any person to do any act in violation of any provision of the two preceding subsections. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the members of the police department of the city to take into custody any person under the age of 17 years in violation of subsection (a) of this section, but such person shall be turned over to his parent or person standing in loco parentis as soon as possible, it being the intention of the city council that no person under the age of 17 years be placed in jail for violation of this section if it is reasonably possible to turn such person over to his parent or person standing in loco parentis pending the filing of a complaint for violation of this section. 
(e)  The practice of persons in previous years on Halloween night in roving all over the city late at night has become, in the opinion of members of the city council, undesirable, and imposes additional duties on members of the police department to protect minor children who leave the immediate vicinity of their residence, and the movement of such minor children creating an intolerable situation only on Halloween night, this section is made effective only for the limited time set out in subsection (a) of this section. 
(f)  The violation of this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 677, §§ I—VI, 10-12-1999)  
Secs. 36-55—36-81. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Juvenile curfew in general-law municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.905; review of curfew every three years, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 370.002; children taken into custody for violation of curfew, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.059. 
 
Sec. 36-82. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Adult means a responsible person, 18 years of age or older, other than a parent, guardian or custodian, in whose care and under whose individualized supervision the juvenile has been placed by the parent, guardian, or custodian and under circumstances which demonstrate actions indicating oversight and concern for the juvenile. 
City means the corporate limits of the City of Taft. 
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
Guardian means any person to whom custody of a juvenile has been given by a court order. 
Juvenile means any person who is ten years of age or older and under 17 years of age; or 17 years of age or older and under 18 years of age who is alleged or found to have engaged in delinquent conduct or conduct indicating a need for supervision as a result of acts committed before becoming 17 years of age. 
Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
Parent means a person who is: 
(1)  A natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent, grandparent of another person; or 
(2)  A person at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody for a limited time for a specific purpose of a juvenile. 
Parking lot means any area, whether paved or unpaved, whether public or private, used or intended to be used for the storage or parking of vehicles. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, alleys, highways, and the common areas of school, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, parks and shops, but does not include a lot containing and used with a residential dwelling if the minor is there with consent of his parent and the owner or tenant who occupies the residential premises. 
Remain means to linger or stay or fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a peace officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises. 
Vacant lot means a parcel of land, whether private property or public property, with or without a structure that is uninhibited by an individual. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 1, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 924, § 1, 3-11-2014; Ord. No. 966, § 1, 2-16-2017; Ord. No. 1054, § 1, 2-25-2020)  
Sec. 36-83. - Nighttime hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any unsupervised juvenile to remain in or upon any establishment, parking lot, public place or vacant lot within the city at any time during the following hours: 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 6 a.m. of the following day; and 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 2, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 924, § 2, 3-11-2014; Ord. No. 966, § 2, 2-16-2017; Ord. No. 1054, § 2, 2-25-2020)  
Sec. 36-84. - Daytime hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any unsupervised juvenile or any juvenile who is under school suspension to remain in or upon any establishment, parking lot, public place or vacant lot within the city at any time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. until 3:30 p.m. on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday; provided, however, the hours specified in this paragraph shall not be considered as curfew hours for juveniles not subject to compulsory school attendance pursuant to V.T.C.A., Education Code § 21.032, nor shall the hours defined in this paragraph be considered as curfew hours during periods in which the school where the applicable juvenile is enrolled is closed or classes for which the applicable juvenile is enrolled have been canceled under the order and direction of officials authorized to issue such orders and directives. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 3, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 924, § 3, 3-11-2014; Ord. No. 966, § 3, 2-16-2017; Ord. No. 1054, § 3, 2-25-2020)  
Sec. 36-85. - Defenses. 
It shall be a defense to prosecution under this division where one of the following situations exists: 
(1)  The juvenile was accompanied by a parent. 
(2)  The juvenile was accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such a juvenile for a designated period of time and purpose within specified area. 
(3)  The juvenile was in route, using the most direct route, to or from the following: 
a.  A place of the minor's employment. 
b.  An emergency errand. 
c.  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel. 
d.  To or from a scheduled medical appointment. 
(4)  A juvenile was exercising First Amendment Rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly. 
(5)  The juvenile was married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Family Code ch. 31. 
(6)  The owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the Taft Police Department that a juvenile was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(7)  With respect to sections 36-83 and 36-84, that the offense occurred during the scheduled vacation of or on a holiday observed by the school in which the juvenile is enrolled; or that the juvenile has graduated from high school or received a high school equivalency certificate; or that the minor has permission from an authorized school official to be absent from school or be in a public place. 
(8)  In the case of a juvenile being educated in a home school, a parent shall be deemed a school official. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 4, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 924, § 4, 3-11-2014; Ord. No. 966, § 4, 2-16-2017; Ord. No. 1054, § 4, 2-25-2020)  
Sec. 36-86. - Enforcement procedure. 
Any police officer, upon finding a juvenile in violation of this division, may transfer the case to proper authorities for handling under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Family Code tit. 3. In addition, a complaint may be filed against the parents in municipal court for violation hereof. The police department shall file any necessary legal papers, supply all necessary documentation, and provide necessary testimony as required for pursuing violation of this division by either the minor or by any parent or guardian. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 5, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 924, § 5, 3-11-2014; Ord. No. 966, § 5, 2-16-2017; Ord. No. 1054, § 5, 2-25-2020)  
Sec. 36-87. - Parental responsibility. 
It shall be unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a minor knowingly to permit or by inefficient control to knowingly allow such minor to be in violation of the curfew imposed in sections 36-83 and 36-84. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent's legal custody. It shall be no defense that a parent was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such minor. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 6, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 924, § 6, 3-11-2014; Ord. No. 966, § 6, 2-16-2017; Ord. No. 1054, § 6, 2-25-2020)  
Sec. 36-88. - Penalty. 
A parent or a juvenile violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
In assessing punishment for either a parent or a juvenile, the municipal court judge is encouraged to consider the community service program. Prosecutors and judges are directed that the primary goal of this division is to bring about positive change in parental behavior. Circumstances of the individual defendant should be considered. Where appropriate, alternative such as deferred adjudication conditioned upon counseling or parenting courses are preferred as a means of community service. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 7, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 924, § 7, 3-11-2014; Ord. No. 966, § 7, 2-16-2017; Ord. No. 1054, § 7, 2-25-2020)  
Sec. 36-89. - Expiration date. 
This division shall expire if it is not reviewed and re-adopted every three years as prescribed by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 370.002. 
(Ord. No. 831, § 9, 11-24-2009; Ord. No. 924, § 9, 3-11-2014; Ord. No. 966, § 9, 2-16-2017; Ord. No. 1054, § 9, 2-25-2020)  
Chapter 38 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipalities to operate and maintain parks, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 331.001; park to be open for public use under rules prescribed by local governing authority, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 331.007. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Park hours of operation. 
(a)  The city parks governed by this chapter shall be open to the general public between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. In case of an emergency, or for other good cause, a park, or any part thereof, may be closed to the public by a city official. 
(b)  Any exceptions to the requirements of this section are authorized only by council approval. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 1, 2-25-2020)  
Secs. 38-2—38-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TAFT PARKS ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 38-19. - Board defined. 
As used in this article, the term "board" shall mean the parks advisory board. 
(Ord. No. 573, § I, 9-12-1989)  
Sec. 38-20. - Board composition; appointment; qualification of members. 
There is hereby created a parks advisory board which shall be composed of five members appointed by the city council. All members shall be residents of the city and known to be interested in public parks. Two members shall be residents of ward one, two members shall be residents of ward two, and the fifth member may reside in ward one or ward two. 
(Ord. No. 573, § II, 9-12-1989)  
Sec. 38-21. - Terms of members. 
(a)  Members of the board shall be appointed for terms of two years; provided, however, that the terms of the members shall be staggered so that one or more members shall be appointed every year in order that there may be continuity on the board. All members shall serve two-year terms beginning on November 1, with city council appointments to be made in October for expiring terms. 
(b)  A member may not serve more than two consecutive terms. 
(c)  Any member desiring to resign from the board shall submit his resignation to the city council in writing. 
(d)  Whenever a vacancy occurs during a term, appointment filling the vacancy shall be to fill the unexpired term. 
(e)  A member who misses three consecutive regular meetings or three consecutive special meetings, except in case of illness, shall be automatically removed from the board without any action required of the board or the city council, upon written notice to the board chairperson and the city council from the board secretary that a member has failed to fulfill the attendance requirements set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 573, § III, 9-12-1989)  
Sec. 38-22. - Members to hold no other city office. 
No member of the board shall hold any other public office of honor, trust, or profit in the government of the city during his term of office. 
(Ord. No. 573, § IV, 9-12-1989)  
Sec. 38-23. - Members to serve without pay. 
Members of the board shall serve without pay. 
(Ord. No. 573, § V, 9-12-1989)  
Sec. 38-24. - General duties of board. 
(a)  The board shall act as an advisory committee to the city council on planning matters pertaining to the acquisition, development, management, maintenance, and use of parks owned or controlled by the city. 
(b)  The board shall make a complete and thorough survey of parks provided by the city, and shall report its findings to the city council, together with any and all recommendations it deems proper with respect to parks. 
(c)  The board shall study and report upon plans for the extension and development of existing parks provided by the city. 
(d)  The board shall study and report upon plans for the establishment of new parks in the city. 
(e)  The board shall, at all times, seek to promote close cooperation between the city and private citizens, institutions and agencies interested in the establishment and development of parks. 
(Ord. No. 573, § VI, 9-12-1989)  
Sec. 38-25. - Meetings and rules of order. 
(a)  The regular meetings of the board shall be held quarterly, and special meetings may be held when needed. 
(b)  Meetings shall adhere to the provisions of the Open Meetings Act, and the posting of notices and agendas shall be with the city secretary's office. 
(c)  Special meetings can be held by call of the chairperson, or vice-chairperson in the absence of the chairperson, or by any three members. 
(d)  A majority of the current membership of the board shall constitute a quorum. A quorum is necessary for conducting official business. 
(e)  A simple majority vote shall be required for passage of any official business with the chairperson voting only in case of a tie. 
(f)  Robert's Rules of Order (revised) shall govern in all cases not covered by this article. 
(Ord. No. 573, § VII, 9-12-1989)  
Sec. 38-26. - Officers. 
(a)  The officers of the board shall be a chairperson, a vice-chairperson, and a secretary. 
(b)  The term of office for officers shall be one year, elected by the board membership in November each year. 
(c)  The chairperson shall serve only to preside at meetings of the board and at ceremonial functions. 
(d)  The vice-chairperson shall serve only to preside at meetings of the board, when the chairperson is absent, and to represent the board, and at ceremonial functions when asked by the chairperson. 
(e)  The secretary shall serve only to record and transcribe the minutes of all board meetings. 
(Ord. No. 573, § VIII, 9-12-1989)  
Secs. 38-27—38-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HIDALGO PARK 
 
Sec. 38-56. - Park regulations. 
The following regulations shall be in force from the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived: 
(1)  Hours open to the public. Hidalgo Park shall be open to the public from 6:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m.; 
(2)  No glass containers in park or playground area; 
(3)  No vehicles in park or playground area; 
(4)  No bicycles, skate boards, roller skates, or inline skates allowed on the walking track; 
(5)  All pets must be on a leash in the park area. No pets in the playground area. 
(Ord. No. 652, § I, 5-13-1997)  
Sec. 38-57. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $200.00 each transaction in violation of any of these provisions shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 652, § II, 5-13-1997)  
Secs. 38-58—38-87. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FACILITIES REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 38-88. - General regulations. 
(a)  No person shall enter or be present between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(b)  No glass containers in park or play areas. 
(c)  Vehicles allowed in parking lot areas only. 
(d)  No bicycles, skate boards, roller skates, or inline skates allowed on concrete areas of the park, tennis courts, parking lots, or within the athletic fields. 
(e)  All pets must be on a leash. 
(f)  Picnic areas and grills must be cleared of all trash. 
(g)  Weapons of any kinds are not permitted. Violators will be handed over to police authorities. 
(h)  Trash must be placed in trash receptacles. 
(Ord. No. 779, § I, 5-9-2006)  
Sec. 38-89. - Use of tennis and basketball courts. 
All persons using the tennis and basketball courts shall abide by the following rules: 
(1)  Tennis courts shall be used for tennis playing only; 
(2)  Pets, food, tobacco products, or furniture shall not be allowed on the courts; 
(3)  Players must conduct themselves in a sportsmanlike manner, loud, quarrelsome conduct or profanity shall not be permitted. 
(4)  Proper tennis shoes must be worn at all times. 
(Ord. No. 779, § II, 5-9-2006)  
Sec. 38-90. - Water park rules. 
The following rules, as established by the city independent school district and acknowledged by the city shall apply to all persons entering the waterpark: 
(1)  Running and horseplay are not permitted; 
(2)  No person having skin lesions, sores, and inflammation of the eyes, discharges from the ears or nose, or any communicable disease shall be allowed to use the water park facilities; 
(3)  No person that appears to be under the influence of illegal drugs or alcohol will be permitted; 
(4)  A cleansing shower must be taken by all persons entering the water park; 
(5)  No food, drink or gum allowed inside park; 
(6)  No smoking in or around park facility; 
(7)  Only swim suits will be worn, no cut-offs, or other apparel allowed. T-shirts may be allowed at the discretion of park supervisor, provided they are white; 
(8)  No glass objects allowed in facility; 
(9)  Shoulder rides not allowed; 
(10)  Children under four years of age or who cannot swim and cannot touch bottom must be accompanied by an adult in the water. If children are in the water, the supervising adult must accompany them or sit at poolside within a few feet of them; 
(11)  Non-swimmers must remain in the areas of the water park which are less than 4 feet in depth, even if they are with an adult; 
(12)  Personally owned goggles and flotation devices (life jackets) are the only swimming aides allowed in the park; fins and snorkels are not allowed without the pre-arranged consent of the park supervisor; 
(13)  Park patrons will not: 
a.  Enter without a lifeguard present; 
b.  Loiter or engage in horseplay in the locker room areas; 
c.  Spit, spout water, or blow nose in pool; 
d.  Use profanity or vulgarity; 
(14)  No one will jump from or throw anything from the bridge; 
(15)  Patrons will not hang on railings, ladders and other pool fixtures; 
(16)  Children age six years of age and over must use the locker facilities of their own gender; 
(17)  To protect the privacy of our customers, the use or possession of a cellular telephone in the pool bathhouse is strictly prohibited; 
(18)  All patrons must follow the directions of the water park staff; 
(19)  Staff is not responsible for any valuables or personal property brought into the facility; 
(20)  No pets allowed in water park area. 
(Ord. No. 779, § III, 5-9-2006)  
Sec. 38-91. - Use of athletic fields. 
(a)  Use of fields shall be scheduled with city staff and abide by permitting requirements. 
(b)  During little league season, the league shall have priority over use. 
(c)  An agreement specifying rules for use of fields by little league officials and city shall be executed. 
(Ord. No. 779, § IV, 5-9-2006)  
Sec. 38-92. - Alcoholic beverages. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or possess any alcohol beverage within or upon the confines of the recreational park or the parking lots connected therewith or adjacent thereto; however, it shall be a defense to prosecution that the person has or is acting under the terms of a lease, agreement or permit with the city. The term alcoholic beverage shall mean alcohol and any beverage containing more than 0.5 percent of alcohol by volume, which is capable of use for beverage purposes. 
(Ord. No. 779, § V, 5-9-2006)  
Sec. 38-93. - Rental and user agreements. 
(a)  The city manager or designee is empowered to prepare and sign user or rental agreements for the rental of facilities and/or equipment of the parks and recreation department. All user and rental agreements shall be signed by the city manager or designee under the following conditions: 
(1)  The form of every instrument used for a particular purpose shall be approved by the city attorney, provided, however, that this not require the signatory approval of the city attorney on each document executed pursuant to this section; and 
(2)  All blanks are filled and information is provided as required by the form instrument. 
(b)  Verbal arrangements to rent are not recognized under any circumstances, and this article and the contracts and agreements shall constitute the whole agreement between the parties and may not be altered unless done so in writing, signed by authorized representative of both parties. 
(1)  All agreements shall provide that parties contracting for the use of city facilities or other property shall hold the city harmless from any and all liability for any claim as a result of use of the premises, equipment, or other property and shall indemnify the city in case of any claims resulting from their operations, use, or occurring as a result of their occupancy of the premises or use of property and all agreements shall specifically include such provisions. 
(2)  Any or all deposit amounts shall be applied against any amounts owed to the city for use of the property/facilities, and the city may refuse to enter into any agreement until any and all amounts due the city by any applicant or organization, or by any organization which the applicant has represented, have been paid in full. 
(3)  The city manager or designee may enter rented facilities for the purpose of ensuring that parties comply with the provisions of this article or the applicable agreement. 
(Ord. No. 779, § VI, 5-9-2006)  
Sec. 38-94. - Rental rates. 
The city manager shall prepare a schedule of rental rates for the use of facilities to include, but not be limited to, pavilions, tennis courts, athletic fields, picnic tables, or barbecue grills. This schedule shall be reviewed on an annual basis, provided however, all such rates, except athletic field rental rates, shall not increase annually by more than 25 percent and rates for organized youth activities shall not exceed a level which would recover 40 percent of the estimated total cost, nor shall new fees be created without the city council's approval by motion or resolution. The approved schedule shall be filed with the city secretary and copies shall be provided to the city council. Specific rates, however, may be adjusted at any time, and the city manager shall have the authority to negotiate special rates for special situations. 
(Ord. No. 779, § VII, 5-9-2006)  
Sec. 38-95. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $200.00. Each violation shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 779, § VIII, 5-9-2006)  
Secs. 38-96—38-118. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - COMMUNITY CENTERS 
 
Sec. 38-119. - Rental rules. 
(a)  Inquires of date availability and rental of center shall be made at City Hall, 501 Green Avenue, Taft, Texas between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. and rental shall be on a "first-come, first-serve basis". 
(b)  Rental hours shall be between 7:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. 
(c)  The rental fee of $40.00 per hour and deposit are required at time of rental. 
(d)  Individuals renting the community center must be over 18 years of age and must complete and sign the rental agreement, "Exhibit A" attached [to Ord. No. 974] , acknowledging these rules prior to rental. 
(e)  A $100.00 cash deposit is required at time or rental and refunds will be made if: 
(1)  Notification of cancellation one week in advance; 
(2)  No sign of misuse or damage to center or equipment; 
(3)  City staff, upon inspection, approves the refund. 
(f)  Organizations and individuals using the center must provide any additional equipment needed that the center is not equipped with. 
(g)  Nothing shall be affixed to any walls, windows, doors, or ceiling. 
(h)  Each organization or individual using the facilities must restore it to its original state, including, but not limited to, sweeping and mopping floors, cleaning the counters, stove, sinks and restrooms, and removal of all trash. In lieu of this rule, a renter may opt to pay a cleaning fee of $60.00. 
(i)  A licensed peace officer serving as security, at an additional rate not to exceed $50.00 per hour, shall be required for every 100 persons in attendance if alcoholic beverages are served for the duration of the function. Rent or will be responsible for supplying the name and agency of the officer before the event begins. 
(j)  Alcoholic beverages and music will be allowed inside the building only between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday and between 7:00 p.m. and 1:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
(k)  The security officer shall cease the event if, he or she observes the presence of dangerous situation. 
(l)  There shall be no use of illegal drugs or profanity. 
(m)  One adult chaperone shall be present for every ten minors under 18 years of age. 
(n)  No items shall be sold that would otherwise require a license or special permit (i.e., alcohol). 
(Ord. No. 897, § 1, 1-8-2013; Ord. No. 974, § 1, 10-9-2018)  
Sec. 38-120. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 974, § 1, adopted October 9, 2018, repealed the former section 38-120 in its entirety, which pertained to fees, and derived from Ord. No. 897, § 2, adopted January 8, 2013. For current provisons related to rental fees, the user's attention is directed to section 38-119.  
Chapter 40 - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate sexually oriented business, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.003. 
 
Sec. 40-1. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose, nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent, nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
(b)  It is the intent of the city council that the locational regulations of section 40-13 are promulgated pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code chapter 243, as amended, and Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, as they apply to nude model studios and sexual encounter centers only. It is the intent of the city council that any other provisions of this chapter are promulgated pursuant to the ordinances of the city, and Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175, and the pertinent provisions applicable thereto contained in the Local Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 561, § A, 9-13-1988)  
Sec. 40-2. - Definitions and classifications. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult bookstore oradult video store means a commercial establishment which as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motel means a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
Chief of police means the chief of police of the city or his designated agent. 
Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a strip tease for another person. 
Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. 
Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
Nudity or a state of nudity means: 
(1)  The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast; or 
(2)  A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breast. 
Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
Residential district means a single family, duplex, multiple family or mobile home zoning district as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
Residential use means a single family, duplex, multiple family and/or mobile home park use as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
Semi-nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude. 
Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
Specified anatomical areas means human genitals in a state of sexual arousal. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition. 
Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means an increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 25 percent, as the floor area exists on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 561, § B, 9-13-1988)  
Sec. 40-3. - Classification of businesses. 
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motels; 
(5)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(6)  Adult theaters; 
(7)  Escort agencies; 
(8)  Nude model studios; and 
(9)  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Ord. No. 561, § C, 9-13-1988)  
Sec. 40-4. - License required. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented business without a valid license, issued by the city for the particular type of business. 
(b)  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the chief of police. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who must comply with section 40-19 shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements of section 40-19. 
(c)  The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the health department, fire department, and building official. 
(d)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20 percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 40-5 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(e)  The fact that a person possesses a valid theater license does not exempt him from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business license. A person who operates a sexually oriented business and possesses a theater license shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this chapter as well as the requirements and provisions of the ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 561, § D, 9-13-1988)  
Sec. 40-5. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  The chief of police shall approve the issuance of a license by the collector of taxes to an applicant within 30 days after the receipt of an application, unless he finds one or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in his payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against him or imposed upon him in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for the information on the application form. 
(4)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter, other than the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within two years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect. 
(5)  An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a license by the city to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding 12 months, or residing with a person whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months. 
(6)  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the health department, fire department, and the building official as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(7)  The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid. 
(8)  An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 12 months and has demonstrated that he is unable to operate or manage a sexually oriented business premises in a peaceful and law abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(9)  An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with sections 40-7, 40-12, 40-13, and/or 40-15 through 40-20. 
(10)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime: 
a.  Involving: 
1.  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code chapter 43: 
(i)  Prostitution; 
(ii)  Promotion of prostitution; 
(iii)  Aggravated promotion of prostitution; 
(iv)  Compelling prostitution; 
(v)  Obscenity; 
(vi)  Sale, distribution, or display of harmful materials to minor; 
(vii)  Sexual performance by a child; 
(viii)  Employment harmful to minors; 
(ix)  Possession of child pornography; 
2.  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code chapter 21: 
(i)  Public lewdness; 
(ii)  Indecent exposure; 
(iii)  Indecency with a child; 
3.  Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code chapter 22; 
4.  Incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway child as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code chapter 25; 
5.  Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses; 
b.  For which: 
1.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
(b)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or applicant's spouse. 
(c)  An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection (a)(10)a of this section may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required by subsection (a)(10)b of this section has elapsed. 
(d)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(Ord. No. 561, § E, 9-13-1988)  
Sec. 40-6. - Fees. 
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license is $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 561, § F, 9-13-1988)  
Sec. 40-7. - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, and building inspection department to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits an offense if he refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the police, fire, health and building inspection departments at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(c)  The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Ord. No. 561, § G, 9-13-1988)  
Sec. 40-8. - License expiration. 
(a)  Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 40-4. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(b)  When the chief of police denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the chief of police finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the denial became final. 
(Ord. No. 561, § H, 9-13-1988)  
Sec. 40-9. - Suspension. 
The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a licensee or an employee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with sections 40-7, 40-12, 40-13, and 40-15 through 40-20; 
(2)  Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(3)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article; 
(4)  Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises; or 
(5)  Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. 561, § I, 9-13-1988)  
Sec. 40-10. - Revocation. 
(a)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 40-9 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if he determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the chief of police during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)  A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in section 40-5(a)(10)a for which the time period required in section 40-5(a)(10)b has not elapsed; 
(6)  On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed in section 40-5(a)(10)a for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; 
(7)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the same meaning as it is defined in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 21.01; or 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for ad valorem taxes, assessments, or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(d)  Subsection (b)(7) of this section does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view. 
(e)  When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under subsection (b)(5) of this section an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under section 40-5(a)(10)b has elapsed. 
(Ord. No. 561, § J, 9-13-1988)  
Sec. 40-11. - Appeal. 
If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license, or suspends or revokes a license, he shall send to the applicant, or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and the right to an appeal. The aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the chief of police to the city council. The filing of an appeal stays the action of the chief of police in suspending or revoking a license until the city council makes a final decision. 
(Ord. No. 561, § K, 9-13-1988)  
Sec. 40-12. - Transfer of license. 
A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Ord. No. 561, § L, 9-13-1988)  
Sec. 40-13. - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of: 
(1)  A church; 
(2)  A public or private elementary or secondary school; 
(3)  A boundary of a residential district; 
(4)  A public park adjacent to a residential district; 
(5)  The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
(d)  For the purposes of subsection (a) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, or public or private elementary or secondary school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district, or residential lot. 
(e)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(f)  Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived that is in violation of subsections (a) though (c) of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed three years unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later-established business is nonconforming. 
(g)  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, residential district, or residential lot within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked. 
(h)  The measurements referred to in subsections (a), (b), (d), (e), and (g) of this section shall be certified by a registered public surveyor licensed by the state, whose fee shall be paid by the applicant or licensee. 
(Ord. No. 561, § M, 9-13-1988)  
Sec. 40-14. - Exemption from location restrictions. 
(a)  If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license to an applicant because the location of the sexually oriented business establishment is in violation of section 40-13, then the applicant may, not later than ten calendar days after receiving notice of the denial, file with the city secretary a written request for an exemption from the locational restrictions of section 40-13. 
(b)  If the written request is filed with the city secretary within the-ten day limit, the city council may consider the request. The city secretary shall set a date for the hearing within 60 days from the date the written request is received to coincide with a regular or special meeting of the city council. 
(c)  A hearing by the city council of the city may proceed if a quorum is present. The city council shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply. 
(d)  The city council may, in its discretion, grant an exemption from the locational restrictions of section 40-13 if it makes the following findings: 
(1)  That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or be contrary to the public safety or welfare; 
(2)  That the granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of the ordinances of the city; 
(3)  That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not downgrade the property values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight; 
(4)  That the location of an additional sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; and 
(5)  That all other applicable provisions of this chapter will be observed. 
(e)  The city council may grant or deny the exemption by a majority vote. Failure to reach a majority vote shall result in denial of the exemption. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the city council of the city, is final. 
(f)  If the city council of the city, grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one year from the date of the city council's action. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business is in violation of the locational restrictions of subsection 40-13 until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption. 
(g)  If the city council denies the exemption, the applicant may not re-apply for an exemption until at least 12 months have elapsed since the date of the city council's action. 
(h)  The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any other provisions of this chapter, other than the locational restrictions of subsection 40-13. 
(Ord. No. 561, § N, 9-13-1988)  
Sec. 40-15. - Additional regulations for escort agencies. 
(a)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under 18 years of age. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 561, § O, 9-13-1988)  
Sec. 40-16. - Additional regulations for nude model studios. 
(a)  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under 18 years of age. 
(b)  A person under 18 years of age commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under 18 years of age was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(d)  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 561, § P, 9-13-1988)  
Sec. 40-17. - Additional regulations for adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he knowingly allows a person under 18 years of age to appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(b)  A person under 18 years of age commits an offense if he knowingly appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (a) and (b) of this section if the person under 18 years of age was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(Ord. No. 561, § Q, 9-13-1988)  
Sec. 40-18. - Additional regulations for adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined herein. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the term "rent" or "subrent" means the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Ord. No. 561, § R, 9-13-1988)  
Sec. 40-19. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The chief of police may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the chief of police or his designee. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this section must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(7)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor level. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described above, is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsection (a) of this section commits an offense if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 561, § S, 9-13-1988)  
Sec. 40-20. - Display of sexually explicit material to minors. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons under the age of 17 years, he displays a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film, or videocassette, the cover of which depicts, in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or perversion for commercial gain, any of the following: 
(1)  Human sexual intercourse, masturbation, or sodomy; 
(2)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast; 
(3)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks, or that portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; or 
(4)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered. 
(b)  In this section, the term "display" means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining assistance from an employee of the business establishment: 
(1)  It is available to the general public for handling and inspection; or 
(2)  The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 561, § T, 9-13-1988)  
Sec. 40-21. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, any person violating section 40-13, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(b)  If the sexually oriented business involved is a nude model studio or sexual encounter center, then violation of section 40-4(a) or section 40-13 is punishable as a Class B misdemeanor. 
(c)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, any person violating a provision of this chapter other than section 40-13, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 40-4(a), 40-13, or 40-16(d) that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school licensed by the state; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure; 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; 
b.  Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(e)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 40-4(a) or 40-13 that each item of descriptive, printed, film, or video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
(Ord. No. 561, § U, 9-13-1988)  
Sec. 40-22. - Injunction. 
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in violation of section 40-13 is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Ord. No. 561, § V, 9-13-1988)  
Chapter 42 - SIGNS 
 
Sec. 42-1. - Regulation of political campaign sign placement. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Political campaign sign means a sign that advertises a candidate or issue to be voted for on a definite election day. A political campaign sign is associated with a specific election, and is not the same as a sign containing political speech. The person running for office and/or political party/group placing a political sign is responsible for compliance with these provisions. 
(b)  Placing a political campaign sign on private property without the permission of the property owner is prohibited. 
(c)  Political campaign signs posted within the city shall not exceed 50 square feet in area. 
(d)  No application or permit is required in order to place a political campaign sign on public property; however, the city may remove signs not conforming to following criteria: 
(1)  No sign or any part thereof may be located within ten feet of any right-of-way line (not to be confused with the curb or pavement line) and within 20 feet of intersecting right-of-way lines. Prohibited signs include signs and supports (other than those placed by the governmental authority such as street name signs) which are located within any public right-of-way. 
(2)  No sign may be posted prior to 90 days before the next uniform election date established by state law. 
(3)  Signs shall be removed within ten days following the uniform election date. 
(4)  No sign may be erected within 100 feet of any outside door through which a person may enter city hall. 
(e)  The city may charge any cost associated with removal of nonconforming signs to the party responsible for the sign. 
(f)  A person commits an offense if the person violates this chapter. An offense under this chapter is a Class C misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 920, § II, 11-14-2013)  
Chapter 44 - SOLID WASTE  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 44-1—44-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
 
Sec. 44-19. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article apply to all territory within and without the corporate limits of the city served by the city with utilities, as defined in this article, or other areas as may be described in this or other ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 603, § 1, 4-14-1992)  
Sec. 44-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bags means plastic sacks designed to store refuse with sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by top. Total weight of a bag and its contents shall not exceed 50 pounds. 
Bulky waste means stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, vehicle tires, furniture, and other waste materials other than construction debris, dead animals, hazardous waste, and stable matter with weights or volumes greater than those allowed for containers. 
Bundled brush means tree, shrub and brush trimmings or parts thereof securely tied together forming an easily handled package not exceeding four feet in length or 50 pounds in weight. 
Commercial and industrial refuse means all bulky waste, construction debris, garbage, rubbish and stable matter generated by a producer at a commercial and industrial unit. 
Commercial and industrial unit means all premises, locations or entities, public or private, requiring refuse collection within the corporate limits of the city and the city service area not a residential unit and not a light commercial unit. 
Composting means a deposit of a mixture of organic matter such as grass clippings, leaves, fireplace ashes, sawdust, vegetable trimmings, egg shells, coffee grounds, tea bags, a little dirt, fertilizer all moistened to activate the decaying process. Meats, dairy foods or any fats, oil or grease shall not be deposited for composting. 
Construction debris means waste building materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations. The term "construction debris" includes, but is not limited to, lumber, roofing materials, concrete piers and concrete slabs such as driveways and sidewalks. 
Container means a receptacle with a capacity of greater than 20 gallons, but less than 35 gallons constructed of plastic, metal or fiberglass, having handles of adequate strength for lifting and having a tight fitting lid capable of preventing entrance into the container by vectors. The mouth of a container shall have a diameter greater than or equal to that of the base. The weight of a container and its contents shall not exceed 50 pounds. 
Contract documents means the request for proposals, instructions to proponents, contractor's proposal, general specifications, the contract performance bond and any addenda or changes to the foregoing documents agreed to by the city and the contractor. 
Contractor orfranchisee means the person, corporation or partnership performing refuse collection and disposal under contract or franchise with the city. 
Dead animals means animals or portions thereof equal to or greater than ten pounds in weight that have expired from any cause, except those slaughtered or killed for humane use or consumption. 
Disposal site means a refuse depository including, but not limited to, sanitary landfills, transfer stations, incinerators, and waste processing/separation centers licensed, permitted or approved by all governmental bodies and agencies having jurisdiction and requiring such licenses, permits or approvals to receive refuse and dead animals for processing or final disposal. 
Dumpster means a metal receptacle with a capacity of approximately three cubic yards, more or less, which has been designed and constructed so as to be coupled, lifted, emptied and serviced thru the use of a hydraulic system on a truck with a lifting system compatible in design. To be used at commercial and industrial units. 
Garbage means any and all dead animals of less than ten pounds in weight, except those slaughtered for human consumption; every accumulation of waste (animal, vegetable and/or other matter) that results from the preparation, processing, consumption, dealing in, handling, packing, canning, storage, transportation, decay or decomposition of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, grains or other animal or vegetable matter (including, but not by way of limitation, used tin cans and other food container; and all putrescible or easily decomposable animal or vegetable waste matter which is likely to attract flies or rodents), except (in all cases) any matter included in the definition of bulky waste, construction debris, dead animals, hazardous waste, rubbish or stable matter. 
Hazardous waste means waste, in any amount, which is defined, characterized or designated as hazardous by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or appropriate state agency by or pursuant to federal or state law. For purposes of this article and/or related contract, the term "hazardous waste" also includes motor oil, gasoline, paint, paint cans, vehicle tires and batteries. 
Light commercial refuse means all bulky waste, construction debris, garbage, rubbish and stable matter generated by a light commercial unit. 
Light commercial unit means all premises, locations or entities, public or private, requiring refuse collection within the corporate limits of the city and the city service area not a residential or a commercial and industrial unit. A small business or professional shop which requires collection service reasonably similar to residential service. 
Medical waste means all medical waste, infectious waste, special waste from health care facilities as defined by the state department of health. 
Producer means an occupant of a residential, light commercial, commercial or industrial unit who generates refuse. 
Recycling waste means paper, glass, plastic, iron, tin and aluminum generated at a residential unit unless the context otherwise requires. 
Refuse means residential refuse and bulky waste, construction debris and stable matter generated at a residential unit unless the context otherwise requires. 
Residential refuse means all garbage, bundled brush, trash, bulky waste, and rubbish generated by a producer at a residential unit. 
Residential unit means a dwelling within the corporate limits of the city and the city service area occupied by a person or group of persons comprising not more than four families. A residential unit shall be deemed occupied when either water or domestic light and power services are being supplied thereto. A condominium dwelling, whether of single or multi-level construction, consisting of four or less continuous or separate single-family dwelling units shall be treated as a residential unit, except that each single-family dwelling within any such residential unit shall be billed separately as a residential unit. 
Rubbish means all waste wood, wood products, tree trimmings, grass cuttings, dead plants, weeds, leaves, dead trees or branches thereof, chips, shavings, sawdust, printed matter, paper, pasteboard, rags, straw, used and discarded mattresses, used and discarded clothing, used and discarded shoes and boots, combustible waste pulp and other products such as are used for packaging, or wrapping crockery and glass, ashes, cinders, floor sweepings, glass, mineral or metallic substances, and any and all other waste materials not included in the definition of bulky waste, construction debris, dead animals, garbage, hazardous waste or stable matter. 
Stable matter means all manure and other waste matter normally accumulated in or about a stable, or any animal, livestock or poultry enclosure, and resulting from the keeping of animals, poultry or livestock. 
(Ord. No. 603, § 2, 4-14-1992)  
Sec. 44-21. - Accumulation of waste matter prohibited; exception. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place, deposit or throw or permit or cause to be placed, deposited or thrown, any garbage, brush, loose waste or refuse of any kind on public or private property outside of any house, building, flat or tenement in the city and the city's service area, unless the same has been deposited in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be unlawful and in violation of this article, and subject to the penalties as provided by this article, but such enumeration is not deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Throwing, placing, dumping or depositing of any lawn trimmings, hedge trimmings or any other cuttings or trimmings, or weeds, flowers or other vegetation on any lot, vacant or occupied, driveways or any other property; 
(2)  Throwing, placing, dumping or depositing of any lawn trimmings, hedge trimmings or other cuttings or trimmings, or weeds, flowers or other vegetation in any gutter, street, sidewalk, parkway, driveway, curb, alley or any other public property; 
(3)  Throwing, placing, dumping or depositing of any garbage, refuse or animal or vegetable waste matter of any kind on or in any lot, vacant or occupied, driveways or any other private property; 
(4)  Causing or permitting to be or remain in or upon any premises, private or public, any animal, vegetable or mineral matters of any composition, or residue thereof, which is an unsanitary condition or injurious to public health, and if any of such matter has remained upon any premises, public or private it will be presumed that same is an unsanitary condition and injurious to public health. 
(c)  Exception. Depositing organic matter such as grass clippings and leaves taken from a person's private property may be placed and remain in or upon that property for composting purposes. Composting shall be accomplished on a well-drained area in the rear yard of the property in accordance with established composting standards. 
(d)  A violation of this section constitutes a misdemeanor and is subject to the penalties provided in section 44-29. 
(Ord. No. 603, § 3, 4-14-1992)  
Sec. 44-22. - Garbage collection and charges mandatory; exceptions. 
(a)  Required. 
(1)  The charges fixed in this article for the removal and disposal of all garbage, bundled brush, trash, refuse, bulky waste, rubbish or other waste material are levied by the city against all owners, occupants, tenants or lessees using or occupying any building, house or structure receiving such service. Since the proper and prompt removal of all garbage, brush, trash, refuse matter and other waste materials is essential to the preservation of public health and safety, it is deemed necessary that at least the appropriate minimum charge be levied against every person, owner or occupant, tenant or lessee, using or occupying any premises as a residence or commercial establishment and thus provide for more even and equitable distribution of the cost of this service to the citizenry enjoying the benefits thereof. Where an apartment house or other building is served water through one meter, the person in whose name the water account stands shall be responsible for the payment of the garbage fees for all persons in such apartment or building who are subject to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Except as provided in this section, all owners, occupants, tenants and lessees using or occupying any building, house or structure within the corporate limits of the city and the city's service area are required to use exclusively the city's waste disposal services. 
(3)  The city manager shall establish the hours and days of collection and a complaint procedure. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Hazardous and medical wastes must be legally disposed of by the owner through facilities or services other than those of the city. 
(2)  Customers requiring roll-off service in containers 20 cubic yards or greater, roll-off container service shall arrange for such service through the city's designated provider of collection and disposal service. 
(3)  Rural customers provided water service only and/or sanitary sewer service only when such service is located outside the city' primary service area. 
(Ord. No. 603, § 4, 4-14-1992)  
Sec. 44-23. - Persons required to keep containers, bags, bins, racks. 
Every owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of any house, building, flat, apartment, tenement or commercial establishment in the city and the city's service area, where persons reside, occupy, board or lodge, or where animal or vegetable food is prepared or served, shall provide such house, building, flat, apartment, tenement or commercial establishment, and at all times maintain in good order and repair, a bag or container, and/or bin or rack. 
(Ord. No. 603, § 5, 4-14-1992)  
Sec. 44-24. - Collection of garbage, refuse, brush and other waste material. 
(a)  Every person subject to the provisions of this article shall place solid waste in required bags and bins or containers and racks at the curbside or alley. However, the city manager or his representative has the authority to designate the location of such bags, containers, bins and racks taking into consideration, among other things, convenience to collection crews, convenience to the customer, hazardous conditions such as electrical wiring, danger of the collector being bitten by household pets, and other such matters. 
(b)  Tree parts, shrubbery, bagged or containerized rubbish, newspapers and magazines are limited to 50 pounds in weight and not larger than four feet in any direction; bundling of these items is required. Items shall be placed alongside the location for solid waste collection in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 603, § 6, 4-14-1992)  
Sec. 44-25. - Use of another's container; meddling with or scattering contents of container. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any owner, occupant, tenant or lessee, using or occupying a building, house or structure as a separate unit, to utilize the garbage containers or receptacles of another owner, occupant, tenant or lessee for the disposal of his own refuse or garbage, and in this manner evade the payment of the fees levied by this article. 
(b)  It is a violation of this section for any person to meddle with any garbage container or trash receptacle unless such container or receptacle is owned or controlled by such person, or unless such person is an authorized collector of the contents, under this article. 
(c)  It is a violation of this section for any person to scatter the contents of any garbage container, bag or trash receptacle. 
(Ord. No. 603, § 7, 4-14-1992)  
Sec. 44-26. - General rates. 
The general and reasonable rates for collecting garbage and brush under the provisions of this article shall be determined and fixed by ordinance from time to time by the city council. Such collection rates shall at least be in an amount necessary to meet the cost of services contemplated by this article. Such rates fixed by ordinance shall be available in writing at the city offices during business hours. 
(Ord. No. 603, § 8, 4-14-1992)  
Sec. 44-27. - Billing and collecting; duty of city manager. 
For the purpose of convenience, the billing and collecting of the charges levied for the services mentioned in this article are done under the direction of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 603, § 9, 4-14-1992)  
Sec. 44-28. - Failure to pay charges; discontinuance of water service. 
All sanitary service charges, including, but not limited to, garbage collection service, are due monthly and must be paid at city hall, and if not paid, the city has the right to shut off the water and other utilities and services from such premises and such services shall not be turned on again until said bill has been paid in full, including additional charges for disconnecting and resumption of services. Such charges are fixed and may be increased or decreased by the city council from time to time by ordinance, and such charges are available in writing at the city offices. 
(Ord. No. 603, § 10, 4-14-1992)  
Sec. 44-29. - Penalties. 
Any corporation, firm agent or person who violates the provisions of this article, upon conviction, shall be fined any sum not exceeding $500.00, and each violation shall constitute a separate offense, and each and every day of such violation shall be deemed a separate and complete offense. The city also has the power to enforce the provisions of this article through civil court action. 
(Ord. No. 603, § 11, 4-14-1992)  
Secs. 44-30—44-46. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RECYCLING 
 
Sec. 44-47. - Recycling service established. 
A commercial recycling service and rate is established. A commercial service dealing with large volumes of paper and cardboard may enter into a recycling agreement with the city's waste disposal contractor to dispose of this refuse. 
(Ord. No. 632, § I, 12-12-1995)  
Sec. 44-48. - Service charge established. 
The monthly charge for this service shall be as established from time to time. It shall be understood that the solid waste contractor shall make every effort to pass any savings realized as a result of recycling efforts to the customer. 
(Ord. No. 632, § II, 12-12-1995)  
Chapter 46 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Powers of general-law municipality over streets, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.002; additional authority of Type A municipality, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.003. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 46-1. - Driveway culvert installation. 
The city shall cover the cost of labor for the installation of a driveway culvert for a distance of no greater than 20 linear feet, per property. 
(Ord. No. 901, § 1, 5-14-2013)  
Sec. 46-2. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to build, lay, construct or maintain any pipe line for any purpose within a city street, alley or easement (whether such city easement be within or without the corporate limits of the city) unless such person first obtains a permit from the city to build, lay construct or maintain such line. 
(b)  Such permits shall be issued by the director of public works of the city and shall be conditioned as the director of public works deems necessary to protect the best interest of the inhabitants of the city. 
(Ord. No. 290, §§ 1, 2, 12-13-1966)  
Secs. 46-3—46-22. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STREETS AND NUMBERING 
 
Sec. 46-23. - Street naming. 
(a)  Street names are declared public property. Street names shall be public property and shall be subject to change by the city council with or without notice, at the discretion of the city council. 
(1)  An alphabetized master street name list may be maintained by the commissioners' court and appraisal district. 
(2)  The name of a new street shall not duplicate the name of an existing street within the county. 
(3)  The continuation of an existing street shall have the same name even if in different jurisdictions and even though it may change directions. 
(4)  New street names shall be no more than 20 characters in length. 
(5)  Street name abbreviations shall follow the guideline as set by the United States Postal Service. 
(6)  Street prefixes of "N," "E," "S," and "W" indicate direction and are to be used only with streets in two or more of the north, east, south, or west quadrants. 
(7)  Street suffixes "street," "road," "lane," "boulevard," "drive," "parkway," "avenue," "place," "court," "cove," "trail," "north," "east," "south," "west" for new streets shall be used based upon the discretion of the city council. 
(8)  Street suffixes "circle," "loop," "cul-de-sac" if used in conjunction with the street name shall be used only for streets which actually form a circle, loop, or cul-de-sac. 
(9)  Streets in new subdivisions shall comply with subsections (a)(1) through (8) of this section. The subdivider/developer shall provide a plat to the cities/county/appraisal office at a scale of one to 400 with proposed names of streets and house numbers. Said house numbering shall be on the basis of one number for every individually buildable lot. Said house numbers shall conform to standards in this article. The subdivider shall provide street signs, meeting city specifications at the intersection of all streets. 
(b)  All houses, buildings or addresses shall be numbered from the base line of the street's origin to the terminus of the street, in regular order, the even numbers on the right and the odd numbers on the left of each street. 
(c)  As the blocks progress in distance from the base line, the beginning number shall be raised 100 with each block. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 1, 9-10-1991)  
Sec. 46-24. - Street signs. 
Street signs are declared public property. Street signs shall be public property and shall be subject to change by the city council with or without notice, at the discretion of the city council. 
(1)  Location. Street signs shall be installed at the intersection of all streets and highways and at such other locations as may be determined to be necessary by the director of public works/county road engineer. 
(2)  Plates. Extruded, aluminum, 0.080 thickness, six inches high by 24 inches, 30 inches or 36 inches wide as necessary. Thermo-setting acrylic baked enamel green background with reflectorized copy. Plates and materials approved in the Texas Uniform Traffic Control Device Handbook may be used. 
(3)  Copy. Four-inch standard alphabet "B" series. Prefix and suffix abbreviations are two-inch standard alphabet "C" series. Block numbers, which are required in order to indicate address range must be two-inch copy of top of suffix. All copy shall be white in order to contrast with green background. 
(4)  Hardware. Smooth finish, diecast of high strength aluminum alloy number 380 under 400 tons pressure with minimum tensile strength of 45,000 p.s.i. Special sawtooth heat treated plated steel fasteners secure sign blades against removal by vandals, and minimize fatigue secure sign blades against resulting from wind vibration. For 2 3/8 -inch O.D. galvanized tubular sign posts. 
(5)  Height. Street signs shall be erected with a minimum height of seven feet from the level of the near edge of the pavement to the bottom of the sign. If, however, a traffic control sign is mounted below a street sign, the bottom of the street sign shall be at least nine feet and the bottom of the traffic control sign at least six feet above the level of the pavement edge. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 2, 9-10-1991)  
Sec. 46-25. - House and address numbering. 
House numbers are declared public property. Assigned house numbers shall be public property and shall be subject to revision by the city council with or without notice, at the discretion of the city council. 
(1)  The appraisal district shall assign the proper number for houses upon application. 
(2)  A complete, current record of the numbering of all houses, buildings, and addresses shall be maintained at the appraisal office as a public record. 
(3)  The owner or occupant of every house, building or address shall place the number assigned by the appraisal office in a conspicuous place on or near such house, building or address so that it may be plainly seen from the street. It shall be the owner or occupant's responsibility to purchase the numbers wherever they desire. 
(4)  House numbers shall be at least three inches high and shall be of a contrasting color to the background. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, deface or take down any number placed on any property except for repair or replacement of such numbers. 
(6)  No building permit shall be issued for any building until the owner or developer has procured from the appraisal office of the county the official number of the premises. Final approval for a certificate of occupancy of any building erected or repaired after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived or court order shall be withheld until permanent and proper numbers have been displayed in accordance with the requirements. 
(7)  House/address numbers for apartments, trailer parks, and motels shall use the primary number assigned into the private driveway or main entrance office followed by a suffix number or letter to designate the specific building or lot. 
(8)  Condominiums developed on named streets shall be treated as individual residences for the purposes of addressing. Those complexes which are not on named streets shall be treated the same as apartments and motels in subsection (7) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 3, 9-10-1991)  
Sec. 46-26. - Issues and conditions not addressed. 
Any issue or condition not addressed in these standards shall be resolved by using the guidelines presented in either: 
(1)  The latest edition of the Addressing Handbook for Local Governments produced by the state advisory commission on state emergency communication; 
(2)  The latest Federal Addressing Standards Guideline; or 
(3)  The latest state uniform traffic control device handbook. 
(Ord. No. 593, § 4, 9-10-1991)  
Secs. 46-27—46-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY BY WIRELESS NETWORK PROVIDERS 
 
Sec. 46-51. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Assist the city in the competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory management of the physical use, occupancy and maintenance of its public rights-of-way by wireless network providers; 
(2)  Secure fair and reasonable compensation for the physical use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way by wireless network providers in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner; and 
(3)  Assist the city in protecting the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 987, § II(Exh. A), 4-24-2018)  
Sec. 46-52. - Governing law. 
This article shall be construed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284 ("the Code") to the extent not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the United States or of the state. 
(Ord. No. 987, § II(Exh. A), 4-24-2018)  
Sec. 46-53. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the definitions found in the city design manual for the installation of network nodes and node support poles ("the design manual") are hereby incorporated into this article and shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The following definitions as found in the design manual are specifically applicable to this article: 
Applicable codes means: 
(1)  The city uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization, and 
(2)  Local amendments to those codes to the extent not inconsistent with chapter 284. 
City means the City of Taft, Texas. 
City council means the municipal governing body of the City of Taft, Texas. 
City manager means the Manager or his/her designee for the City of Taft, Texas. 
Chapter 284 means V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
Code means the Texas Local Government Code. 
Collocate and collocation mean the installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of network nodes in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to a pole. 
Decorative pole means a streetlight pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signage or temporary holiday or special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to nondiscriminatory city codes and ordinances. 
Design district means an area that is zoned, or otherwise designated by municipal code, and for which the city maintains and enforces unique design and aesthetic standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis. 
Easement means and shall include any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the city for public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever. "Easement" shall include a private easement used for the provision of utilities. 
Federal Communications Commission or FCC means the Federal Administrative Agency, or lawful successor, authorized to oversee cable television and other multi-channel regulation on a national level. 
Highway right-of-way means right-of-way adjacent to a state or federal highway. 
Historic district means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district under municipal, state, or federal law. 
Law means common law or a federal, state, or local law, statute, code, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance. 
Local means within the geographical boundaries of the city. 
Location means the city-approved and lawfully permitted location for the network node. 
Mayor means the mayor of the City of Taft, Texas, or designee. 
Micro network node means a network node that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than 11 inches. 
Municipal park means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated by the city as a public park for the purpose of recreational activity. 
Network node means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term: 
(1)  Includes: 
a.  Equipment associated with wireless communications; 
b.  A radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and 
c.  Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a particular collocation; and 
(2)  Does not include: 
a.  An electric generator; 
b.  A pole; or 
c.  A macro tower. 
Network provider means: 
(1)  A wireless service provider; or 
(2)  A person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or installs on behalf of a wireless service provider: 
a.  Network nodes; or 
b.  Node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node; or 
c.  Transport facilities. 
Node support pole means a pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network node. 
Permit means a written authorization for the use of the public right-of-way or collocation on a service pole required from the city before a network provider may perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project over which the municipality has police power authority. 
Pole means a service pole, city-owned utility pole, node support pole, or utility pole. 
Private easement means an easement or other real property right that is only for the benefit of the grantor and grantee and their successors and assigns. 
Provider has the same meaning as "network provider." 
Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the city has an interest. The term does not include: 
(1)  A private easement, or 
(2)  The airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications. 
Service pole means a pole, other than a city-owned utility pole, owned or operated by the city and located in a public right-of-way, including: 
(1)  A pole that supports traffic control functions; 
(2)  A structure for signage; 
(3)  A pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and 
(4)  A pole or similar structure owned or operated by a municipality and supporting only network nodes. 
Street means only the paved portion of the right-of-way used for vehicular travel, being the area between the inside of the curb to the inside of the opposite curb, or the area between the two parallel edges of the paved roadway for vehicular travel where there is no curb. A "street" is generally part of, but smaller in width than the width of the entire right-of-way, while a right-of-way may include sidewalks and utility easements. A "street" does not include the curb or the sidewalk, if either are present at the time of a permit application or if added later. 
Traffic signal means any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
Transport facility means each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes. 
User means a person or organization which conducts a business over facilities occupying the whole or a part of a public street or right-of-way, depending on the context. 
Utility pole means a pole that provides: 
(1)  Electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than 34.5 kilovolts, or 
(2)  Services of a telecommunications provider, as defined by chapter 284, V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 51.002. 
Wireless service means any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node. 
Wireless service provider means a person that provides wireless service to the public. 
Wireless facilities mean "micro network nodes", "network nodes", "node support poles", and "transport facilities" as defined in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
(Ord. No. 987, § II(Exh. A), 4-24-2018)  
Sec. 46-54. - Use and occupancy of public rights-of-way. 
Pursuant to this article and subject to the design manual and the code, a wireless network provider has the nonexclusive right to use and occupy the public rights-of-way in the city for the purpose of constructing, maintaining, and operating its facilities used in the provision of wireless facilities. 
The terms of this article shall apply to all wireless network providers' facilities used, in whole or part, in the provision of wireless services throughout the city, including any annexed areas upon the effective date of annexation or the date the city provides the company written notice, whichever date occurs later. 
(Ord. No. 987, § II(Exh. A), 4-24-2018)  
Sec. 46-55. - Compliance with design manual and applicable codes. 
All wireless network providers shall comply with the terms of this right-of-way management ordinance, city applicable codes, and the terms and conditions of the city's design manual. 
(Ord. No. 987, § II(Exh. A), 4-24-2018)  
Sec. 46-56. - General construction and maintenance requirements. 
A network provider shall construct and maintain network nodes, network support poles and transport facilities described in the code in a manner that does not: 
(1)  Obstruct, impede, or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way; 
(2)  Obstruct the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers; 
(3)  Violate nondiscriminatory applicable codes; 
(4)  Violate or conflict with the city's publicly disclosed public right-of-way design specifications; or 
(5)  Violate the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA). 
(Ord. No. 987, § II(Exh. A), 4-24-2018)  
Sec. 46-57. - Permit applications. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in chapter 284 of the code, a network provider shall obtain a permit or permits from the city to install a network node, node support pole, or transport facility in a city public right-of-way. 
(b)  As required by chapter 284 of the code, the city shall not require a network provider to perform services for the city for which the permit is sought. 
(c)  A network provider that wants to install or collocate multiple network nodes inside the municipal limits of the city is entitled to file a consolidated permit application with the city for not more than 30 network nodes and upon payment of the applicable fee(s), receive a permit or permits for the installation or collocation of those network nodes. 
(d)  The network provider shall provide the following information in its permit applications: 
(1)  Applicable construction and engineering drawings and information to confirm that the applicant will comply with the city's design manual and applicable codes; 
(2)  Any additional information reasonably related to the network provider's use of the public rights-of-way to ensure compliance with the design manual and this article; 
(3)  A certificate that the network node(s) complies with applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission; and certification that the proposed network node(s) will be placed into active commercial service by or for the network provider not later than the 60th day after the date of construction and final testing of each network node is completed. 
(4)  A certificate of insurance that provides that the network provider and its contractor has at least $1,000,000.00 in general liability coverage. 
(e)  Exception. As provided in section 284.157 of the code, a network provider is not required to apply, obtain a permit, or pay a rate to the city for: 
(1)  Routine maintenance that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks, recreational trails or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; 
(2)  Replacing or upgrading a network node or network pole with a node or pole that is substantially similar in size or smaller and that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks, recreational trails or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; or 
(3)  The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro network nodes that are strung on cables between existing poles or Node Support Poles in compliance with the National Electrical Safety Code; 
(4)  Notwithstanding subsection (e) above, the network provider or its contractors shall notify the city at least 24 hours in advance of work described in this subsection (e). 
(Ord. No. 987, § II(Exh. A), 4-24-2018)  
Sec. 46-58. - Installation in historic districts or design districts 
A network provider must obtain advance written consent from the city council before collocating new network nodes or installing new node support poles in an area of the city that has been zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district; or an area that has been designated as a design district if the district has decorative poles. The network provider shall be required to comply with the general aesthetic requirements described in the city's design manual. The city has the authority to designate new historic districts and design districts at a future date. 
(Ord. No. 987, § II(Exh. A), 4-24-2018)  
Sec. 46-59. - Installation in municipal parks and residential areas. 
A network provider may not install a new node support pole in a public right-of-way without the city council's discretionary, nondiscriminatory and written consent if the public right-of way: 
(1)  Is in a municipal park; or 
(2)  Is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is: 
a.  Not more than 50 feet wide; and 
b.  Adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. 
(3)  In addition to the above, a network provider installing a network node, node support pole or transport facilities in a public right-of way shall comply with private deed restrictions and other private restrictions in the area that apply to those facilities. 
(4)  The network provider shall be further required to comply with guidelines set out in the city's design manual. 
(Ord. No. 987, § II(Exh. A), 4-24-2018)  
Sec. 46-60. - Municipal review process by the city. 
(a)  Determination of application completeness. The city shall determine whether the permit application is complete and notify the applicant of that determination: 
(1)  For network nodes and note support poles. No later than 30 days after the date the city receives the permit application. 
(2)  For a transport facility. No later than ten days after the date the city receives the permit application. 
(b)  Approval or denial of application. The city shall approve or deny a completed application after the date it is submitted to the city: 
(1)  For network nodes. No later than 60 days after the date the city receives the complete application. 
(2)  For network support poles. No later than 150 days after the date the city receives the complete application. 
(3)  For transport facilities. No later than 21 days after the city receives the complete application. 
(c)  Basis for denial of application. If an application is denied by the city, the city shall document the basis for the denial, including the specific applicable city code provisions or other city rules, regulations, or other law on which the denial is based. The documentation for the denial must be sent by electronic mail to the applicant on or before the date that the city denies the application. 
(d)  Resubmission of denied application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified in the denied application. 
(1)  The applicant has 30 days from the date the city denies the completed application to cure the deficiencies identified in the denial documentation without paying an additional application fee, other than any fee for actual costs incurred by the city. 
(2)  The city shall approve or deny the revised completed application after a denial not later than the 90th day after the city receives the revised completed application. The city's review shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial documentation. 
(e)  Nondiscriminatory review. Each completed application shall be processed by the city on a nondiscriminatory basis. 
(Ord. No. 987, § II(Exh. A), 4-24-2018)  
Sec. 46-61. - Time of installation. 
A network provider shall begin installation for which a permit is granted not later than six months after final approval of the application and shall diligently pursue installation to completion. The city manager may in his/her sole discretion grant reasonable extensions of time as requested by the network provider. 
(Ord. No. 987, § II(Exh. A), 4-24-2018)  
Sec. 46-62. - Applicable fees and rental rates to the city. 
(a)  As compensation for the network provider's use and occupancy of the city public rights-of-way, the network provider shall pay application fees and annual public right-of-way rental rates as set forth in the city's fee schedule, which shall not be in lieu of any lawful tax, license, charge, right-of-way permit, use, construction, street cut or inspection fee; or other right-of-way related charge or fee, whether charged to the network provider or its contractor(s) within the city, except the usual general ad valorem taxes, special assessments and sales tax levied in accordance with state law and equally applicable to all general businesses in the city. 
(b)  The city fee schedule shall list rates for the following: 
Network nodes: 
(1)  Application fee. The application fee shall be for each network node for up to but not more than 30 network nodes. The fee shall encompass up to five nodes with an additional fee for each node after that on the same application. 
(2)  Annual public right-of-way rate fee. The annual public right-of-way shall be per network node installed in the city public rights-of-way. 
(3)  Public right-of-way rate adjustment. As provided in section 284.054 of the code, the city may adjust the amount of the annual public right-of-way rate not more than annually by an amount equal to one-half the annual change, if any, in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for All Urban Consumers for Texas. The city shall provide written notice to each network provider of the new rate; and the rate shall apply to the first payment due to the city on or after the 60th day following the written notice. 
(c)  Node support poles. The application fee for a network support pole shall be a separate fee per pole. 
(d)  Transport facilities. 
(1)  An application fee shall be paid for each transport facility. 
(2)  The may be assessed a monthly transport facility rental rate for each network node site located in a public right-of-way. However, no rate is required if the network provider is already paying the city an amount equal to or greater than the amount of other city right-of-way fees for access lines under chapter 283 of the code or cable franchise fees under V.T.C.A., Utility Code ch. 66. 
(e)  Micro network nodes. No application fee is required for a micro network node if the installation is attached on lines between poles or node support poles. 
(f)  Collocation of network nodes on service poles. Subject to the city's pole service agreement, there shall be a fee assessed per year per pole for collocation of network nodes on city service poles. 
(g)  City-owned municipal utility poles. A network provider shall pay an annual pole attachment rate for the collocation of a network node supported by or installed on a city-owned utility pole based upon the pole attachment rate consistent with V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 54.024, applied on a per-foot basis. 
(h)  The city shall not seek or accept in-kind services in lieu of or as additional payment or consideration from any user of the public rights-of-way for use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 987, § II(Exh. A), 4-24-2018)  
Sec. 46-63. - Indemnity. 
As provided in section 284.302 of the code, a wireless network provider shall indemnify, defend, and hold the city harmless from and against all liability, damages, cost, and expense, including reasonable attorney's fees, arising from injury to person or property proximately caused by the negligent act or omission of the network provider. The city shall promptly notify the network provider of any claims, demands, or actions ("claims") covered by this indemnity after which the network provider shall defend the claims. The network provider shall have the right to defend and compromise the claims. The city shall cooperate in the defense of the claims. The foregoing indemnity obligations shall not apply to claims arising solely from the negligence of city; however, they shall apply in the case of all claims which arise from the joint negligence of the network provider and the city; provided that in such cases, the amount of the claims for which the city shall be entitled to indemnification shall be limited to that portion attributable to the network provider. Nothing in this section shall be construed as waiving any governmental immunity available to the city under state law or waiving any defenses of the parties under state law. 
(Ord. No. 987, § II(Exh. A), 4-24-2018)  
Sec. 46-64. - Effect on other utilities and telecommunication providers. 
Nothing in this article shall govern attachment of network nodes on poles and other structures owned or operated by investor-owned electric utilities, electric cooperatives, telephone cooperatives, or telecommunication providers. 
(Ord. No. 987, § II(Exh. A), 4-24-2018)  
Chapter 48 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of subdivisions and property development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq.; minimum requirements for subdivisions, 31 Tex. Admin. Code § 364.91. 
 
Sec. 48-1. - Approval authority of subdivision plan, plat or replat. 
(a)  Before any plan, plat or replat of a subdivision or additions of land inside the city or within its extra-territorial jurisdiction shall be recorded with the county clerk, it shall first be approved by the planning commission and the city council, in conformity with Vernon's Ann. Civ. Stat. art. 974a, and the provisions of this chapter. No transfer of land in the nature of a subdivision, as defined herein, shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter even though the instrument or document of transfer may describe land so subdivided by metes and bounds. The filing of any plan, plat, or replat without complying with the requirements of this chapter, or the transfer of land by the filing of any instrument in the nature of a conveyance without having first complied with the requirements of this chapter, shall be deemed a violation of the provisions of this chapter. There is, however, excepted from the provision of this chapter any conveyance transferring any land or interest in land to or from the state, county, city, city independent school district, and city hospital district (and previously legally platted lot or a portion of a legally platted lot as provided for in section 48-6). 
(b)  The city council delegates the authority to approve minor plats to the city manager. The term "minor plat" means a plat or replat involving four or fewer lots, fronting an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities. For any reason, the city manager may refuse to approve the minor plats, but in such case, the plat must be presented to the planning and zoning commission and the city council for their review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 544, § I, 12-8-1987; Ord. No. 558, § I, 6-14-1988; Ord. No. 671, 12-8-1998)  
Sec. 48-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alleys means minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
Arterial street means major thoroughfares, principally traffic arteries more or less continuous across the city which are intended to connect remote parts of the city and which are used primarily for fast or heavy volume traffic and shall include, but not be limited to, each street designated as a major street on the major street plan. 
Collector street means a street which provides circulation within neighborhoods to carry traffic from minor streets to arterial streets, or to carry traffic through or adjacent to commercial or industrial areas. 
Commission means the planning and zoning commission of the city. 
Cul-de-sac means a street having but one outlet to another street and terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular turn around. 
Development plat orsingle lot survey means a single tract of land within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction that is not intended for division, but rather became a parcel of land as a result of division historically and needs services for the development of a use of such land, and affects the orderly growth of a community as a division of property requiring the submittal of a plat in accordance with subdivision guidelines. 
Marginal access streets means minor streets which are parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways; and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
Plat means a map or drawing showing the lot and street arrangement and other features of an area. 
Subdivider and/or developer means and includes any person, partnership, firm, association, corporation, and/or any officer, agent, employee, servant and trustee thereof, who does, or participates in the doing of any act towards the subdivision of land or development of a tract of land. The terms "subdivider" and "developer" are used synonymous and interchangeably. 
Subdivision or tract division means a division of any lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more parts, lots or sites, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or division of ownership. The term "subdivision" or "tract division" includes resubdivision on lots which are part of a previously recorded subdivision. (Any previously legally platted lot or a portion of a legally platted lot as provided in section 48-6 as amended shall be exempt.) Land division for agricultural purposes is exempt where no building construction is proposed or where such division does not include a new street or utility service within an access easement. For the purposes of this chapter, mobile or manufactured home subdivisions follow the same process of subdivision requirements as any set in place development. 
Surveyor means a licensed state land surveyor or a registered public surveyor as authorized by state statute to practice the profession of surveying. 
Utility easement means an interest in land granted to the city, to the public generally, and/or to a private utility corporation, for installing or maintaining utilities across, over, or under private land, together with the right to enter thereon with machinery and vehicles necessary for the maintenance of said utilities. 
(Ord. No. 544, § II, 12-8-1987; Ord. No. 558, § II, 6-14-1988)  
Sec. 48-3. - Procedures and plat requirements. 
(a)  Pre-submission conference. Prior to the submission of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall confer with the staff on an informal basis to discuss the proposed plat and its conformity to the comprehensive plan and its relationship to surrounding property. 
(b)  Preliminary plat. Following the pre-submission conference, all persons desiring to subdivide a tract of land within the area above described shall first prepare and submit to the zoning and planning commission, not less than 15 days prior to any meeting at which such plat is to be considered, the following information which shall be certified by a state registered professional engineer or by a state licensed or registered land surveyor: 
(1)  Five copies of a preliminary plat showing the general features of the proposed development. This preliminary plat shall be drawn on a scale 100 feet to the inch or larger and shall show the following: 
a.  The outline of the tract with principal dimensions. 
b.  The proposed plan of subdivision, showing streets, blocks, lots, alleys, easements, building lines, parks, etc., with principal dimensions. The preliminary plat shall cover all of the tract intended to be developed, at any time, even though it is intended by the developer to file plats and install improvements for parts of said tract by sections or units. 
c.  The location, width, and name of existing streets and any blocks, lots, alleys, building lines, and water courses or other natural features in the area affected, with principal dimensions and any other significant information on all sides for a distance of not less than 200 feet. 
d.  The names of proposed streets. Such names shall conform to the names of existing streets of which they may be or become extensions, or otherwise shall not duplicate or conflict with the recognized name of any other street located in the area subject to these regulations. 
e.  The location of existing sewers, water and gas mains and other public and private utilities, if any. 
f.  Proposed general plan for stormwater drainage sufficiently detailed to indicate the location of drainage ditches or structures and the direction of flow. 
g.  Any zoning district affecting the area being platted or any proposed changes in zoning for which application will be made. 
h.  The name of the proposed subdivision, north point, direction of prevailing breeze, scale and date. The name of the owner and the engineer and surveyor. 
i.  Vicinity sketch or key map at a scale of not more than 800 feet to the inch which shall show all existing subdivisions, streets, and tracts of acreage in the area and the general drainage plan, ultimate designation of water and possible storm sewer connections by arrows. 
j.  Typical cross section of proposed street improvements. 
k.  Contours of not more than two-foot interval and profiles of proposed streets and alleys shall be required by the commission. 
l.  The area of each lot shall be clearly indicated by writing the number of square feet in each lot on the preliminary plat. 
(2)  On receipt of the preliminary plat and other information, the commission shall render a decision thereon within 30 days after their regular meeting. Such decision may consist of approval, disapproval or conditional approval. Conditional approval shall be considered to be the approval of a plat or replat subject to conformity with prescribed conditions, but shall be deemed to be a disapproval of such plat or replat until such conditions are complied with. All objections made to the preliminary plat, or conditions imposed, shall be furnished to the subdivider in writing. 
(3)  When a preliminary plat has been approved, the subdivider may thereafter file a final plat or plats of sections of the subdivision upon which approval of the preliminary plat has been obtained, and upon the filing of a final plat or plats covering a portion of such subdivision, the remainder of the preliminary plat shall be deemed as considered approved or conditionally approved as in subsection (b)(2) of this section; provided, however, that such approval or conditional approval of the remainder of the preliminary plat shall be limited to a two-year period; provided further, however, that the commission may, at its discretion, extend such period of validity. When a preliminary plat has been approved and thereafter the subdivider fails to file with the commission a final plat of the subdivision or a section thereof within a period of six months, the approval of the preliminary plat shall be void except, however, the commission may, in its discretion, extend such period of validity. 
(c)  Final plat. After the preliminary plat procedure has been complied with, the subdivider shall prepare and file the following information: 
(1)  The original and six copies of the final plat. The plat shall be drawn to scale of one inch equals 100 feet. 
(2)  The boundary lines of the area subdivided with accurate distances and angles. 
(3)  The location of all proposed streets and alleys with their widths and names and the line of departure of one street from another. Street signs and block numbers for entire subdivision or each unit of the subdivision, to be installed by the developer at the developer's expense. 
(4)  The boundary lines of adjoining property and of adjoining streets and alleys with their widths and names and the line of departure of one street from another. 
(5)  Any portions of the property to be dedicated or granted for public use. 
(6)  The location of all easements for public use, services, or utilities, including location of proposed street lighting plan. 
(7)  All lots designated by numbers or by letters and numbers, and their zoning district delegations. 
(8)  All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating the boundaries of the subdivisions, the lots, streets, alleys, easements and other features. (Dimensions shall be given to the nearest one-tenth of a foot.) 
(9)  The radii, arcs or chords, points of tangency and central angles for all curvilinear streets and the radii for rounded corners. 
(10)  The locations and descriptions of all survey monuments. 
(11)  The name of the subdivision, the scale of the plat, northpoint, and the name of the owners. 
(12)  Private restrictions and covenants and their effective periods. (In lieu of their lettering on the plat, these may be handled by separate instrument with reference thereto on the plat.) Such restrictions shall be consistent with the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(13)  Acknowledgment and certification. 
a.  Acknowledgment and certification of the owner or lien holders to the plat and restrictions, including dedication to public use of all streets, alleys, parks or other open spaces shown thereon and the granting of the easements. 
b.  Acknowledgment and certification by a land surveyor registered in the state as to the accuracy of the survey and the correct location of the monuments. 
c.  In addition to other required certificates, the following forms shall be entered on the plat following the certificates of owner, engineer, etc., and preceding the certificates of the county clerk: 
1.  Certification of the mayor and city council. 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF SAN PATRICIO 
This plat of ___________ Subdivision (Addition) approved by the Mayor and City Council of Taft, Texas, on this the ___ day of ___________, 20___. 
	/s/   
      Mayor 
 	 
	/s/   
      City Secretary 
 	 
2.  Certification of the city zoning and planning commission. 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF SAN PATRICIO 
This plat of ___________ Subdivision (Addition) approved _____ (date) by the City Zoning and Planning Commission of the City of Taft, Texas. This the ___ day of ___________, 20___; provided, however, this approval shall be invalid, and null and void, unless this plat is filed with the County Clerk within six months hereafter. 
	/s/   
      Chairman 
 	 
	/s/   
      Secretary 
 	 
3.  Certification of the city engineer. 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF SAN PATRICIO 
This the final plat of ___________ Subdivision (Addition) approved by the City Engineer of the City of Taft, Texas. This the ___ day of ___________, 20___. 
	/s/   
      City Engineer 
 	 
4.  Certification of the county clerk. 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF SAN PATRICIO 
I, ___________, County Clerk of San Patricio County, Texas, do hereby certify that the foregoing plat of ___________ dated the ___ day of ___________, 20___, with its certificate of authentication was filed for record in my office the ___ day of ___________, 20___, at ___ o'clock ___. M. in the Map Records of said County in Volume _____, Page _____. 
	/s/   
      County Clerk 
      San Patricio County, Texas 
 	 
By: 
	/s/   
      Deputy 
 	 
d.  If a subdivision is located in an area not served by a sanitary sewer system and septic tanks are to be used, the following form shall be included on the plat: 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF SAN PATRICIO 
Approved by the San Patricio County Health Officer. This the ___ day of ___________, 20___. 
	/s/   
      County Health Officer 
 	 
e.  Where lots are located within an identified flood plain (Zone A indicated on the flood hazard and insurance rate maps) it is required that the plat indicate a minimum flood elevation of one foot above the established 100-year base flood elevation. This elevation will represent the minimum finished floor for future building construction. The plat shall include the following form on the plat: 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF SAN PATRICIO 
This property falls within Zone A of the Flood Hazard and Insurance Rate maps as prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration and may require special permits prior to building of structures. 
	/s/   
      Subdivider Agent    Date 
 	 
(d)  Final approval. 
(1)  Upon filing of the final plat, providing all objections made or conditions imposed to the preliminary plat have been complied with, the commission shall recommend to the city council acceptance of the plat. Should the commission fail to comply with subsection (b)(2) of this section, a certificate showing the filing date and the failure to take action within the time prescribed shall, on demand, be issued by the planning and zoning commission to the governing body, and said certificate shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval herein required. Such commission shall keep a record of applications and action taken thereupon by minutes, and upon demand by the owners of any land affected, shall certify its reasons for the action taken in the matter. 
(2)  On approval of the plat by the city council, all improvements shall be installed within the areas of the subdivision and approved and accepted by the city engineer and city council before the final plat can be signed and filed for record with the county clerk. The chairperson and the secretary of the commission and the mayor and city secretary shall sign in the spaces provided which shall allow said plat to be filed with the county clerk. The owner shall file the signed plat with the county clerk not later than 30 days after the date of the mayor's signing. 
(3)  Contractors and subcontractors, upon completion of improvements, shall provide a one-year maintenance bond to the city on all improvements in accordance with section 48-5(d). 
(e)  Filing fees. Upon the filing of each preliminary plat, a filing fee of $10.00 shall be paid to the city. A filing fee of $10.00 plus $1.00 per each lot shall be paid when the final plat is filed. 
(Ord. No. 544, § III, 12-8-1987)  
Sec. 48-4. - Design standards. 
(a)  Streets. 
(1)  Streets to conform to general plan. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall conform to the general plan for the city, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
(2)  Arrangements of streets. Where such is not shown in a general plan for the city, the arrangements of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
a.  Provide for the continuation on appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or 
b.  Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the planning and zoning commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing street impracticable. 
(3)  Minor streets. Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(4)  Existing or proposed arterial streets or highways. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed main arterial street or highway, the planning and zoning commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
(5)  Railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the planning and zoning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
(6)  Reserve strips prohibited. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their control is definitely placed in the city under conditions approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(7)  Street jogs to be avoided. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet long shall be avoided. 
(8)  Tangents. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves or arterial and collector streets. 
(9)  Streets to intersect at right angles. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. 
(10)  Property lines to be rounded. Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of ten feet or of a greater radius where the planning and zoning commission may deem it necessary. 
(11)  Right-of-way widths. Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown in the general plan for the city, and where not shown therein shall be as follows: 
RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTHS BY STREET TYPE 
Street Type 	Right-of-Way Width 
Major thoroughfares 	80 feet 
Collector 	60 feet 
Minor for apartments 	60 feet 
Minor for other residences 	50 feet 
Marginal access 	38 feet 
 
(12)  Half streets. Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations and where the planning and zoning commission finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever a half street has already been provided adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other remaining half of the street shall be platted within such subdivision. 
(13)  Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac). Dead-end streets, designed to be so permanently, shall not be longer than 500 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least 80 feet, and a street property line diameter of at least 100 feet. 
(14)  Street grades. Street grades shall be established with one regard being had for topography contemplated land use, and the existing city drainage plan and facilities in the area surrounding the land to be subdivided, provided that the minimum street grade shall be one-fifth of one percent, and minimum grade across valley gutters, if approved, shall be one-half of one percent. No land shall be rejected for subdivision purposed for failure to provide for greater street grade than that contained in this article. 
(15)  Flood design section for roadway. The flood design section for a roadway shall be taken from back of walk to back of the walk; provided that in no case shall the height of curbs for subdivision be more than six inches. The runoff factor used in design of storm sewers shall be a minimum of 1 3/10 cubic feet per second per acre for a minimum time of ten minutes, or in accordance with the appendix to this chapter. 
(b)  Alleys. 
(1)  To be provided in commercial and industrial districts. Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that the planning and zoning commission may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses purposed. 
(2)  Minimum width. The minimum width of an alley shall be 20 feet. 
(3)  Intersections and sharp changes to be avoided. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe vehicular movement. 
(4)  Dead-end alleys to be avoided. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead-end, as determined by the planning and zoning commission. 
(c)  Easements. 
(1)  Utility easements. Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least ten feet wide. 
(2)  Drainage easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose. Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith. 
(d)  Blocks. The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1)  Adequate building sites. Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
(2)  Zoning requirements. Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions. 
(3)  Convenient access. Needs for convenient access, circulation control, and safety of street traffic. 
(4)  Block lengths. Block lengths shall not exceed 1600 feet. 
(5)  Topography. Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(e)  Lots. 
(1)  Size. The lot size, width, depth, shape, and orientation, and the minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development. The standards for dimensions are set forth by the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Corner lots. Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both sides. When the garage entrance is on the side street, the building line for the garage structure shall be 20 feet minimum distance from the property line. When such lots side upon a major thoroughfare or collector street, no driveway or garage entrance shall enter on said thoroughfare or collector street; a note to this effect shall be properly entered on the plat to be recorded. 
(3)  Access to be provided. The subdivision of the land shall be such as to provide, by means of a public street, each lot with satisfactory access to an existing public street. 
(4)  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots to be avoided. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten feet, across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the lines of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantage use. 
(5)  Side lot lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines. 
(f)  Parks. Due consideration shall be given to the dedication of suitable sites for parks and playgrounds; the actual provision of such areas shall be governed by the following standards and regulations: 
(1)  Less than ten acres. On a subdivision of less than ten acres, no park requirements shall be made. 
(2)  More than ten acres. On any subdivision of more than ten acres, the subdivider shall be required to dedicate five percent of the total area of the subdivision for park purposes at a location to be designated by the planning and zoning commission, unless, at the discretion of the planning and zoning commission, a park area is not warranted in this location. No park dedication will be required for industrial, commercial, or professional subdivisions. 
a.  The area of the park to be dedicated shall be measured and calculated to the centerline of any street within the subdivision bounding said park. 
b.  When a subdivision is to be developed in stages or by units so that the actual platting of the park area to be dedicated in connection with said subdivision will be deferred until the second or a later unit, the subdivider shall complete and deliver to the planning and zoning commission with the final plat of the first unit of said subdivision, an agreement form furnished by the planning and zoning commission which shall provide for the future dedication of such parks. 
c.  When the city shall bear its portion of the cost of curb gutter and paving on any streets within the subdivision bounding the park being dedicated, and shall also pay the cost of any utility extensions required to serve the park. 
d.  The city shall improve the dedicated park area coincidentally with the development of the subdivision. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "coincidentally" means that the city shall improve said park when the subdivider has completed all permanent improvements required of him by this chapter adjacent to the dedicated park area or upon acceptance of the subdivision by the city, whichever time is later. The term "improve", as used in this portion of the chapter, means such filling and grading as may be necessary for the practical use of said park together with sodding and planting of basic trees and shrubs. 
e.  In the event the city should not be able to provide the development as outlined above, it shall have the option of causing the subdivider to improve the dedicated park area as the term "improved" is defined in this portion of the chapter, under a contract between the city and the subdivider for the cost of such improvements within the following 18 months from the date of completion thereof, and at an interest rate on the unpaid balance of five percent per annum; provided that, such development shall be done according to the city's plans. 
f.  Should the city fail or for any reason refuse to develop the park, or fail to avail itself of the option of causing the subdivider to develop said park, or to reimburse the developer for the contracted development of said park, then said park area shall revert to the subdivider, his heirs, successors and assigns. 
(3)  Applicability. Subsections (f)(1) and (2) of this section shall not apply in the case of a replat of a plat, subdivision, or addition that has previously met park requirements or the subdivision of existing single lots. 
(g)  Large tract division. Where a parcel is divided into larger tracts than standard building lots, such parcels shall be so divided as to allow for the opening of major thoroughfares and the ultimate extension of adjacent minor streets. Large tract division is division on the basis of lots 2½ acres or larger. Curbs and gutters shall be required. Deed restrictions shall be filed to identify owner rights. A copy of the final restrictive covenants (deed restrictions) to govern the nature of the use of the property in said subdivision shall be submitted if said subdivision is planned for the use of individual septic tanks in lieu of a sanitary sewer system. Such restrictions shall provide that minimum lot areas shall not be reduced unless and until sanitary sewer service is available to each lot; in the case of a large tract division such restrictions shall provide that these lot areas shall not be reduced until a satisfactory replat of such subdivision or portion thereof is approved by the planning commission. The commission may, in the public interest, require that these be filed simultaneously with the plat. The planning and zoning commission may vary the other requirements of this subdivision ordinance in such manner as the general welfare of such area may require to permit such large tracts. 
(Ord. No. 544, § IV, 12-8-1987)  
Sec. 48-5. - Required improvements. 
(a)  General 
(1)  Plans and specifications. When a preliminary plat of a subdivision has been approved by the planning and zoning commission, the developer shall submit plans and specifications for all improvements pertinent to said subdivision to the consulting city engineer. The consulting city engineer shall, within 30 days of said plans and specifications, approve same if they conform to the requirements, or disapprove same giving his reasons therefor in writing to the subdivider. Thereafter, when the subdivider has met the objections, if any, the consulting city engineer shall sign the plans and specifications and forthwith deliver same to the subdivider, his agent, or his engineer. Any plans and specification submitted in connection with a preliminary plat which may have been conditionally approved are subject to the final determination of the condition of such approval. 
(2)  Five sets of plans to be submitted. Before beginning any construction of the improvements outlined in this subsection on proposed roadways or public utilities pertaining to any subdivision or tract development, five complete sets of plans and specifications of such construction, in the form of plats, sketches, or other satisfactory written descriptions, shall be filed with the city. These shall show such features as roadways, cross sections and longitudinal slope for drainage, full description of proposed pavement or street improvements, its grade and slope, dimensions and specifications concerning public utilities to be installed showing proposed position on the ground, specifications of materials and construction, and profile maps of all sanitary and storm sewers showing both ground surface and flow line, and any other pertinent information of similar nature. 
(3)  Improvements to be accepted. All improvements shall be installed within the areas of any subdivision or portion thereof and approved and accepted by the city engineer and city council before the final plat can be signed and filed for records with the county clerk. 
(4)  Improvements to conform to design standards. All improvements shall be designed by a registered professional engineer of the state, and the construction of all improvements shall be designed and constructed to conform with design standards of the city, and no construction shall be commenced until this is complied with. 
(b)  Minimum standards. The following minimum standards for improvements shall be agreed to and complied with in each subdivision or addition before final approval of a plat by the planning and zoning commission. Engineering and construction standards, identified as the appendix to this chapter are herewith approved and made a part of this chapter. Conflicting standards, if any, shall be resolved by the city's engineer. 
(1)  Roadway pavement. 
a.  All roadways for residential and marginal access type streets shall be paved with a base of caliche having a minimum thickness of eight inches. All other type street pavement shall have paving with a thick base of caliche having a minimum thickness of nine inches. Prior to placing the base material, the subbase and minimum of one foot beyond the back of the curb shall be scarified and compacted to a minimum of 98 percent of the standard proctor maximum density as determined at the optimum moisture content. The base material shall be constructed in layers, each layer shall be compacted to a minimum of 98 percent of proctor density. All compaction tests of both the subgrade and base shall be tested by a commercial laboratory. Testing to be paid for by the developer. 
b.  The base shall be surfaced as follows: 
1.  Prime coat, 0.25 gal./sq. yard of MC oil. 
2.  Two inches of hotmix, hotlaid asphalted concrete pavement, Type D; pea gravel will not be allowed. 
c.  Width of paving for various types of streets including standard two-foot curb and gutter shall not be less than the following: 
PAVEMENT WIDTH BY STREET TYPE 
Street Type 	Minimum Pavement 
Width (feet) 
 
Marginal access .....28 feet 
Minor, for residences .....32 feet 
Minor, for apartments .....40 feet 
Collector .....40 feet 
Major thoroughfare .....60 feet 
d.  Pavement widths for business or industrial developments shall be established by the planning and zoning commission on the basis of the extent and character of the proposed development. 
e.  Specifications, design criteria, and testing of requirements shall meet the latest requirements established by the city engineering department. 
(2)  Curb and gutter. Combined curb and gutters shall be constructed on each side of each street within the boundaries of each subdivision within the city limits and within the area that the city extraterritorial jurisdiction control exists. 
a.  All combined curb and gutters for all subdivisions, and for all street improvements shall be of the L-type with a minimum height of six inches, and driveways shall be designed as a lay-down curb and gutter or a straight driveway section, and the driveway section and the driveway within the curb shall not be wider than that approved by the building inspector. 
b.  The design and specifications for combined curb and gutters shall meet the latest requirements established by the city engineering. (See the appendix to this chapter) 
(3)  Sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks having a width of not less than four feet and thickness of not less than four inches shall be constructed on each side of each street within the subdivision. Said sidewalks shall be one foot from the property line within the street right-of-way and shall extend along all street frontage including the side of corner lots and block ends; provided, however, that where it is impractical in the opinion of the city engineer for the subdivider to provide such sidewalks on the side lot lines abutting major thoroughfares or drainage ditches, then in those instances, sidewalks shall not be required. The design and specifications for sidewalks shall meet the latest requirements established by the city engineering department. 
(4)  Street markers. 
a.  Street markers shall be erected at all street intersections in such subdivisions. 
b.  The type markers shall meet the latest requirements established by the city engineering department. 
(5)  Water lines. See the appendix to this chapter. 
a.  Where an approved public water supply is within one mile of the property being platted, each lot within the subdivided area shall be provided with access to such water supply. All property to be provided with water service must be properly platted in accordance with the city's requirements. No more than one water connection per lot will be permitted. The layout shall be designed to form a loop system. No main shall be smaller than six inches, and the minimum size for service lines shall be four inches, except that two-inch stubs may be extended to serve a maximum of three lots. 
b.  In areas where a public water supply is not available, the subdivider shall construct wells in such manner than an adequate supply of potable water shall be available to every lot in the subdivision. Such water supply system shall be constructed under the supervision of the county health unit, and shall comply with all regulations of the state board of health in regard to such systems. 
c.  The design and specifications for water lines shall meet the latest requirements established by the city engineering department. 
(6)  Sanitary sewers. See the appendix to this chapter for detail. 
a.  All subdivisions coming under the provisions of this chapter and reasonably accessible to a public sanitary sewer shall provide each lot within said subdivision with access to such sanitary sewer. The design of such sanitary sewer layouts shall be coordinated with the city's sanitary sewers. The minimum size for mains shall be eight inches. 
b.  When any subdivision is planned that is not reasonably accessible to a public sanitary sewer, it shall provide either for the use of septic tanks or an individual sewage treatment plant as follows: 
1.  Septic tanks. In all subdivisions planned for septic tank use, septic tanks shall be installed as provided by state and county ordinance as adopted or as hereafter amended. 
2.  Individual sewage treatment plant. In all subdivisions planned to be serviced by an individual sewage treatment plant, lots may be of standard area and sewers shall be installed to serve each lot. The plant providing such sewage disposal facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the regulations and requirements of the state board of health and with the approval and under the supervision of the county health unit of the county and the city. 
c.  The design and specifications for sanitary sewers shall meet the latest requirements established by the city engineering department. 
(7)  Supervised installations required. In order to properly protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens, all taps, meter services, and meter sets on existing public utility water lines of the city must be made and installed under the supervision and direction of the superintendent of the water division. 
(8)  Oversized mains. Where it shall be determined by the city council that larger or deeper mains or lines are required in order to provide for the future extension of the sewer and/or water utility system beyond the limits of the subdivision in question, the city shall assume the responsibility for any additional costs involved. In the event city funds are not currently available to pay for such larger or deeper mains or lines as may be required, arrangements for reimbursement shall be made by the city. 
(9)  Subdivider to extend utilities. Whenever a final plat of a subdivision within the city limits is approved for which no water or sewer facilities are available at the boundary of such subdivision, the subdivider shall extend the utilities to his property at no cost to the city. 
a.  The city will not pay any cost of acquisition of any easements or right-of-way for the extension of any utilities. The city may assist the subdivider in the securing of easements or right-of-way. 
b.  The subdivider shall pay into the utility fund for water and sewer services, and the sum of $10.00 each for water supply and sewer service for each lot platted in the proposed subdivision; in the event the subdivision is in acreage, the subdivider shall pay the sum of $30.00 each for water and sewer service per acre. The above service fees are in addition to any other existing tapping or connection fees. 
(10)  Street lights. The developer shall install the street lighting system as required. The developer shall pay for any additional cost, if any, above the credit allowance that the city receives from the utility company. The city will energize and pay all monthly charges, as soon as power is available to the system (see the appendix to this chapter for detail). 
(11)  Utilities in utility easement. All utilities shall be located so that their placement shall conform to the distances, locations and depths of the city requirements. 
(c)  Final plan. Upon the completion of construction of any such improvements, one set of reproducible tracing as-built final plans, dated, signed and certified by the engineer in charge shall be filed with the consulting city engineer showing all features as actually installed, including materials, size, locations, depth or elevation, ends of lines, valves, fittings, storm sewer lines, inlets and other pertinent items. The utility department of the city shall make no connections to such utilities until the foregoing has been complied with. 
(d)  Maintenance bond. The subdivider's contractor shall provide a one year maintenance bond for faulty workmanship and/or materials utilized in the improvements of the subdivision. The maintenance bond shall be in the amount of 100 percent of the cost of the construction. The bond shall be executed on the forms provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 544, § V, 12-8-1987)  
Sec. 48-6. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Off-site improvements. Where any street forms any part of the boundary of a subdivision and some part of the width of said street has been dedicated or committed to improvement, then the subdivider shall be required to dedicate and/or improve the balance of the width of any such street; otherwise no improvements shall be required as a prerequisite to the approval of the plat for any existing dedicated street forming a boundary of a subdivision. 
(b)  Gas utilities. The installation and dedication of gas distribution mains within the subdivision shall not be required. 
(c)  Vacation of plat or plan procedure. Any such plan, plat or replat may be vacated by the proprietors of the land covered thereby at any time before the sale of any lot therein by a written instrument declaring the same to be vacated provided the approval of the city planning and zoning commission or governing body shall have obtained as above provided the execution and recordation of the instrument shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plan, plat or replat so vacated. If the property has been sold into lots, the property owners combined can file such vacation. The county clerk shall respond by placing "vacated" on the plat and also mark reference to the volume and page in which said instrument is recorded. 
(d)  Platted lots. 
(1)  When any lot and a portion of a lot, or portions of lots, aggregating a larger tract in width and/or size than the average lot in the block of which same is situated are conveyed, as a single unit for an existing single use purpose, or for the purpose of constructing a single-family home from a previously legally platted subdivision, no replat thereof shall be required. 
(2)  This exception shall not apply to any extension across an easement or public way, nor permit changing the facing of the original lots. 
(3)  This exception is not to be construed as a waiver of any requirement of the zoning ordinance, as amended, or other applicable ordinance, or recorded restriction, and for such interpretations said integrated tract shall thereafter be considered as a single lot. 
(Ord. No. 544, § VI, 12-8-1987; Ord. No. 558, § III, 6-14-1988)  
Sec. 48-7. - Variances. 
(a)  Hardship. Where the planning and zoning commission finds that extraordinary hardships may result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of a general community plan or these regulations. Such variances and modifications as may be granted under this subsection shall be by at least three-fourths majority of the commission present. 
(b)  Conditions. In granting variances and modifications, the planning and zoning commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements as varied or modified. 
(c)  Disapproval restricted. No plat shall be disapproved nor the processing thereof delayed for non-compliance with any requirement or condition not set forth in this chapter, or otherwise required by law. 
(Ord. No. 544, § VII, 12-8-1987)  
Sec. 48-8. - Appeals. 
Any subdivider contesting any disapproval and/or the interpretation and/or application of any rule, standard, regulations, determination, requirement or necessity set forth in this chapter directly or by delegation of authority shall have the right, after filing a written request with the planning and zoning commission, to have a hearing thereon before the commission within 21 days after the date of filing of such request. Any subdivider not satisfied with the ruling of the planning and zoning commission shall have the right to appeal such rulings or decisions to the city council by giving written notice to the city secretary within 15 days after the final hearing before the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 544, § VIII, 12-8-1987)  
APPENDIX A. - ENGINEERING AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS Ordinance No. 544 
(1)  General. These standards are in outline form and are intended to indicate the minimum requirements for street, alley, sidewalk, drainage, water and sanitary sewer system improvements to be constructed in new subdivisions in the city or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction. Minimum testing requirements are included. The responsibility for proper plans and specifications and control of construction to produce facilities adequate for the intended use is with the developer. The city will inspect construction at various times and as required by the developer. No instructions will be given by the city directly to the developer's contractor, unless specifically requested by the developer in writing. 
(2)  Street and alley improvements. 
a.  Subgrade. Clean, acceptable material compacted to natural subsurface density, minimum 98 percent of optimum, Standard Proctor, ASTM 698. 
b.  Base. Eight inch compacted thickness caliche, minimum compaction 98 percent of optimum, Standard Proctor, ASTM 698. Caliche shall have the following characteristics: 
Gradation limits: 
Size 	100% Passing 
2½" 	100 
2" 	95-100 
1" 	65-90 
¾" 	60-80 
40 mesh 	15-40 
Minus 40 mesh material: 
Liquid Limit 	40 max. 
Plasticity index 	8-13 max. 
Los Angeles abrasion loss 	55% max. 
 
These limits apply to material as obtained directly from the pit. 
c.  Asphaltic pavement. One course seal coat and two-inch compacted thickness hot-mix asphaltic concrete. 
Seal coat: 
0.30 gallons/sq. yd. 	AC-5 (TDHPT spec.) 
1 cubic yard/100 sq. yd. 	Grade 4 (not precoated) Aggregate (TDHPT spec.) 
 
HMAC: Tack coat as required and two-inch compacted thickness HMAC having the following characteristics: 
Aggregate—crushed limestone 
Paving mixture—Type "D" (TDHPT spec.) 
Density—optimum 95, minimum 93, maximum 96 (ASTM D 2041-71) 
Stability—42 minimum (ASTM Bulletin C-14) 
d.  Curb and gutter. 24-inch-wide reinforced concrete (3—#4 bars continuous minimum) with doweled expansion joints. 
e.  Sidewalk. Four-inch reinforced concrete with doweled expansion joints, tied to back of curb. Light broom finish. Ramp down at corners. 
(3)  Drainage improvements. 
a.  Drainage ditches. Side slopes one on three or flatter, min. grade 0.001 (0.1 percent), greater for small ditches. Concrete lining will be required if a utility easement is used. Alleys will not serve as a drainage ditch. 
b.  Inlets. Curb inlets, other types as specifically approved only. 
c.  Pipe. Reinforced concrete, other types as specifically approved only. Backfill water consolidated. 
d.  Culverts. Reinforced concrete with appropriate headwalls or end sections. 
e.  Design. Major drainage structures designed by rational method for 25-year storm; minor drainage structures designed for five-year storm. 
Storm drainage design (areas less than 200 acres) 
Use TDHPT formula for the county.   
i 	= 	  B   
  (T + D) 	E 
 
i = intensity of rainfall, in./hr. 
T = time of concentration, minutes 
D = 8.7 
For 5-yr. frequency: 
B = 78.0 
E = 0.789 
For 25-yr. frequency: 
B = 91.0 
E = 0.757 
f.  Lot grading. 0.5 percent slope toward designated and maintained drainageway, all building sites such that lowest occupied floor is above 100-year flood level. 
Note: The city is vitally concerned that adequate drainage is obtained. If for any reason, it is not feasible to meet the above minimum requirements, the engineer for the developer will prepare a drainage plan acceptable to the city engineer for consideration by the planning and zoning commission and the city council. 
(4)  Water system improvements. 
a.  Pipe. Six-inch diameter in residential fire system, eight-inch diameter in business or industrial fire system. Smaller sizes for other service not in fire system, as approved. 
b.  Valves. Required with box and cover, at each tee or cross and every 1,000 feet along straight runs. Tees will require two valves and crosses will require three valves, unless approved otherwise. 
c.  Taps. Required with box and cover for each lot. 
d.  Fire hydrants. Placed such that front building line of all residential lots falls within 500 feet of a hydrant, and direct access from hydrant to lot is provided. Spacing in commercial and industrial areas is 300 feet. Valve is required on each hydrant lead. 
e.  Fittings and blocking. Fitting M. J. cast iron. Concrete blocking required at all fittings and fire hydrants. 
f.  Excavation and backfill. To give proper bedding of pipe and avoid backfill settlement after completion. Water consolidation of backfill required as a minimum. Observe all OSHA safety requirements. 
g.  Sterilizing. To meet state department of health criteria. 
h.  Testing. Required, 24 hours system pressure followed by two hours at 100 psi (city will provide water). 
(5)  Sanitary sewer system improvements. 
a.  Pipe. Vitrified clay, or PVC. Mains six-inch diameter or larger. Slopes and placing to meet state department of health criteria. Special care required where trench material is water-bearing or unstable. 
b.  Manholes. Clay brick—heavily mortared outside and sealed with asphaltic waterproofing compound. Reinforced concrete—monolithic, eight-inch and smaller lines only. Fiberglass—appropriate wall thickness, not permitted for depths greater than 12 feet. 
1.  Covers. Traffic covers, machined. 
2.  Taps. Separate four inch tap required for each lot, plugged with a nondegradable plug. 
c.  Excavation and backfill. To give proper bedding of pipe and avoid backfill settlement after completion. Water consolidation of backfill required as a minimum. Observe all OSHA safety requirements. 
d.  State department of health criteria. These criteria shall be met. Attention is called to requirements for placement of water and sewer systems in proximity. 
(6)  Street lights. Street lights shall be placed at every street intersection and no further apart than 500 feet along all streets. Developer, at his expense, shall obtain poles and fixtures from Central Power and Light Co. and install them in accordance with their recommendations. 
(7)  Materials. Materials shall meet the following minimum specifications: 
a.  Concrete—3,000 psi. cylinder strength at 28 days. 
b.  Concrete testing below 90 percent of this value shall be replaced. 
c.  Reinforcing steel—ASTM A615 (grade 60 or 40). 
d.  Concrete pipe for storm drainage—ASTM C76, Class III. 
e.  Water system pipe—asbestos-cement, AWWA C400, Class 150; PVC, AWWA C900, Class 200 (DR 14), gasketed joints. 
f.  Water system valves—AWWA C500. 
g.  Fire hydrants—AWWA C502, two hose, one pumper connection. 
h.  Sanitary sewer system pipe—vitrified clay ASTM C700 (plain end), PVC ASTM D1784 (type 1, grade 1), ASTM D-1869 joints, SDR 35 or thicker. 
i.  Water meter boxes—concrete or cast iron. 
j.  Other materials as specified by the developer and approved by the city. 
(8)  Testing. Developer shall provide testing to ensure to the city that improvements meet the required specifications. The minimum testing program required is as noted below. Testing shall be performed by a laboratory meeting the requirement of ASTM E329. All test results shall be reported to the contractor, the city and such other parties as the developer or city may specify. 
MINIMUM TESTING PROGRAM 
Test Required 	Number of Tests 
Subgrade material proctor 	1/type of material 
Caliche or base proctor 	1/5,000 c.y. 
Caliche Atterberg limits 	1/5,000 c.y. 

Subgrade compaction 	1/200 l.f. of street 
Base compaction 	1/200 l.f. of street 

Concrete (set of 3 cylinders) 	
 Curb and gutter 	1 set/200 l.f. 
 Sidewalk 	1 set/4,000 s.f. 
 Inlets 	1 set/6 inlets 
 Paving, streets 	1 set/500 lf.f. 

HMAC 
 Design 	1/Job 
 Density, in place (streets) 	1/1,000 l.f. 
 
(9)  Guarantee. The developer, either directly or through contract with others, shall guarantee to the city all construction against defects in workmanship or materials for a period of 12 months following acceptance by city for maintenance. This guarantee specifically includes all trench backfill. 
(Ord. No. 544, app. A, 12-8-1987)  
Chapter 50 - TAXATION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 50-1. - Homestead exemption. 
If a person who is disabled or is 65 years of age or older receives a residence homestead exemption as prescribed or authorized by article 8, section 1 b, Texas Constitution, the total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on that homestead by the city may not be increased while it remains the residence homestead of that person or that person's spouse who is disabled or 65 years of age or older and receives a residence homestead exemption on the homestead. If the eligible disabled person or person 65 years or older dies in a year in which the person received a residence homestead exemption, the total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on the homestead by the city may not be increased while it remains the residence homestead of that person's surviving spouse if the spouse is 55 years of age or older at the time of the person's death, subject to any exceptions provided by general law. 
(Ord. No. 802, § 1, 9-29-2007)  
Secs. 50-2—50-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION OF AD VALOREM TAXES 
 
Sec. 50-21. - County shall collect city ad valorem taxes. 
Pursuant to the authority contained in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 6.22, the county is required to assess and collect the ad valorem taxes the city imposes in county, being those taxes within the corporate limits and within the area called Southwest Taft that was disannexed from the city, all in the manner in which the county assesses and collects its taxes. The governing body of the unit may revoke the requirement at any time by the same official action. 
(Ord. No. 909, § 2.01, 7-9-2013)  
Sec. 50-22. - Liability of city and county. 
Neither the city nor any authorized agent acting under the terms of this article shall be liable or have any liability by reason of orders issued or work done in compliance with the terms of this article, nor, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 6.275, shall the county tax assessor/collector be liable for the loss of public funds in the custody of the assessor-collector or the assessor-collector's office if a district court enters a declaratory judgment that the loss is due to a reason other than the negligence or misconduct of the assessor-collector. 
(Ord. No. 909, § 2.02, 7-9-2013)  
Sec. 50-23. - Applicable law, venue, and remedies. 
This article shall be governed by the laws of the state and venue shall lie in the county except in regard to any case or cause of action for which venue is governed or subject to other laws. Failure of the county to collect the ad valorem taxes the city imposes in the county in the manner in which the county assesses and collects its taxes may be enforced through mandamus or other applicable remedy. 
(Ord. No. 909, § 2.03, 7-9-2013)  
Secs. 50-24—50-49. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX 
 
Sec. 50-50. - Authorization. 
The city council is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this article upon his determination that such implementation is necessary regulate an collect occupancy tax as provided by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.000 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 912, § 2, 8-13-2013)  
Sec. 50-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Consideration means the cost of the room, sleeping space, bed or other facilities in such hotel and shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room or space not related to the cleaning and readying of such room or space for occupancy, and shall not include any tax assessed for occupancy thereof by any other governmental agency. 
Extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) means the unincorporated area that is contiguous to the corporate boundaries of the municipality and that is located one-half mile of those boundaries. 
Hotel means a building or facility in which members of the public may obtain sleeping accommodations for consideration. The term "hotel" includes a hotel, motel, tourist home, tourist house, tourist court, lodging house, inn, rooming house, bed and breakfast or other building where space is furnished for consideration. The term "hotel" does not include a hospital, sanitarium, nursing home or a dormitory or housing facility owned or leased and operated by an institution of higher education or a private or independent institution of higher education, as defined by the state education code, used by the institution for the purpose of providing sleeping accommodations for persons engaged in an educational program or activity at the institution. Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.001(1); definition adopted, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001(5). 
Occupancy means the use, possession, or right to use or possess any room or rooms, or sleeping space or facility in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement. 
Occupant means anyone, who, for a consideration, for any purpose, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room or rooms, or sleeping space or facility in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement. 
Permanent resident means any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room, sleeping space or facility in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days, so long as there is no interruption of payment for the period. 
Person means any individual, partnership, company, corporation, association, or other legal entity owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel. 
Quarterly period means the regular calendar quarters of the year. The first quarter being the months of January, February and March; the second quarter being the months of April, May and June; the third quarter being the months of July, August and September; and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December. 
(Ord. No. 912, § 3, 8-13-2013)  
Sec. 50-52. - Tax rate and exemptions. 
(a)  There is hereby levied a tax upon the occupant of any room or space furnished by any hotel within the city or ETJ of the city, provided by V.T.C.A., Tax Code §§ 351.002 and 351.0025, where such costs of occupancy is at the rate of $2.00 or more per day, such tax to be equal to seven percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room, space or facility to such hotel, exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by other governmental agencies. 
(b)  The person required to collect the tax set forth in subsection (a) of this section may deduct and withhold from the person's payment to the city, as reimbursement for the cost of collecting the tax, an amount not to exceed one percent of the tax due and required to be reported to the city. If taxes due under this article are not paid to the city within the time required or if the person required to file a report fails to file the report when due, the person forfeits the claim to the reimbursement that could have been taken if the tax had been paid or the report filed when due. 
(c)  No tax shall be imposed under this section upon a permanent resident. 
(d)  No tax shall be imposed under this section upon an occupant of any room or space rented from a corporation or association organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes, if no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
(e)  All revenue derived from the occupancy tax imposed in subsection (a) of this section, except the one percent which may be withheld under subsection (b) of this section, will be used only for those purposes permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 912, § 4, 8-13-2013)  
Sec. 50-53. - Collection. 
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed in section 50-52 for the city. The failure of the person, firm or corporation owning, operating, managing or controlling said hotel, to collect sufficient monies from occupants to satisfy said tax shall not excuse the obligation to pay said tax to the city. Any person who receives or collects hotel tax from an occupant shall hold the amount so collected in trust for the benefit of the city and is liable to the city for the full amount collected plus any accrued penalties and interest on the amount collected. 
(Ord. No. 912, § 5, 8-13-2013)  
Sec. 50-54. - Reports. 
On the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person required in section 50-52 to collect the tax imposed in this article on the city's behalf shall file a report with the city secretary showing the consideration paid for all occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of the tax due on such occupancies, and any other information as the city secretary may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the amount of tax due from occupants during the period of the report at the time of filing the report. There shall also be furnished to the city secretary at the time of such report and payment, a copy of the state hotel occupancy tax report for the corresponding period. 
(Ord. No. 912, § 6, 8-13-2013)  
Sec. 50-55. - Rules and regulations. 
The city secretary shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax levied in this article, and shall upon reasonable notice have access to books and records necessary to enable the city secretary to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 912, § 7, 8-13-2013)  
Sec. 50-56. - Use of revenue derived from tax. 
(a)  Revenue from the municipal hotel occupancy tax may be used only to promote tourism and the convention and hotel industry, and that use is limited to the following: 
(1)  The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operation, and maintenance of convention center facilities or visitor information centers, or both; 
(2)  The furnishing of facilities, personnel, and materials for the registration of convention delegates or registrants; 
(3)  Advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to attract tourists and convention delegates or registrants to the municipality or its vicinity; 
(4)  The encouragement, promotion, improvement, and application of the arts, including instrumental and vocal music, dance, drama, folk art, creative writing, architecture, design and allied fields, painting, sculpture, photography, graphic and craft arts, motion pictures, radio, television, tape and sound recording, and other arts related to the presentation, performance, execution and exhibition of these major art forms; and 
(5)  Historical restoration and preservation projects or activities of advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to encourage tourists and convention delegates to visit preserved historic sites or museums: 
a.  At or in the immediate vicinity of convention center facilities or visitor information centers; or 
b.  Located elsewhere in the municipality or its vicinity that would be frequented by tourists and convention delegates. 
(b)  Revenue derived from the tax authorized by this article shall be expended in a manner directly enhancing and promoting tourism and the convention and hotel industry as permitted by subsection (a) of this section. That revenue may not be used for the general revenue purposes or general governmental operations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 912, § 8, 8-13-2013)  
Sec. 50-57. - Penalties. 
(a)  If any person required to collect tax under this article fails to collect the tax, or fails to file a report as required in this article, or fails to pay to the city the tax as imposed in this article when such report for payment is due, or files a false report, then such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be punished by a fine as provided in section 50-58. In addition, such person who fails to remit the tax imposed by this article within the time required shall pay a fee of ten percent of the total amount of the tax owed, and after the first 30 days shall pay an additional five percent of the total amount of the tax owed. Delinquent taxes shall draw daily interest at the rate of ten percent per annum beginning 30 days from the date due on the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  The attorney acting for the city may bring suit against a person who is required to collect the hotel occupancy tax and pay the collections over to the city, and who has failed to file a tax report or pay the tax when due, to collect the delinquent taxes, or to enjoin the person from operating a hotel in the city until the tax is paid or the report filed, as applicable, as provided by a court order. In addition to the amount of any tax owed, the person is liable to the city for reasonable attorney fees, the costs of an audit conducted as determined by the city using a reasonable rate if the tax has been delinquent for at least two complete city fiscal quarters at the time the audit is conducted. 
(Ord. No. 912, § 9, 8-13-2013)  
Sec. 50-58. - Fines. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $500.00. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 912, § 10, 8-13-2013)  
Chapter 52 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Powers of local authorities regarding regulation of traffic, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202; limitations on local authorities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.203; municipal restrictions on use of state highways, 25 Tex. Admin. Code §§ 25.601—25.603; local authorities may regulate and license bicycles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(4); local ordinances concerning pedestrians, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 552.009. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 52-1. - Definition of words and phrases. 
(a)  Whenever any words and phrases used herein are not defined herein but are defined in state laws regulating the operation of vehicles, any such definition therein shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alley means any street as herein defined having no legal or official name other than alley, of 20 feet or less in width. 
Authorized emergency vehicle means vehicles of the fire department (fire patrol), police vehicles, and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the police commissioner or the chief of police. 
Bicycle means every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is over 20 inches in diameter, and including any device generally recognized as a bicycle though equipped with two front or two rear wheels. 
Bus means every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and used for the transportation of persons, and every motor vehicle, other than taxicabs, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation. 
Business district means the territory contiguous to and including a roadway when, within any 600 feet along such roadway, there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings which occupy at least 300 feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the roadway. 
Chief of police means the chief of police of the city. 
Crosswalk means: 
(1)  That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs from the edges of the traversable roadway. 
(2)  Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
Curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Farm tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm implement for drawing plows, mowing machines, and other implements of husbandry. 
Freight curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or passengers. 
Intersection means the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways which join one another at or approximately at right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
Laned roadway means a roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
Limited-access highway means every highway, street, or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and any other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same, except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street, or roadway. 
Motor vehicles means every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails. 
Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a saddle for use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
Negligence means the driving at a greater rate of speed than allowed by law, or the violation of any traffic law or ordinance of this city, or the failure to use that degree of care and caution as a person of ordinary prudence would use under like or similar circumstances. 
Official traffic control devices means all signs, signals, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic. 
Owner means a person who holds the legal title of a vehicle or in the event a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event of a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this chapter. 
Passenger curb loading zone means a place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
Personal injury means a wound or injury to any part of the human body which necessitates treatment. 
Private road or driveway means every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
Residence district means the territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business district when the property on such highway for the distance of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with dwellings or dwellings and buildings in use for business. 
Road tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon, either independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn. 
Roadway means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicle travel. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways the term "roadway," as used herein, shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart. 
School bus means every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and operated for the transportation of children to or from school, or privately owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or from school. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a street between curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every publicly maintained way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Through highway means every street or highway or portion thereof at the entrance to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is required by law to stop before entering or crossing the same and when stop signs are erected as provided in this act. 
Traffic control signal means any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
Truck means every motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
Truck tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
Zone of quiet means all territory within the distance of 250 feet from any hospital, sanatorium or other institution for the treatment and/or care of sick persons, having facilities for lodging ten or more sick persons at the same time, whereabout signs or markers bearing the words"Zone of Quiet—Hospital" shall have been placed by order of the police department, and are conspicuously displayed on streets, alleys and public grounds, indicating approach to the boundary line of such zones of quiet. 
(Ord. No. 166, §§ 1—18, 8-12-1954)  
Secs. 52-2—52-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 52-21. - Police administration. 
There is hereby established in the city police department a traffic division to be under the control of an officer of police appointed by and directly responsible to the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 19, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-22. - Duty of traffic division. 
It shall be the duty of the traffic division with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department to enforce the street traffic regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to cooperate with the city traffic engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon said division by this article and the traffic ordinances of this city. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 20, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-23. - City traffic engineer. 
(a)  The office of city traffic engineer is hereby established. The chief of police shall serve as city traffic engineer in addition to his other functions, and shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this article. 
(b)  It shall be the general duty of the city traffic engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices, to conduct engineering analysis of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigation of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this city. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 21, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-24. - Emergency and experimental regulations. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances of this city and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days. 
(b)  The city traffic engineer may text traffic control devices under actual conditions of traffic. 
(c)  The city traffic engineer may place signs prohibiting or restricting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles on any highway where, in the opinion of the city traffic engineer, such stopping, standing, or parking is dangerous to those using the highway or where the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles would unduly interfere with the free movement of traffic thereon. Such signs shall be official signs and no person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle in violation of the restrictions stated on such signs. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 22, 8-12-1954)  
Secs. 52-25—52-51. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ENFORCEMENT, OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS AND NEGLIGENT COLLISION 
 
Sec. 52-52. - Provisions of article refer to vehicles upon the highways; exception. 
The provisions of this article relating to the operation of vehicles refer exclusively to the operation of vehicles upon highways except where a different place is specifically referred to in a given section. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 23, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-53. - Authority of police and fire department officials. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city. 
(b)  Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(c)  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 24, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-54. - Required obedience to traffic ordinance. 
It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this article. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 25, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-55. - Obedience to police and fire department officials. 
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer, or fire department official. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 26, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-56. - Persons propelling push carts or riding animals to obey traffic regulations. 
Every person propelling any push cart or riding any animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this article applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except provisions of this article which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 27, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-57. - Use of coaster, roller skates and similar devices restricted. 
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing such persons shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinance of this city. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 28, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-58. - Public employees to obey traffic regulations. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state, county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any said driver to violate any of the provisions of this article, except as otherwise permitted in this article or by state statute. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 29, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-59. - Exemptions to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  Provisions of this article regulating the operation, parking, and standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles, as defined in this article, except as follows. A driver, when operating any such vehicle in an emergency, except when otherwise directed by a police officer, may: 
(1)  Park or stand notwithstanding the provisions of this article; 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
(3)  Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property; 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions so long as he does not endanger life or property. 
(b)  The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his reckless disregard of the safety of others. 
(c)  No driver of any authorized emergency vehicle shall assume any special privilege under this article except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law. 
(d)  The provisions of this sections shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway but shall apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 30, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-60. - Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle equipped with at least one lighted lamp exhibiting red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle and when the driver is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle, or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 31, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-61. - Negligent collision. 
No person while driving or operating or in charge of any motor vehicle or other vehicle, railroad train, bicycle, or animal shall willfully or with negligence, cause or suffer or permit the same to come into collision with any other vehicle of any nature whatever, or with any animal or property in or on any street or public place whatever. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 32, 8-12-1954)  
Secs. 52-62—52-307. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - METHOD OF PARKING 
 
Sec. 52-308. - Standing or parking close to curb. 
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 74, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-309. - Signs or markings indicating angle parking. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any federal aid or state highway within the city unless the (state highway commission) has determined by resolution or order entered in its minutes that the roadway if of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic. 
(b)  Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 75, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-310. - Obedience to angle-parking signs or markings. 
Upon those streets which have been signed or marked by the city traffic engineer for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 76, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-311. - Permit for loading or unloading at an angle to the curb. 
The city traffic engineer is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein, and it shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 77, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-312. - Lights on parked vehicles. 
(a)  Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked at nighttime upon any street within a business or residence district, no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle. 
(b)  Whenever a vehicle is parked upon a street or highway outside of a business or residence district during the hours between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, such vehicle shall be equipped with one or more lamps which shall exhibit a white light on the roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. 
(c)  Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 78, 8-12-1954)  
Secs. 52-313—52-342. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate standing and parking, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(2). 
 
Sec. 52-343. - Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited; no signs required. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk; 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway; 
(3)  Within an intersection; 
(4)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
(5)  On a crosswalk; 
(6)  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
(7)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the city traffic engineer has indicated a different length by signs or markings; 
(8)  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail or a railroad crossing; 
(9)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of said entrance (when properly signposted); 
(10)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(11)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
(12)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel; 
(13)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 79, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-344. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 80, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-345. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing, dismantling, or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 81, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-346. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 82, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-347. - Parking, stopping, standing in alley. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in a residential district in such a manner or under such conditions as to block the alley or leave less than ten feet of the width of the roadway available for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance or exit to any abutting property. 
(b)  No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in a business district and no person shall stop or stand a vehicle within an alley in a business district in such a manner or under such conditions as to block the alley or leave insufficient width of the roadway available for the free movement of vehicular traffic or to block the driveway entrance or exit to any abutting property. In no case shall the stop for loading or unloading of materials or merchandise exceed 30 minutes in an alley, in a business district. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 83, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-348. - Parking prohibited on narrow streets. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)  When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 84, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-349. - No stopping, standing, or parking near hazardous or congested places. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs places not exceeding 100 feet in length in which the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(b)  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 85, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-350. - No person shall park a vehicle in violation of this article. 
No person, persons, firm, partnership or corporation shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his, her, their or its name to stand or park in any street in this city in violation of any of the ordinances of this city regulating the standing or parking of vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 86, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-351. - Unoccupied vehicles declared a nuisance. 
Any unoccupied vehicle of any kind or description found violating any provision of this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic and such vehicle shall be taken in charge by any police officer and removed from the street and kept in custody under the directions of the chief of police, and such vehicle may be recovered by the owner when he has furnished evidence of his identity and ownership and has signed a receipt and paid a fee to cover the cost of removal, storage and redemption, said fee not to exceed $10.00. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 87, 8-12-1954)  
Secs. 52-352—52-375. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY 
 
Sec. 52-376. - City traffic engineer to designate curb loading zones. 
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 88, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-377. - Standing in passenger curb loading zone. 
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when regulations applicable to such curb loading zones are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 89, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-378. - Standing in freight curb loading zone. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pick-up and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. 
(b)  The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping dies not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 90, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-379. - City traffic engineer to designate public carrier stands. 
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized and required to establish bus stops and taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common-carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public and every such bus stop, taxicab stand, or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 91, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-380. - Parking of buses and taxicabs regulated. 
The driver of a bus (hackney) or taxicab shall not park upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop (hackney stand) or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading and unloading passengers. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 92, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-381. - Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands. 
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop (or other than a hackney in a hackney stand) or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop herein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus (hackney) or taxicab waiting to enter or about to leave such zone. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 93, 8-12-1954)  
Secs. 52-382—52-405. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS 
 
Sec. 52-406. - Application of article. 
The provisions of this article prohibiting the standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 94, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-407. - Regulations not exclusive. 
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking or vehicles in specified places or at specified time. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 95, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-408. - Stopping, standing, parking outside of business or residence districts. 
(a)  Upon any highway outside of a business or residence district, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled part of the highway when it is possible to stop, park or leave vehicle off such part of said highway, but in every event an unobstructed width of the highway opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles and a clear view of such stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each direction upon such highway. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on the paved or main traveled portion of a highway in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 96, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-409. - Officers authorized to remove illegally parked, stopped or standing vehicles. 
(a)  Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle parked, stopped or standing in violation of any of the provisions of this article, such officer is hereby authorized to move such vehicle, or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move same. 
(b)  Any police officer is hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from a highway to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the governmental agency of which the officer is a member, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated: 
(1)  When any vehicle is illegally parked so as to block the entrance to any private driveway and it is impracticable to move such vehicles from in front of the driveway to another point on the highway; 
(2)  When vehicle is found upon a highway and report has previously been made that such vehicle has been stolen or complaint has been filed and a warrant thereon issued charging that such vehicle has been embezzled; 
(3)  When any such officer has reasonable grounds to believe that any vehicle has been abandoned; 
(4)  When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled that its normal operation in impossible or impractical and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are incapacitated by reason or physical injury or other reason to such extent as to be unable to provide for its removal or custody, or are not in the immediate vicinity of the disabled vehicle; 
(5)  When an officer arrests any person driving or in control of a vehicle for an alleged offense and such officer as by this code or other law required to take the person arrested immediately before a magistrate. 
(c)  Any police officer is hereby authorized to remove any vehicle parked or standing in or on any portion of a highway when, in the opinion of the said police officer, the said vehicle constitutes a hazard, or interferes with a normal function of a governmental agency, or by reason of any catastrophe, emergency or unusual circumstance the safety of said vehicle is imperiled. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 97, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-410. - Removing and impounding vehicles. 
Any vehicle parked in violation of the ordinances of the city may be removed and impounded by the police department and an impounding fee assessed against and collected from the owner or driver of the vehicle. The payment of this impounding fee shall not excuse such owner or driver of the vehicle from the charge of violating said ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 98, 8-12-1954)  
Secs. 52-411—52-520. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PARADES AND PROCESSIONS 
 
Sec. 52-521. - Permits required. 
No procession or parade, except funeral processions, shall be held without first securing a permit from the chief of police. All such requests for permits shall state the time, place of formation, proposed line of march, destination and such other regulations as the chief of police may set forth therein. 
(Ord. No. 118, § 72, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-522. - When permits required for parades and processions. 
No procession or parade containing 30 or more persons or five or more vehicles, excepting funerals, the forces of the United States Army or Navy, the military forces of this state, and the forces of the police and fire departments, shall occupy, march, or proceed along any street, except in accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police and such other regulations as are set forth herein which may apply. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 119, 8-12-1954)  
Secs. 52-523—52-574. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - PARTIES AND PROCEDURE UPON ARREST 
 
Sec. 52-575. - Parties to a crime. 
Every person who commits, attempts to commit, conspires to commit or aids or abets in the commission of any act declared herein to be a crime, whether individually or in connection with one or more other persons or as a principal, agent, or accessory, shall be guilty of such offense, and every person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or willfully induces, causes, coerces, requires, permits or directs another to violate any provision of this article is likewise guilty of such offense. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 147, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-576. - Offense by persons owning or controlling vehicles. 
It is unlawful for the owner, or any other person, employing or otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle to require or knowingly to permit the operation of such vehicle upon a highway in any manner contrary to law. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 148, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-577. - When a person arrested must be taken immediately before a magistrate. 
Whenever any person is arrested for any violation of this article, the arrested person shall be immediately taken before a magistrate who has jurisdiction of such offense in any of the following cases: 
(1)  When a person arrested demands an immediate appearance before a magistrate; 
(2)  In any other event when the person arrested refuses to give his written promise to appear in court as hereinafter provided; 
(3)  When directed to do so by state law. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 149, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-578. - When person arrested to be given five days' notice to appear in court. 
(a)  Whenever a person is arrested for any violation of this article and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate as hereinbefore required, the arresting officer shall prepare, in duplicate, written notice to appear in court containing the name and address of such person, the license number of his vehicle, if any, the offense charged and the time and place when, where such person shall appear in court; provided, however, that the offense of speeding shall be the only offense making mandatory the issuance of a written notice to appear in court, and only then if the arrested person gives his written promise to appear in court by signing in duplicate the written notice prepared by the arresting officer. 
(b)  The time specified in said notice to appear must be at least five days after such arrest unless the person arrested shall demand an earlier hearing. 
(c)  The place specified in said notice to appear must be before a magistrate within the city who has jurisdiction of such offense. 
(d)  The arrested person in order to secure release as provided in this section, must give his written promise so to appear in court by signing in duplicate the written notice prepared by the arresting officer. The original of said notice shall be retained by said officer and the copy thereof delivered to the person arrested. Thereupon, said Officer shall forthwith release the person arrested from custody. 
(e)  Any officer violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of misconduct in office and shall be subject to removal from office. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 150, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-579. - Violation of promise to appear. 
(a)  Any person willfully violating his written promise to appear in court, given as provided in this article, is guilty of misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested. 
(b)  A written promise to appear in court may be complied with by an appearance by counsel. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 151, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-580. - Unlawful to give wrong name or address. 
It shall be unlawful for any person when giving a written promise to appear, or given a written notice by any police officer to appear before the corporation court of the city, to give an assumed or fictitious name or a false place of residence or address, or any other than the true name and the true place of his residence or address upon the request of such officer. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 152, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-581. - Procedure prescribed herein not exclusive. 
The foregoing provisions of this article shall govern all police officers in making arrests without a warrant for violations of this article, but the procedure prescribed herein shall not otherwise be exclusive of any other method prescribed by law for the arrest and prosecution of a person for an offense of like grade. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 153, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-582. - Conviction or traffic violation not to affect credibility of witness. 
The conviction of a person upon a charge of violating any provision of this article shall not affect or impair the credibility of such person as a witness in any civil or criminal proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 154, 8-12-1954)  
Sec. 52-583. - Arrest without warrant. 
Any police officer is authorized to arrest without warrant any person found committing a violation of any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 155, 8-12-1954)  
Secs. 52-584—52-633. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 52-634—52-654. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITED AND LIMITED PARKING 
 
Sec. 52-655. - Unlawful parking of certain vehicles. 
No person shall park any trailer, boat trailer, or house trailer upon a street or alley of the city unless the same is attached to a motor vehicle capable of moving such trailer, boat trailer or house trailer; and no person shall park a vehicle which has attached to it a trailer, boat trailer or house trailer upon any street or alley of the city for a longer period of time than 12 hours, where such 12-hour period is continuous and without interruption. 
(Ord. No. 309, § 1, 7-9-1968)  
Sec. 52-656. - Prohibited parking concerning vehicle washing and repair. 
No person shall stop, park or stand a vehicle of any kind or description, motorized or otherwise, upon any street or alley within the city for the principal purpose of washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 309, § 2, 7-9-1968)  
Sec. 52-657. - Prohibited parking in alley. 
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the improved section of the alley for the free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 309, § 3, 7-9-1968)  
Sec. 52-658. - Signs concerning parking causing hazardous condition. 
The director of public works is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs places not exceeding 100 feet in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition and when official signs are erected at hazardous places as hereby authorized, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Ord. No. 309, § 4, 7-9-1968)  
Sec. 52-659. - Penalty. 
The violation of any provision of this division shall be punished by a fine, not exceeding $200.00 and each day any violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 309, § 5, 7-9-1968)  
Secs. 52-660—52-676. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PARKING ON UNIMPROVED SURFACES 
 
Sec. 52-677. - Parking on unimproved surfaces. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building line means a line parallel or approximately parallel to the street line and beyond which, building or fences may not be erected. 
Corner lot means a residential property located at the intersection or confluence of two or more streets such that public street rights-of-way are directly adjacent to at least two contiguous sides of the lot. 
Driveway means the primary improved or unimproved parking surface, which provides egress and ingress from a garage, carport or off-street parking area to an adjacent street or alley. 
Front yard means the area from the front face of a residential structure to the front property line or street right-of-way line or, when a structure does not exist, the area from the front building line to the front property line or street right-of-way. 
Improved parking surface means an area used for the parking or storage of vehicles that is overlaid or otherwise paved with concrete, asphalt, paving stones or other hard surfaced durable material approved by the building official. 
Rear yard means the area from the rear face of a residential structure to the rear property line. 
Side yard means the area from the side of a residential structure to the side property line. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn or moved upon a street, highway, waterway or airway and shall include any automobile, bus, truck, tractor, motor house, farm machinery, motorcycles, scooters, mopeds, all-terrain vehicles, boats, aircraft, recreational vehicles, golf carts, go-carts, trailers, fifth wheel trailers, campers, camper shells, wheeled towing frames, semi-tractor trailers, truck beds mounted on chassis and mobile homes. The term "vehicle" does not include non-motorized bicycles, small engine lawnmowers and devices of similar scale. 
(b)  Regulations. 
(1)  Parking on unimproved surfaces restricted. A person commits an offense if, upon a residential single-family, duplex or townhouse lot or tract; 
a.  The person causes, permits or allows the parking or storage of any vehicle in the front yard upon any surface other than an improved parking surface, if the property has an improved parking surface; or 
b.  The person causes, permits or allows the parking or storage of any vehicle upon the side yard or rear yard of any corner lot property, upon any surface other than an improved parking surface, if the property has an improved parking surface, unless otherwise concealed from view from all public street rights-of-way by: 
1.  A solid, opaque, screening fence or wall at least six feet in height; 
2.  Vegetation consisting of a solid hedgerow of evergreen shrubs, or trees and shrubs, providing full screening from the ground to a minimum height of six feet; 
3.  Any combination of the above that effectively conceals the vehicle from view and accomplishes the required screening height; or 
4.  Any other form of compatible and appropriate screening approved by the building official. 
(2)  No driveway or improved parking surface shall cover more than 67 percent of a residential front yard. 
(3)  There is no violation for parking or storing vehicles on an unimproved surface in the manner described in subsection (b)(1) of this section if an existing residence has no improved parking surface on the day of passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived or if there is not enough improved or unimproved parking space to park additional vehicles that are located there. However, at such time that such existing residence is completely rebuilt, or improvements to the same real property constitute 50 percent or more of the property's total assessed value, compliance with this section shall be required. 
(4)  An exemption shall exist to allow parking on unimproved areas of residences which are located on streets that do not have curbs. 
(c)  Maintenance. All improved parking surface shall be maintained in good and safe condition and be free of holes, cracks or other failures that may affect the use, safety, appearance or drainage of the surface or of an adjoining property. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 1, 11-18-2003)  
Sec. 52-678. - Penalty. 
Any violation of the terms of this division shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, any person so violating same shall be fined a sum of $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 2, 11-18-2003)  
Secs. 52-679—52-699. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - TRUCKS AND TRAILERS 
 
Sec. 52-700. - Carrying capacity and prohibitions. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck or trailer, or the operator of any vehicle which has a capacity in excess of one ton according to the manufacturer's rating, to drive or operate such truck, or such truck and trailer, or such vehicle, upon any of the streets in the city residential district. 
(b)  Residential deliveries. It is, however, accepted, that this article shall not be construed to prohibit any truck or truck and trailer, or vehicle from making delivery or pickup from any point in the residential district. 
(c)  Business deliveries. It is however, accepted, that this article shall not be construed to prohibit any trucks, or truck and trailer, or other vehicle described in this article from making a delivery or pick-up from any point on Green Avenue or in the business district, but Green Avenue is prohibited for use by trucks, or truck and trailer delivery; therefore, Pick-up and delivery must be made by using alleys between Victoria and Green Avenue, or McIntyre and Green Avenue and any cross street between Victoria Avenue and McIntyre Avenue. 
(d)  Authorized through streets. Trucks or truck and trailers and other large vehicles are restricted to the following through streets: 
Victoria Avenue; Avenue C to Compress Road; Railroad Avenue; Toland Avenue from Hi-way # 181 to Ash Street; Short Street; Abazola Street from its intersection with Compress Road to Hi-way 181 and FM 631; 3rd Street from intersection of Avenue C and 3rd Street to Avenue B; and 3rd Street intersection for truck and trailer traffic. 
(Ord. No. 404, § I, 5-10-1977; Ord. No. 415, 1-10-1978)  
Sec. 52-701. - Access by cross streets. 
(a)  Except as otherwise restricted, no truck, truck-trailer or other vehicle drawn or propelled by motor power and having a gross weight in excess of 5,000 pounds or overall width in excess of eight feet shall be permitted on any of the streets of the city, except through streets as listed in section 52-700(d), provided that where the origin or destination of a delivery or pickup by truck requires the driving on streets other than those listed in section 52-700(d), that part of such trip to the point of delivery or pick-up may be made otherwise than on the through streets, provided that part of such trip be made by the shortest and most direct route from or to the nearest through street. 
(b)  Maximum permitted weight. The maximum permitted weight for trucks, and trailers and concrete trucks shall be 40,000 pounds for a tandem axle load and 20,000 pounds for a single axle load. 
(c)  Driving on sidewalks, and curbs. The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk or curb area, except at a permanent or temporary driveway. If curb or sidewalk have to be crossed, bridging shall be approved by the city before crossing. 
(Ord. No. 404, § II, 5-10-1977)  
Sec. 52-702. - Violations. 
The violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $200.00, and not less than $10.00, plus any damages to city streets, sidewalks, curb, and public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 404, § III, 5-10-1977)  
Secs. 52-703—52-732. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
 
Sec. 52-733. - Conformity with manual or uniform traffic control devices and specification of state department of highways and public transportation. 
All traffic control signs, signals, and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the state department of highways and public transportation. All signs, signals, and devices required under this article for a particular purpose shall, so far as practical, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this article, shall be official traffic control devices. 
(Ord. No. 680, § 1, 1-11-2000)  
Sec. 52-734. - Powers and duties of director of public works. 
The director of public works, with the advice of the chief of police, shall place and maintain traffic control signs, signals, and devices when and as required under this article to make effective the provisions of this article, and may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as are deemed necessary to regulate traffic under this article or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. It shall be the duty of the director of public works to supervise the installation and maintenance of traffic control devices. 
(Ord. No. 680, § 2, 1-11-2000)  
Sec. 52-735. - Obedience to devices. 
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto which has been placed in accordance with this article and other traffic ordinances of the city, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exception granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 680, § 3, 1-11-2000)  
Sec. 52-736. - Necessity of signs. 
No provisions of this article which require the placing of signs shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such sections shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. 
(Ord. No. 680, § 4, 1-11-2000)  
Sec. 52-737. - Ratification of existing devices. 
All traffic control signs, signals, devices, and markings placed and erected prior to the adoption of this article and in use for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified, and declared to be official traffic control devices; provided, such traffic control devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of this article or state law. 
(Ord. No. 680, § 5, 1-11-2000)  
Sec. 52-738. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $200.00, unless otherwise specified in other sections of this article. Each transaction in violation of any of the provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 680, art. IX, § 1, 1-11-2000)  
Secs. 52-739—52-759. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - ABANDONED AND JUNKED VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 52-760. - Adoption of state law. 
The provision of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code chapter 683 is hereby adopted insofar as the same relates to cities and towns in the state. 
(Ord. No. 685, § 1, 5-9-2000)  
Sec. 52-761. - Hearing officer. 
The municipal court judge shall be appointed hearing officer for the court. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2004)  
Secs. 52-762—52-785. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - GOLF CARTS 
 
Sec. 52-786. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Driver means the person driving and having physical control over the golf cart. 
Driver's license means an authorization issued by a state for the operation of a motor vehicle. The term includes: 
(1)  A temporary license or instruction permit, and 
(2)  An occupational license. 
Golf cart means a motor vehicle designed by the manufacturer primarily for transporting persons on a golf course. 
Owner means the person holding title to the golf cart. 
Parking area means those areas accessible to the public by motor vehicular traffic and which are designated for temporary parking of motor vehicles, usually in places referred to as parking lots. 
Permit means a certificate/decal of authorization issued to the applicant by the city's police department authorizing the operation of the golf cart for which the permit was issued. 
Permit holder means the person to whom a golf cart permit has been issued. 
Public safety personnel means any employee or officer of a governmental law enforcement agency. 
Public street means a publicly owned or dedicated road, street, drive, or other right-of-way for the use of vehicles within the corporate boundaries of the city. 
Sidewalk means the portion of a street that is between a curb or lateral line of a roadway and the adjacent property line and intended for pedestrian use. 
Slow-moving vehicle emblem means a triangular emblem that conforms to standards and specifications adopted by the director of the state department of transportation under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 547.104 and is displayed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 547.703. 
Texas Transportation Code means the code as it currently exists or may be amended. 
Traffic way means any land way open to the public as a matter of right or custom for moving persons or property from one place to another. The traffic way includes all property, both improved and unimproved, between the property lines of a roadway system. 
Working days means Monday through Friday, excluding city holidays. 
(Ord. No. 999, 10-9-2018)  
Sec. 52-787. - Golf carts permitted and restricted. 
A person, other than public safety personnel, may operate a golf cart on a public street, parking area and/or traffic way if the person obtains a permit and meets the following requirements: 
(1)  The maximum speed limit on the public street is 35 miles per hour or less; 
(2)  The person has a valid driver's license; 
(3)  The person maintains current financial responsibility for the golf cart, as required of other passenger vehicles in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 601.051; 
(4)  The person complies with all applicable federal, state and local laws and ordinances; 
(5)  The golf cart has the following equipment, which must continuously remain in good working and operational order: 
a.  Two headlamps; 
b.  Two tail lamps; 
c.  Side reflectors (two front, amber in color and two rear, red in color); 
d.  Parking brake; 
e.  Rearview mirror(s), capable of a clear, unobstructed view of at least 200 feet to the rear; 
f.  Slow-moving vehicle emblem; and 
(6)  The equipment described herein meets the state and federal motor vehicle safety standards, as they exist or may be amended; and 
(7)  While the golf cart is in motion, the driver and every passenger in a golf cart is seated in a seat designed to hold passengers. No person may stand or ride in the lap of the driver and/or other passenger of a golf cart while it is moving. 
(Ord. No. 999, 10-9-2018)  
Sec. 52-788. - Additional operational regulations for all golf carts. 
(a)  Except for public safety personnel, golf carts shall not be operated on any sidewalk, pedestrian walkway, jogging path, park trail or any location normally used for pedestrian traffic; 
(b)  All golf carts are entitled to a full use of a lane on the authorized public streets, parking areas and traffic ways of the city, and no motor vehicle shall be driven in such a manner as to deprive any golf cart of the full use of a lane; 
(c)  The driver of a golf cart shall not overtake and pass in the same lane occupied by the vehicle being overtaken; 
(d)  No driver shall operate a golf cart between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles; 
(e)  The driver of a golf cart operating the golf cart on a public street may only cross a multi-lane federal, county or state route at an intersection controlled by an official traffic-control device which stops traffic from all directions. The driver of a golf cart may cross a multi-lane road, other than a federal, state, or county route, if it is required to cross from one portion of a golf course to another portion of the same golf course. If a golf cart crossing path is provided for transition between one section of a golf course to another section of the same golf course across a multi-lane road, the operator shall cross at and within the golf cart crossing path; 
(f)  The number of occupants in a golf cart shall be limited to the number of persons for whom factory seating is installed and provided on the golf cart; 
(g)  Children must be properly seated while a golf cart is in motion and may not be transported in a reckless or negligent manner. No person younger than six years of age may be transported in a golf cart unless restrained by a safety belt restraint or in a car seat restrained by a safety belt; 
(h)  Golf carts may not be used for the purpose of towing another golf cart, trailer or vehicle of any kind including, without limitation, a person on roller skates, skateboard or bicycle. A person employed by a golf course may tow a golf cart(s) for the purpose relocating the cart(s) from one portion of a golf course to another portion of the same golf course. 
(Ord. No. 999, 10-9-2018)  
Sec. 52-789. - Liability. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as an assumption of liability by the city for any injuries (including death) to persons, pets or property which may result from the operation of a golf cart by an authorized driver; and 
(b)  Owners are fully liable and accountable for the action of any individual that they provide permission to operate and drive said golf cart, both on personal and/or any authorized public streets, parking areas and traffic ways. 
(Ord. No. 999, 10-9-2018)  
Sec. 52-790. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall operate, cause to be operated or allow the operation of a golf cart on any authorized public streets, parking areas and traffic ways unless a valid permit has been issued for the golf cart or otherwise allowed by law. A permit is not required for golf carts owned or leased by the golf course and used entirely on the golf course or crossing from one section of a golf course to another section of the same course. A permit is not required for a privately owned golf cart used entirely on the golf course or crossing from one section of a golf course to another section of the same course. No golf cart exempted from permitting under this section may be operated on any public streets, parking areas and traffic ways for any other purpose; 
(b)  Application for a permit authorizing the operation of a golf cart shall be made by a person who owns leases or otherwise uses a golf cart. Such application shall be made in writing to the city's secretary department on a form designated for that purpose. On such application shall be set forth the following: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone number and state driver's license number, if applicable, of the permit holder; 
(2)  The street address where the golf cart is kept, including the particular suite or apartment number, if applicable; 
(3)  The business name used for the premises where the golf cart is kept, if applicable; 
(4)  The year, make, model, color, vehicle identification number or serial number if no vehicle identification number has been issued to the golf cart, electric or gasoline; and 
(5)  The person(s) and location, designated by the city's chief of police, that inspected the golf cart, including a certification by said inspector that the golf cart complies with the requirements of this article before the issuance of a permit. 
(c)  The permit shall be permanently affixed on the left side of the golf cart in such a manner that it is clearly visible from 50 feet. The permit must not be damaged, altered, obstructed or otherwise made illegible. The permit holder shall apply for replacement permit and pay all applicable cost associated with the issuance and inspection of the golf cart; 
(d)  The permit shall only be placed upon the golf cart for which it was issued; 
(e)  A permit issued to a golf cart shall become invalid if the golf cart is altered in a manner that fails to comply with any requirement of this article; 
(f)  Permits/stickers are valid until the ownership transfers. The fee found in Appendix A shall apply to inspection by the police department (includes permit/sticker). 
(g)  The permit holder shall notify the city's secretary department within ten working days if the golf cart transfers ownership or the address of the normal storage location has changed. The information shall be submitted on a form designated by the city's chief of police; 
(h)  Lost or stolen permit/stickers are the responsibility of the owner. A police report must be filed in the event of a lost or stolen permit/sticker. If no record can be found of a previous application, or the receipt of a permit/sticker, the city's chief of police may direct the applicant to reapply, and also resubmit any and all fees necessary before a replacement permit/sticker is issued; 
(i)  Any person who operates a golf cart and fails to receive and properly display a city permit/sticker will be subject to all applicable state laws, in addition to being in violation of this article; and 
(j)  A permit may be revoked at any time by the city's chief of police, or his designee, if there is any evidence that the permit holder cannot safely operate a golf cart on any authorized public streets, parking areas and traffic ways of the city in compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 999, 10-9-2018)  
Sec. 52-791. - Public safety personnel. 
Public safety personnel may operate a golf cart on any public street, parking area and traffic way without any further restrictions when the golf cart is used in the performance of his/her duties. 
(Ord. No. 999, 10-9-2018)  
Sec. 52-792. - Records. 
The city secretary shall maintain a record describing each golf cart licensed within the preceding two years. The record shall include the name of the owner of the golf cart, the address of the owner, proof of insurance (including name of carrier and policy number), the location the golf cart is normally parked, the date the golf cart was licensed, the date the license shall expire, the make/manufacturer of the golf cart licensed, the number of seats the golf cart has, the color of the golf cart licensed, the vehicle identification number or serial number of the golf cart licensed, the serial number of the golf cart license certificate, the fee paid for the license, and the method of payment. The city secretary shall provide a duplicate copy of the record to the Taft Police Department on the first business day of every month. 
(Ord. No. 999, 10-9-2018)  
Sec. 52-793. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, entity or corporation who violates any provision of this article, as it exists or may be amended, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined a sum not exceeding $500.00. Each continuing day's violation under this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 999, 10-9-2018)  
APPENDIX A 
Registration and license plate fee (per calendar year) .....$50.00 
Replacement fee (each occurrence) .....25.00 
(Ord. No. 999, 10-9-2018)  
Chapter 54 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal utility systems, general powers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.001 et seq.; municipal jurisdiction over water and sewer utility rates, operations and services, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 13.042(a); municipal power regarding sewers and privies, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.002; municipality may provide sanitary sewer system and require connections, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.003; public water suppliers required by rule to develop drought contingency plans, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 11.1272; drought contingency plans for municipal uses by public water suppliers, 30 Tex. Admin. Code § 288.20. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 54-1. - Adoption. 
The rules and regulations provided in this chapter shall be followed by the department of public works of the city, and there are hereby adopted such rules and regulations for the operation of the department of public works. Plumbing rules and regulations not mentioned in this chapter shall be governed by the plumbing code in effect and adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 1, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 1, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 1, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 1, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-2. - Department includes all services. 
Unless otherwise specified, all provisions in this chapter shall apply to all utility services, including water, sewage, and to municipal solid waste collection, transport, and disposal (garbage service). 
(Ord. No. 922, § 2, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 2, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 2, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 2, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 2, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-3. - Rates. 
The rate schedules for water, sewer and municipal solid waste (garbage) service and any established permit fees. 
The fees below are subject to change at the discretion of the city manager and approval or ratification by the city council are as follows: 
(1)  Security deposit for new account: $150.00 
(2)  Connection fee: $30.00 
(3)  Security deposit for a delinquent account: $200.00 
(4)  Reconnect fee during business hours: $50.00 
(5)  Reconnect fee during non-business hours: $60.00 
(6)  Reconnect fee during a holiday: $100.00 
(7)  Tampering fee: $250.00 
(8)  Broken lock fee: $25.00 
(9)  Fee to test a meter: $200.00 
(10)  Commercial fee for installing flange between utility meter and distribution line: $100.00 
(11)  Fee for pulling meter: $50.00 
(12)  Fee for installing meter plug: $50.00 
(13)  Unauthorized consumption surcharge: $200.00 
(14)  Fee for disabling sanitary sewer tap: $500.00 
(15)  Fee for removing unauthorized sewer tap: $500.00 
(16)  Water tap fee inside city limits: $550.00 for a ⅝" residential; $250.00 additional for increase in size 
(17)  Water tap fee outside city limits: $650.00 for a ⅝" residential; $250.00 additional for increase in size 
(18)  Sewer tap fee inside city limits: $550.00 
(19)  Sewer tap fee outside city limits: $650.00 
(Ord. No. 922, § 3, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 3, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 3, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 3, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 3, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-4. - Application for contract for service. 
(a)  Upon approval by the city manager, the utility office staff is authorized to establish procedures to process and accept applications for utility service inside the city limits and the unincorporated area adjacent to the city limits. 
(b)  A security deposit shall be paid at time of application for all new residential utility applications, in addition to, a connection fee for all applications for new service or transfers of service. 
(c)  A security deposit for a business applicant shall be required in an amount equal to the average three-month billing of a similar commercial account. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 4, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 4, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 4, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 4, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 4, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-5. - Security for the payment and performance of other obligations by customer. 
(a)  The city shall require that a security deposit be placed on the account or updated if: 
(1)  An account has become delinquent; 
(2)  If the customer had a delinquent balance on a previous city utility account; or 
(3)  If the customer tampered with city equipment to receive city utility service. 
An account will be considered delinquent if disconnection of service for non-payment occurs. 
(b)  The amount of the security deposit for a residential account shall be payable at time of application or transfer. The security deposit for a commercial account shall be the sum of a four months billing and payable at time of application or transfer. 
(c)  The city will refund a security deposit, without interest, to a customer, upon the request of the customer, if the following conditions have been satisfied: 
(1)  The customer's service was not disconnected during the preceding 12 consecutive months. 
(2)  The customer has not been sent a delinquent bill during the previous 12 months. 
(3)  The account is not currently in arrears. 
(d)  Deposit will be paid against last bill, if it is not a transfer of service—No exceptions. 
(e)  The security deposit shall be applied to a delinquent account if the water is disconnected for non-payment and payment is not received by the 30th day of the following month. If customer requests discontinuance of service, the security deposit shall be applied to the final bill. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 5, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 5, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 5, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 5, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 5, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-6. - Code enforcement inspection. 
(a)  Upon application of a water meter or requested tap, an inspection will be made within 24 hours by the code enforcement officer, or other person so designated by the city manager, to confirm the absence of any code enforcement violations as described in the public nuisance and junked/abandoned vehicle ordinances in effect at the time of the application. 
(b)  If upon inspection, the code enforcement officer identifies a code enforcement violation, the applicant will be contacted and informed. The applicant will have the option of continuing the application process or be allowed to remove the violation. 
(c)  If the applicant refuses or is unable to remove the violation, the deposit amount, less the connection fee will be returned. 
(d)  If the applicant is the owner of the property, the applicant will be cited by the code enforcement officer for the violation(s) at this time. 
(e)  If the applicant is not the owner of the property, the code enforcement will revert to notifying the owner as prescribed in the applicable ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 6, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 6, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 6, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 6, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 6, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-7. - Monthly bills. 
(a)  Bills for water, sewer and garbage service will be rendered monthly on one bill unless otherwise specified. The term "monthly" for billing purposes shall mean the period between any two consecutive readings of the meters by the city, such readings to be taken as near as practicable every 30 days. 
(b)  Monthly bills are due when rendered and are payable on or before the close of business on the 15th day of the month and a 20 percent late fee will be accessed. Bills not paid by 4:30 p.m. on the 25th are in default and service shall be discontinued for such default, after notice, in writing, to the customer, such notice to be sent by U.S. mail to the address shown on the customer's application. If the 15th day of the month is on a weekend day or a city holiday on which the city's offices are closed, the due date shall be the next business day. 
(c)  Extensions requested prior to cut off will be determined on a case to case basis-proof of the hardship must be presented and the city will keep it on file. 
(d)  Upon request, customer will be allowed a hearing with city staff regarding the inability to pay the bill prior to disconnect. Upon proof of a water leak, customer shall meet with the city manager, city secretary and finance director to negotiate a payment plan and/or reduction in cost of water to be equal to city cost (no free water is ever allowed). If customer fails to meet the terms of the agreement, water will be disconnected and payment in full will be due at that time. 
(e)  Failure to receive a bill in no way exempts a customer from payment of bills. 
(f)  Any bill left unpaid ten days after penalty (the 15th) will be turned off for non-payment and will be charged a $50.00 reconnect fee during normal business hours and $60.00 for non-business hours. No disconnection will be performed on a Friday or the day before a city holiday, however the disconnection fee will still be assessed and disconnection will take place on the next business day if payment is not made prior to 8:00 am on that business day. Should statements not be paid by the 25th day of the month, water will be assumed to be cut off even if actual disconnection has not occurred. 
(g)  Customers who are unable to make payment by the disconnect date may apply for an extension of time to make payment, which extension shall be the last day of the month or two weeks from the date the extension is requested, whichever first occurs. No more than two extensions will be allowed per service connection in any calendar year. For purposes of this section a calendar year means the 12-month period from January to December designated as a specific year (e.g. 2018, 2019), and does not mean a period of 12 consecutive months in two calendar years. 
(h)  When the city is unable to read a meter after reasonable effort due to a condition created by the customer or custodian of the premises, the customer will be billed at two times the rate as the previous monthly bill and the billing adjusted when the meter is read. 
(i)  Any customer who occupies a residence or business with existing services shall assume responsibility for payment of all services if the customer fails to notify city offices of the change, does not make application for service under their name, and fails to pay the required deposit and/or service fees. 
(j)  Customers are prohibited from turning their water off/on except at the customer cut-off. Should a person be found to have committed this offense there is a charge. See schedule of charges in section 54-3. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1, 7-9-2013; Ord. No. 922, § 7, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 7, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 7, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 7, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 7, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-8. - Payment of bills. 
Partial payments will be taken by the billing office and said payments shall be accredited to the proper account. Bills having a balance of $20.00 or less shall roll over to the next month with prior approval of the billing office. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 8, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 8, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 8, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 8, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 8, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-9. - Metering and testing of meters and computer printout of utility meter data. 
(a)  The customer shall provide at a point on his premises or alleyway, to be mutually agreed upon, a suitable location for the installation of meters and such other equipment as city may deem necessary to enable it to deliver water under this chapter and shall properly protect the city's property on the customer's premises and permit no one to inspect or tamper with the city's installation, apparatus and equipment, except the city's agents and persons authorized by law to do so. All bills shall be calculated upon the registration of such meters. 
(b)  Should any meter fail to register, the water delivered during the period of failure shall for billing purposes be estimated at the average of the past three previous monthly bills, calculated when the meter was in order. The city with or without request of the customer may inspect and test meters and whenever any test shall show a meter to be registering in error exceeding two percent, such meter shall be replaced or adjusted within. the limits of error so specified and whenever the meters are so adjusted, the readings thereof shall be corrected, and payments be made accordingly. No corrections shall be made, as to any bill rendered by the city, unless requested before the expiration of the calendar month next succeeding the month in which such readings were made. 
(c)  A fee of $200.00 will be charged to the customer who requests a test of their meter if the meter tests within two percent limit of error in addition to the transfer service fee and cost of replacement meter. 
(d)  Upon request, a customer may obtain a copy of the utility meter data at a cost of $0.10 cents per page. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 9, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 9, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 9, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 9, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 9, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-10. - Maintenance of metering equipment on customer's premises and responsibility for injuries and damage therefrom. 
The customer shall maintain the premises in full compliance with all laws and local ordinances and the rules and regulations of the city effective at any time during the term of the service agreement. The duly authorized agents of the city shall have free access at all reasonable hours to the premises of the customer for the purpose of inspecting installations and equipment, removing city property, reading meters and for the purpose incident to the performance of the service agreement and this chapter. The city does not, however, assume any duty of inspecting the customer's plumbing, apparatus, machinery or equipment, and will not be responsible therefore, and it is' particularly understood that the customer assumes full responsibility for water furnished to him at any location beyond the point of delivery, described as being the point where the water first leaves the meter and enters the line provided or owned by the customer, and agrees to protect and hold harmless the city from all claims for injuries and damages to persons and property occurring upon the premises of the customer, except where it is shown that the negligence of the city or its agents was the sole proximate cause of such injury or damage. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 10, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 10, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 10, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 10, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 10, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-11. - Limitation of liability of city for injuries and damages. 
The city will not be responsible or liable for injuries or damages caused by or resulting from failure to furnish service of the kind and amount contracted for or injuries and damages resulting from the performance or nonperformance of any acts or things by the city required of it or in any way connected with the furnishing of service by city, unless it be shown that the negligence of the city or its agents was the sole proximate cause of the injury or damage complained of. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 11, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 11, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 11, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 11, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 11, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-12. - Agents cannot modify agreements. 
No agent or employee of the city has the authority to amend, modify, alter, waive any of the terms and conditions of the service agreement and this chapter, or to bind the city by making any promises or representations not contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 12, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 12, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 12, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 12, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 12, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-13. - City's standard terms for application for utility service. 
(a)  The city's standard terms for utility service include the following: The applicant shall pay for services as bills are rendered in accordance with the rates, rules and regulations as provided in the ordinances or by the terms and conditions as established by the utilities staff and approved by the city manager. 
(b)  The applicant further agrees to release and discharge the city from any liability for damages suffered: 
(1)  By reason of water or sewer service furnished to the premises; 
(2)  By reason of interruption discontinuance, or disconnection of service hereunder from any cause other than negligence by the city; or 
(3)  By reason of the condition, maintenance, location or systems located on, or adjoining the property supplied and by which such services are furnished or delivered. 
(c)  The applicant shall acknowledge that he is the owner or person entitled to possession of the premises legally liable for payment of services and may be required to provide documentation to establish applicant's right to possession of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 13, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 13, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 13, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 13, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 13, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-14. - Discontinuance of service. 
(a)  If water service is discontinued by the city on a certain property and service is then turned on without authorization, additional service charges will be assessed as described in subsection 54-17(e)(2). 
(b)  When any customer of the city or ETJ is indebted for any connection or service anywhere in the service area and the indebtedness or any installment is delinquent, customer will be allowed a hearing with the city manager, city secretary and the finance director to discuss delinquency of the account prior to disconnect, After the hearing, a determination will be made whether to proceed with the disconnection or grant an extension of payment. The services of the customer may be disconnected at the location of the meter and not reconnected until all delinquencies including penalties and reconnection charges have been paid and the account restored to a current non-delinquent status. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 14, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 14, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 14, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 14, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 14, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-15. - Access to premises supplied with water. 
When necessary for conduction of city business, the public works director and other employees in the public works department shall have free access, at all reasonable hours of the day, to all parts of any premises to which water is supplied. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 15, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 15, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 15, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 15, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 15, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-16. - Customer's checks. 
Any customer issuing a check to the city for payment of a utility account shall be charged for the handling of said check as specified by city ordinance if the check is returned as non-negotiable non-cashable by the city's bank of deposit for a reason of no funds, account closed or for any other reason. The nonpayment of such charge authorized by ordinance could result in the service being disconnected and the customer's deposit applied against the services. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 16, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 16, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 16, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 16, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 16, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-17. - Delinquent notices, late fees, service charges for disconnecting and reconnecting utility services, unauthorized usage of utility services, meter tampering, and replacing meters. 
(a)  The city will mail a delinquent notice on or about the 16th day after the monthly bill was issued, The notice must advise the customer that service is subject to being disconnected on or after the 25th day from the date the initial bill was issued if payment in full is not received. 
(b)  If payment for the delinquent bill has not been received in the utilities business office prior to 8:00 a.m. on the 25th day, the customer's water meter is subject to being disconnected, locked, sealed or removed without further notice. 
(c)  A 20 percent late fee shall be accrued for the costs of handling and collecting a delinquent will be charged if customer does not make full payment by the 15th day of the month. 
(d)  The customer's failure to receive notice does not exempt the customer from paying the delinquent bill or having customer's service disconnected; provided that the notice was regularly deposited in the U.S. Mail, stamped, and assessed to the delinquent customer at the address shown on the records of the utilities business office. 
(e)  All service charges including costs of disconnect service and actions taken to prevent further unauthorized use of the utility will be assessed the account. The service charges will be assessed and must be paid if payment of the delinquency is not received by the utilities business office prior to 8:00 a.m. on the date which the customer has been previously notified that the customer's utility service is to be disconnected due to a failure to pay a delinquent bill in order to obtain a reconnection, The customer's failure to receive notification of date to be disconnected does not exempt the customer from paying the service charge. The service charges, include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Basic service charge for initial field visit on a delinquent account during business hours: $50.00 
(2)  Additional service charges from tampering with utility meter after service is cutoff: 
a.  Tampering with utility service fee. 
b.  Fee for broken utility meter lock. 
c.  The commercial fee for installing flange between utility meter and distribution line. 
d.  Fee for pulling utility meter. 
e.  Fee for installing utility meter plug. 
g.  Unauthorized consumption surcharge. 
h.  Minimum charge for unmetered consumption: 
1.  Water consumption of 10,000 gallons per billing cycle. 
2.  Wastewater consumption of 10,000 gallons per billing cycle. 
(3)  Service charge for after hours, weekend, and holiday replacement or reconnection of utility meter after utility service is cutoff by authorized city employees: 
(4)  Additional service charges imposed for unmetered utility service 
a.  Tampering with utility service fee. 
b.  Fee for disabling sanitary sewer tap. 
c.  Fee for removing unauthorized sewer tap. 
(5)  If a utility tap is disabled or removed, an application for a new tap and payment of all applicable tap fees under section 54-19 is required before utility service can be restored to the premises. 
(f)  Utility meters removed due to failure to pay a delinquent bill or service or penalty charges shall be replaced only upon payment of all service charges required by subsection (e). The payment must be made in person at city hall. If payment is made after hours, weekend or holiday, payment shall be in the form of a money order or check payable to the City of Taft, for the total amount due, including the bill, late fees and any service charges assessed. 
(g)  Meters, service connections, locks, valves or any other city property broken, damaged or stolen while on the premises of the customer, by the customer or someone acting in behalf of the customer, will be charged to the customer at a fair price based on the cost of the labor and materials necessary to repair or replace the damages, destruction or stolen property. These charges must be paid in person to the public utilities office in order to authorize a reconnection of service. 
(h)  The breaking, damaging, adjusting, changing, removal or taking of any meter, pipe service connection, lock, seal, valve or any other city-owned property shall be unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor. The turning on of any valve so as to provide service from any utility service, except by an authorized employee of the city, is subject to all required fees, service charges, and surcharges required by subsection (e) and are unlawful and punishable under the Texas Penal Code. 
(i)  For purposes of this section, a person who owns or otherwise has the apparent present right of possession and control of the premises where the utility meter, seal, valve, pipe, or other city-owned property, which has been broken, damaged, adjusted, changed, cut, removed, turned, or otherwise altered, is situated and is presumed to be the person who violated or allowed the violation, but the person has the right and burden of proof to show that person did not break, damage, adjust, change, cut, remove, turn, or otherwise alter the utility meter, seal, valve, pipe, or other city-owned property in violation of subsection (h). 
(j)  Any person whose name is on file with the utilities business office as the customer on the water account for the property where the violation of subsection (h) occurs is presumed to be a person in apparent control of the premises. The customer has the right and burden of proving that they did not have control of the premises at the time of the violation. 
The record owner of the property may show that they did not own the property at the time of the violation by executing an affidavit stating: 
(1)  That the record owner did not own the property on the date of the alleged violation, and 
(2)  The name and last known address of the person who acquired the property from the record owner. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 17, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 17, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 17, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 17, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 17, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-18. - Water service to city without charge. 
No rate or charge shall be assessed for water service provided to city buildings, institutions, and activities operated by the city. The city shall maintain records showing the free service and the value thereof. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 18, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 18, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 18, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 18, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 18, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-19. - Water service outside city. 
Any water or sewer connections or repairs that are connected to the city's main located outside the city limits, shall be installed or repaired in accordance with city's ordinances, regulations or requirements and shall be inspected by the city's plumbing inspector. All inspection fees shall be paid as specified by city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 19, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 19, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 19, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 19, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 19, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-20. - Connection of service. 
All conditions of section 54-5 contained in this chapter shall apply prior to reconnection of service if the service has been interrupted by the city at any time. 
During business hours (8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.) water service will be turned on within 24 hours after customer requests service, for all new accounts or transfers, if all fees are paid. If services have been disconnected for non-payment, service will be restored if all service charges and fees are paid prior to 3:00 in the afternoon. If payment is received after 3:00 p.m., service may or may not be restored until the next business day. 
During the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 8:30 p.m. customers may contact the San Patricio County dispatcher requesting assistance from the on-call utility worker. Upon payment of all fees owed, payment will be accepted only in the form of a money order or check for the entire amount owed, the utility worker will reconnect service. Any calls for service or reconnects after 8:30 p.m. will be completed the next day. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 20, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 20, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 20, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 20, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 20, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-21. - Rules, regulations and fees for plumbing permits, inspections and taps. 
The rules and regulations concerning the control, operation and administration of utility taps or service connections of water and sewer utilities owned by the city and the regulations prescribing fees for utility taps or service connections prescribed by a previously adopted and approved ordinance are hereby amended, and shall include the following: 
(1)  Utility tap applications. Applications for water or sewer taps may be accepted from anyone who has properly applied for a building or plumbing permit for taps to be made inside or outside the city, and the fees for such taps shall be paid before the permit is issued. 
(2)  Utility tap fee payment. Utility tap fees will be paid upon application of utility taps. Where applicant has requested a water line extension and water tap, he may make payment upon an installment basis as hereto set forth, however the tap will not be completed until the entire fee has been paid. 
(3)  Utility tap fees defined. Utility tap fees are separate and distinct from any plumbing permit or inspection fees and will not be construed as being part of or as including such fees. 
(4)  Utility tap fees extra charges. Estimated charges will be made in addition to utility tap fees for street cuts which cannot be readily made to existing lateral lines provided for such services or for taps which involve major street crossings or taps to major mains or trunk lines and similar cases, to cover the entire cost of all work and material, including meters, if any. 
(5)  Customer side fees. In the event the city responds to a customer complaint and the problem is identified to be on the customer's side beyond the city's tap or meter, the customer will be charged a fee of $30.00 on next month's utility billing if such city response is during business hours, $40.00 if after business hours or weekend and $50.00 if on a city holiday. If the problem is on the city's side of the tap or meter, the city will make the repair at no cost to the customer. Prior to beginning any work to determine the cause of the problem, the customer will be notified of the possibility of this fee and will be asked to sign an agreement acknowledging and accepting the cost fee. 
(6)  Definition of street taps and easement taps. 
a.  Street tap fees will apply to all taps made to laterals or mains in front or at the side of property to be served, regardless of whether the line to be tapped is in the street, behind the curb or in some similar position. 
b.  Easement tap fees will apply to all taps made to mains or laterals in the rear of the property to be served, where such lines are in dedicated or established easements or alleys. 
(7)  Service to be provided for fees. Sewer and water taps will be made and services installed to a standard location. Necessary meters and regulators will be installed. The entire installation will remain the property of the city and will be maintained by the city for as long as services available from the city are desired on the property by the occupant. Maintenance of privately-owned service lines or parts of service lines, on private property will be the responsibility of the owner, occupant or consumer. Failure to maintain such service lines will subject the service in question to discontinuance by the city. 
(8)  Availability of service. The existence of mains or trunk lines, or even lateral lines, near a property will not constitute an obligation for the city to cap such lines on request for taps, where such lines are inaccessible due to necessary crossings of major streets or due to excessive cost or excessive distance; however, no service shall exceed 80 feet per customer. These special cases must be arranged for with the director of public works well in advance of the desired service date, to permit necessary extensions, crossings, or similar construction. 
(9)  Fee schedule, water. 
(1)  Inside city limits: $550.00 for a ⅝" residential; $250.00 additional for increase in size. 
(2)  Outside city limits: $650.00 for a ⅝" residential, $250.00 additional for increase in size. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 21, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 21, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 21, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 21, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 21, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-22. - Sewer tapping fees. 
The city shall install and shall maintain service lines only to the house tap and all house service lines for the city sewer mains shall be installed to the nearest property or easement lines, both inside and outside the city. The city shall charge a tap fee for the installation of any house lateral in a sum sufficient to cover the average cost thereof, Such fee shall be as outlined by city ordinance. The fees shall be reviewed periodically by the city manager and adjusted by the city council to ensure they are equitable. Customer shall assume responsibility for maintenance of the line beyond the city tap to their property. City will not, under any circumstances, assume any maintenance on customer property. All new construction shall have installed a sewer clean-out within five feet of the city sewer tap for access by the utilities crew. In the event the public works department is called to the same property for the same service problem three consecutive times, for established utility services without a clean-out within five feet of the tap, the property owner will be required to install a clean-out within five feet of the city sewer tap. City crews will not be allowed to enter private property to determine the matter of service problem. The public utilities department shall collect fees in accord with the following schedule: House service line tap charge: 
(1)  House service connections applied for after September 25, 2012 shall be charged at a rate of $550.00, inside the city limits and $650.00 outside the city limits, except as otherwise herein provided. 
(2)  House service connections to be constructed in streets applied after September 26, 2012, shall be charged at a rate of $8.00 a square yard except as otherwise herein provided. 
(3)  Taps constructed for commercial buildings and taps constructed where unusual conditions are involved shall be charged on the basis of estimated costs determined by the wastewater services department. Such estimated costs must be deposited with the department of public utilities before work is started. Unusual conditions shall include, but not be limited to the following: sewer tapping depths greater than 14 feet; lateral line links greater than 60 feet; obstructions other than normal walks, curbs, and paving; or service requiring an eight-inch or greater diameter pipe. 
The above charges shall include the cost of tapping the sewer main, the installation of wyes and placing house service lines to the nearest street right-of-way or utility line, but shall not include costs incident to the necessary repairs to pavement of any kind or character involved in making the house service line connection, which shall be accomplished at a charge of $8.00 per square yard. Where sanitary sewer house service lines have been installed ahead of paving, the above cost for such shall include extension of the line to the nearest property line, if not thus extended. The street department shall make the pavement repairs as part of the installation job. Costs as set out herein shall apply for connections to property inside the city. For connections to property outside the city, the actual costs of construction shall govern, with a minimum charge according to the above schedule. The pro rata charges fixed on the basis herein above provided shall be collected at the time of collecting tap fees applicable to the specific property for all extensions made, for which cost is chargeable on a front-foot basis under the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 22, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 22, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 22, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 22, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 22, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-23. - Right of city to cut off water. 
In case of false representation on the part of an applicant for the use of water, or the use of water for purposes not embraced in his application, or the willful or unreasonable waste of water, the city shall have the right to cut off the person's supply and recover all damages, and such action of cutting off the water supply may be taken by the public works director at any time after he or she shall learn of such false representation or waste; water running to waste to keep pipes from freezing being especially prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 23, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 23, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 23, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 23, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 23, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-24. - Unlawful taking or use of water. 
No consumer shall supply water to other persons or families, or suffer them to take same, except for use on his own premises, for the purpose specified in his application, nor shall he, after the water is introduced upon or into his property or premises, without written permit from the utility office staff, specifying the change to be made, make any change in the manner of use of the water, under penalty of baying the supply cut off without notice. Double connections will not be allowed. 
No person, except the public works director or employees of the water department, shall take any water from any public hydrant, street, washer, plug, draw cock, hose, pipe or fountain, except for fire purposes, and for the use of the fire department in case of fire, nor shall anyone in any way use or take any water for private use which is furnished by the city waterworks, unless purchased at the bulk rate set by city ordinance and supplied by the water department. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 24, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 24, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 24, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 24, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 24, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-25. - Payment of delinquent water bills before using water at other premises. 
Any person owing delinquent water charges or fees who moves to other premises where there are water connections, or where connections shall be thereafter made shall, before being permitted to use the water, pay all former delinquencies. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 25, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 25, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 25, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 25, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 25, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-26. - Duty of water users to keep equipment in good repair, etc.; responsibility of city. 
Water takers shall keep their own service pipelines and apparatus in good repair and condition and protected from frost at their own risk and expense, and shall prevent all unnecessary waste of water, and it is especially stipulated by the city that no claim shall be made against it by reason of the breakage of any service pipe or service cock, or from damage by reason of shutting the water to, repair the mains, or for other purposes, and in case of neglect or refusal to promptly repair any imperfection in the service pipes, lines, service stops, street washers or other fixtures, the public works director may cause the same at the expense of the owner of such service, which expense shall be paid at the office of the city water division before the water is turned on. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 26, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 26, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 26, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 26, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 26, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-27. - Responsibility of owners and occupants of premises for water used thereon. 
Owners or occupants of premises having service pipes and connections will be held strictly responsible for all uses of water from such service by other parties, and for water for such extra and improper uses, in addition to other penalties as elsewhere in this chapter provided. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 27, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 27, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 27, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 27, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 27, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-28. - Additional rules and regulations. 
The following rules and regulations for the management and protection of the waterworks are hereby approved by the city council, and the same shall have the force and effect of ordinances of the city: 
(1)  (Rule) 1. More than one premises served by same connection. In all cases where two or more distinct premises or tenements are supplied with water from one connection, the person controlling the main stopcock must pay the water rents for all premises thus supplied, as separate water bills will not be made, unless separate and distinct stopcocks shall be placed on the outside of each of such premises, at such places as the public works director may direct. 
(2)  Rule 2. Fixtures, etc., for service pipes. Every service pipe must be provided with a stop and waste cock or valve at the entrance of the pipe into any building or before any branch is taken off such pipe, and a nipple of two feet in length, with a union attached inside the stop and waste cock; also, with a stop and waste cock or valve for each separate tenement or place supplied with water and on all risers, all to be easily accessible, and so situated that the water can be conveniently shut off and drained from the pipes. Every pipe supplying a bathroom or water closet shall not be less than one-half-inch. 
(3)  Rule 3. Inspection, etc., of fixtures. All stopcocks and other fixtures used by plumbers shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the city plumbing inspector. 
(4)  Rule 4. Bathroom, etc., fixtures. 
a.  Urinals with stopcocks to be turned by hand, unless self-closing, are not permitted. 
b.  Water closets must be fitted to be operated by the regular water closet valves of the different makes. The valve known as the hopper valve with continual flow in use will not be allowed. The use of ordinary drawcocks in connection with water closets will also not be permitted. 
c.  Hydrants set over slop sinks must be self-closing. 
d.  Water troughs must be provided with a float valve to prevent overflowing, and the owners of troughs must keep the same in good working order. 
(5)  Rule 5. Access to premises supplied with water. The director of public works of the water department and other employees thereof shall have free access, at all reasonable hours of the day, to all parts of any premises to which water is supplied. 
(6)  Rule 6. Right of fire department in case of fire. In case of fire, the fire department shall have the right to use any hydrant, cistern, hose, pipe or other fixture supplied wholly or in part from any service pipe used for fire protection. 
(7)  Rule 7. Charges for water. If the meter goes out of order and fails to register, the consumer will be charged at the three-month average consumption as shown by the meter when in order. 
(8)  Rule 8. Responsibility for violation of rules. In all cases where any apprentice or minor shall be guilty of any violation of the preceding rules and regulations, employer, parent or guardian of such person shall be held responsible for such violation. 
(9)  Rule 9. Cutting off water for violation of rules. The consequence of a violation of any of the preceding rules will be the stoppage of the supply of water without any preliminary notice, and the water will not be restored, except upon the payment of all damages, and upon the satisfactory understanding that no future cause of complaint shall arise. 
(10)  Rule 10. In cases where city equipment has been damaged or broken, if payment of fees is not paid within ten days of notice of cost, a formal complaint will be filed with the corporation court judge. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 28, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 28, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 28, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 28, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 28, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-29. - Wastewater service to city without charge. 
No rate or charge shall be assessed for wastewater sewer service provided to city buildings, institutions, and activities operated by the city. The city shall maintain records showing the free service provided and the value thereof. 
(Ord. No. 922, § 29, 2-11-2014; Ord. No. 952, § 29, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 976, § 29, 8-22-2017; Ord. No. 1035, § 29, 7-9-2019; Ord. No. 1052, § 29, 2-11-2020)  
Sec. 54-30. - Water conservation plan. 
The water conservation plan entitled "Drought Contingency Plan for the City of Taft, Texas, date of preparation: August 13, 2013," and labeled as exhibit A to the ordinance from which this section is derived, is hereby approved, adopted, and incorporated into the body of this section as if copied in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 913, § 2, 8-13-2013)  
Secs. 54-31—54-48. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 54-49. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approving authority means the city manager or his duly authorized representative. 
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/L, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of 20 degrees Celsius. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer on other place of disposal (also called the house lateral and house connection). 
COD (chemical oxygen demand) means measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in mg/L as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand. 
Control manhole means a manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
Control point means point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
Garbage means animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking and dispensing of food; and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
Industrial waste means waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct from normal wastewater. 
Industrial waste charge means the charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the city's sewerage system. 
Milligrams per liter (mg/L) means the same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
Normal domestic wastewater means wastewater excluding industrial wastewater discharged by a person into sanitary sewer and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 200 mg/L and BOD is not more than 200 mg/L. 
Overload means the imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity. 
pH means the logarithm (base ten) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. 
Person means any individual and includes any corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership association, or other legal entity. 
Public sewer means pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject to control by the city. 
Sanitary sewer means a public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which stormwater, surface water, groundwater, and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed. 
Slug means any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
Standard methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
Storm sewer means a public sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed. 
Stormwater means rainfall or any other forms of precipitation. 
Superintendent means the water and wastewater superintendent of the city or his duly authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Suspended solids (SS) means solids measured in mg/L that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which are largely, removable by a laboratory filtration device. 
To discharge includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
Trap means a device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances. 
Unpolluted wastewater means water containing: 
(1)  No free or emulsified grease or oil; 
(2)  No acids or alkalis; 
(3)  No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water; 
(4)  No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution; 
(5)  No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases; 
(6)  Not more than an insignificant amount in mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD, as determined by the state department of water resources; and 
(7)  Color not exceeding 50 units as measured by the Platinum-Cobalt method of determination as specified in standard methods. 
Waste means rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous, or solid rom resulting from domestic, agricultural, or industrial activities. 
Wastewater means a combination of the water carried waste from residences, business building, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with any ground, surface, and stormwater that may be present. 
Wastewater facilities includes all facilities for collection, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes. 
Wastewater service charge means the charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative or normal wastewater. 
Wastewater treatment plant means any city-owned facilities, devices, and structures used for receiving, processing and treating wastewater, industrial waste, and sludges from the sanitary sewers. 
Watercourse means a natural or man-made channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 1, 3-25-1983)  
Sec. 54-50. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sewer any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes may: 
(1)  Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities; 
(2)  Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or 
(3)  Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent. 
(b)  All discharges shall conform to requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 2, 3-25-1983)  
Sec. 54-51. - Chemical discharges. 
No discharge to public sewers may contain any chemicals which, in the opinion of the city, will cause interference of the operation of the treatment plant. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 3, 3-25-1983)  
Sec. 54-52. - Hazardous metals and toxic materials. 
(a)  No discharges may contain concentrations of hazardous metals other than amounts specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The allowable concentrations of hazardous metals, in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), for discharge to inland waters, and determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with Standard Methods are: 
ALLOWABLE CONCENTRATIONS OF HAZARDOUS METALS 
	Not To Exceed 
Metal 	Average 	Daily Composite 	Grab Sample 
Arsenic 	0.1 	0.2 	0.3 
Barium 	1.0 	2.0 	4.0 
Cadmium 	0.05 	0.1 	0.2 
Chromium 	0.5 	1.0 	5.0 
Copper 	0.5 	1.0 	2.0 
Lead 	0.5 	1.0 	1.5 
Manganese 	1.0 	2.0 	3.0 
Mercury 	0.005 	0.005 	0.01 
Nickel 	1.0 	2.0 	3.0 
Selenium 	0.05 	0.1 	0.2 
Silver 	0.05 	0.1 	0.2 
Zinc 	1.0 	2.0 	6.0 
 
(Note: These concentration parameters and rules governing same are promulgated under authority of V.T.C.A., Water Code § 5.131 and 5.132, Texas Water Code—Hazardous Metals, and in accordance with Texas Department of Water Resources Rule 156.19.) 
(c)  No other hazardous metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from the approving authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes, and other applicable provisions. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 4, 3-25-1983)  
Sec. 54-53. - Particulate size. 
(a)  No person may discharge garbage or other solids into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than one-half inch in any dimensions are prohibited. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) of greater. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 5, 3-25-1983)  
Sec. 54-54. - Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers: 
(1)  Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage; 
(2)  Unpolluted cooling water; 
(3)  Unpolluted industrial process waters; 
(4)  Other unpolluted drainage; or make any new connections from inflow sources. 
(b)  In compliance with the Texas Water Quality Act and other statutes, the approving authority may designate storm sewers and other water-courses into which unpolluted drainage described in subsection (a) of this section may be discharged. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 6, 3-25-1983)  
Sec. 54-55. - Temperature. 
No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius), or any substance which causes the temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten degrees Fahrenheit or more per hour, or a combined total increase of plant influent to 110 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 7, 3-25-1983)  
Sec. 54-56. - Radioactive wastes. 
(a)  No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the approving authority. 
(b)  The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations, regulations for discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 8, 3-25-1983)  
Sec. 54-57. - Impairment of facilities. 
(a)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing: 
(1)  Obstruction to the flow in sewers; 
(2)  Interference with the operation of treatment processes of facilities; or 
(3)  Excessive loading of treatment facilities. 
(b)  Discharges prohibited by subsection (a) of this section include, but are not limited to, materials which exert or cause concentrations of: 
(1)  Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/L, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Fuller's earth 
b.  Lime slurries; and 
c.  Lime residues. 
(2)  Dissolved solids greater than 500 mg/L, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Sodium chloride; and 
b.  Sodium sulfate. 
(3)  Excessive discoloration including, but not limited to: 
a.  Dye wastes; 
b.  Vegetable tanning solutions. 
(4)  BOD, COD, or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity. 
(c)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may: 
(1)  Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers; 
(2)  Overload skimming and grease handling equipment; 
(3)  Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment processes due to the nonamenability of the substance to bacterial action; or 
(4)  Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities. 
(d)  No person may discharge nay substance into public sewers which: 
(1)  Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and facilities employed; or 
(2)  Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(e)  The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may: 
(1)  Impair the treatment process; 
(2)  Cause damage to collection facilities; 
(3)  Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; or 
(4)  Render the effluent unfit for stream disposal or industrial use. 
(f)  No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (a) of this section if present in sufficient quantity or size, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Ashes; 
(2)  Cinders; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Mud; 
(5)  Straw; 
(6)  Shavings; 
(7)  Metal; 
(8)  Glass; 
(9)  Rags; 
(10)  Feathers; 
(11)  Tar; 
(12)  Plastics; 
(13)  Wood; 
(14)  Unground garbage; 
(15)  Whole blood; 
(16)  Paunch manure; 
(17)  Hair and fleshings; 
(18)  Entrails; 
(19)  Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders; 
(20)  Slops; 
(21)  Chemical residues; 
(22)  Paint residues; or 
(23)  Bulk solids. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 9, 3-25-1983)  
Sec. 54-58. - Compliance with existing authority. 
(a)  Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sanitary sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging: 
(1)  Wastewater; 
(2)  Industrial waste; 
(3)  Polluted liquids. 
(b)  Unless authorized by the state department of water resources, no person may deposit or discharge any waste included in subsection (a) of this section on public or private property or into or adjacent to any: 
(1)  Natural outlet; 
(2)  Watercourse; 
(3)  Storm sewer; 
(4)  Other area within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(c)  The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state and local governments. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 10, 3-25-1983)  
Sec. 54-59. - Approving authority requirements. 
(a)  If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may: 
(1)  Deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving water; 
(2)  Create a hazard to life or health; or 
(3)  Create a public nuisance; 
the approving authority shall require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers, control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The approving authority shall reject wastes when it determines that a discharge or proposed discharge does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 11, 3-25-1983)  
Sec. 54-60. - Approving authority review and approval. 
(a)  If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall review and approve design and installation of equipment and processes. 
(b)  The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other laws. 
(c)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow equalizing, or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities in effective operating condition at his own expense. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 12, 3-25-1983)  
Sec. 54-61. - Requirements for traps. 
(a)  Discharges requiring a trap include: 
(1)  Grease or waste containing grease in amounts that will impede or stop the flow in the public sewers; 
(2)  Oil; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Flammable wastes; and 
(5)  Other harmful ingredients. 
(b)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority; 
(2)  Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection; and 
(3)  Maintain the trap in effective operating condition. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 13, 3-25-1983)  
Sec. 54-62. - Requirements for building sewers. 
Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall, at his own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Install an accessible control manhole; 
(2)  Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation sampling and measurement of the waste; 
(3)  Install safety equipment and facilities (ventilation, steps, etc.) where needed; 
(4)  Maintain the equipment and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 14, 3-25-1983)  
Sec. 54-63. - Sampling and testing. 
(a)  Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb, and property. (Note: The particular analysis involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite sample from all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls. Where applicable, 16-hour, eight-hour or some other period may be required. Periodic grab samples are used to determine pH and oil and grease.) 
(b)  Examination. An analyses of the characteristics so waters and waters and wastes required by the ordinance shall be: 
(1)  Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods; and 
(2)  Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control point authorized by the approving authority. 
(c)  BOD and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling, except to detect unauthorized discharges. 
(d)  The approving authority shall determine which users or classes of users may contribute wastewater which is of greater strength than normal domestic wastewater. All users or classes of users so identified shall be sampled for low BOD, TSS and pH at least annually. 
(e)  The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, BOD, and suspended solids, if necessary. Flow may alternately be determined by water meter measurements if no other flow device is available and no other source of raw water is used. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 15, 3-25-1983)  
Sec. 54-64. - User charge system. 
(a)  Persons making discharges of industrial waste into the city system shall pay a charge to cover all costs of collection and treatment. 
(b)  When discharges of any waste into the city system are approved by the approving authority, the city or its authorized representative shall enter into an agreement or arrangement providing: 
(1)  Terms of acceptance by the city; 
(2)  Payment by the person making the discharge, in accordance with the user charge system as established in subsection (e) of this section; 
(3)  Sewer connection procedures and requirements shall be in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code as promulgated by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials; 
(4)  A sewer application approved with connection fee paid; and 
(5)  Construction of sewer connections shall be approved by city inspectors prior to sewer use. 
(c)  Each user of the wastewater treatment system will be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with a regular sewer bill, of the rate and that portion of user charges or ad valorem taxes which are attributable to the operation and maintenance of the wastewater treatment system. 
(d)  The city will apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the cost of operation and maintenance attributable to that class for the next year and adjust the rates accordingly. 
(e)  User charge system. (See Instructions and Appendix B to 40 CFR 35.) 
(Ord. No. 476, § 16, 3-25-1983)  
Sec. 54-65. - Savings clause. 
A person discharging wastes into public sewers prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may continue without penalty as long as he: 
(1)  Does not increase the quantity or decrease the quality of discharge without permission of the approving authority; 
(2)  Has discharged the waste at least two months prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; and 
(3)  Applies for and is granted a permit no later than seven days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 17, 3-25-1983)  
Sec. 54-66. - Conditions or permits. 
(a)  The city may grant a permit to discharge to persons meeting all requirements of the savings clause, provided that the person: 
(1)  Submits an application within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived on forms supplied by the approving authority; 
(2)  Secures approval by the approving authority of plans and specifications for the facilities when required; 
(3)  Has complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements, including, but not limited to, provisions for: 
a.  Payment of charges; 
b.  Installation and operation of the facilities and of pretreatment facilities if required and 
c.  Sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength when directed by the city; 
(4)  Provides a sampling point, when requested by the city, subject to the provisions of this article and approval of the approving authority. 
(b)  A person applying for a new discharge shall: 
(1)  Meet all conditions of subsection (a) of this section; and 
(2)  Secure a permit prior to discharging any waste. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 18, 3-25-1983)  
Sec. 54-67. - Power to enter property. 
(a)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this article. 
(b)  Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security, and fire protection. 
(c)  Except when caused by negligence or failure of person to maintain safe conditions, the city shall indemnify the person against loss or damage to their property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the person and growing out of the sampling operation. 
(d)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter all private properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement for the purposes of: 
(1)  Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling or repair; 
(2)  Maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within the easements; and 
(3)  Conducting any other authorized activity. All activities shall be conducted in full accordance with the terms of the negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(e)  No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public sewers. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 19, 3-25-1983)  
Sec. 54-68. - Authority to disconnect service. 
(a)  The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect a customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals which may damage the sewer lines or treatment process are released to the sewer potentially causing accelerated deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to the city's system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or 
(3)  The customer: 
a.  Discharges waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority; 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment system; 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer in services when due; or 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers in violation of sections 54-50 through 54-57. 
(b)  If service is discontinued pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section, the city shall: 
(1)  Disconnect the customer; 
(2)  Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all pertinent information; and 
(3)  Continue disconnection until such time as the customer provides pretreatment/additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the objectionable characteristics from his wastes. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 20, 3-25-1983)  
Sec. 54-69. - Notice. 
The city shall serve persons discharging in violation of the article with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 21, 3-25-1983)  
Sec. 54-70. - Continuing prohibited discharges. 
No person may continue discharging in violation of this article beyond the time limit provided in the notice. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 22, 3-25-1983)  
Sec. 54-71. - Penalty. 
(a)  A person who continues prohibited discharges is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00 for each act of violation and for each day of violation. 
(b)  In addition to proceeding under the authority of subsection (a) of this section, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharges. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 23, 3-25-1983)  
Sec. 54-72. - Failure to pay. 
In addition to sanctions provided for by this article, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the other ordinances of the city for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 24, 3-25-1983)  
Sec. 54-73. - Penalty for criminal mischief. 
The city may pursue all criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes and ordinances against a person negligently, willfully or maliciously causing loss by tampering with or destroying public sewers or treatment facilities. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 25, 3-25-1983)  
Secs. 54-74—54-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FATS, OILS AND GREASE 
 
Sec. 54-101. - Requirements for grease interceptors. 
(a)  Permittee responsibility for expenses. All commercial and industrial facilities dealing with grease shall, at the permittee's expense and as required by the control authority: 
(1)  Provide an adequately sized grease interceptor. Requirements for grease trap sizing and the design criteria are provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  Locate the intercept or in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection. 
(3)  Obtain a written interceptor service agreement with a licensed transporter for a term of at least one year, or for the duration of the operation of the establishment, whichever is less, to maintain the interceptor in effective operating condition. A service agreement must be in effect as long as the facility has a grease trap permit. 
(4)  Unless otherwise specified by the control authority, service the interceptor every 90 days and maintain backup copies of trip tickets and a service log, on the premises of the facility, for at least five years. 
(5)  Report to the control authority yearly. 
(6)  Allow demand inspection of the facility and of records by the inspector during reasonable hours. 
(b)  Requirements for grease trap sizing and design criteria. 
(1)  Introduction. Information contained within this document is based on standard industry practices and guidance found in the plumbing code. Size, type, and location of grease traps shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and the requirements of city ordinance. 
(2)  Applicability. These requirements are applicable to all commercial food service establishments, including those that are undergoing: 
a.  New construction; 
b.  Interior remodeling to accommodate expansion or operational modifications; 
c.  Changes of ownership/occupancy; 
d.  Facilities which may be experiencing difficulty in achieving compliance with maintenance and/or wastewater discharge limitations. 
(3)  Sizing requirements. 
a.  Sizing methods described herein are intended as guidance in determining grease trap/interceptor sizes that will afford the city's sanitary sewer system (POTW) a minimum degree of protection against grease and other obstructing materials. Sizing determinations are based on operational data provided by business owners or their contractors. In approving a customer's plumbing or grease interceptor design, the city does not accept liability for the failure of a system to adequately treat wastewater to achieve effluent quality requirements specified under this article. It is the responsibility of the generator and/or contractors to insure the appropriate level of treatment necessary for compliance with environmental and wastewater regulations. 
b.  Minimum acceptable grease trap/interceptor sizing shall be accomplished as follows: 
1.  Sizing according to formulas found in subsection (b)(4) of this section. 
2.  Where sizing formulas result in determination of a grease trap less than 750 gallons in capacity, this minimum size is recommended. However, under no circumstances should exterior grease traps less than 500 gallons be utilized. 
3.  In the circumstance of "single service kitchens" with no food preparation (heat/serve only) and which use paper service items, a minimum 50-gallon per minute (gpm) flow rated, or 100-pound grease retention, mechanical grease trap may be used. In these instances, the grease trap is to be installed separate from food handling area, and the trap must be readily accessible for cleaning and maintenance. (See subsection (b)(6) of this section.) 
(4)  Grease trap sizing formulas. It is the responsibility of the generator and his/her contractors to ensure that the wastewater discharged from their facility is in compliance with the city's discharge limitations. For the purpose of plans review, a general assessment of grease trap/interceptor design and size will be performed using the following formulas. (These formulas have been demonstrated as industry standards capable of achieving the city's discharge criteria when systems are maintained in proper conditions.) 
a.  Method 1. Number of meals x waste flow x retention x storage = size requirement per peak hour (1) rate (2) time (3) factor (4) liquid capacity. The following factors are: 
1.  Peak number of meals served. Number of meals served at peak operating hour (seating capacity) x peak factor. 
A.  Where peak factor for fast food restaurant is 1.33; and 
B.  Peak factor for all other food service types is 1.00. 
2.  Waste flow rate. 
A.  With dishwasher = Six-gallon flow. 
B.  Without dishwasher = Five-gallon flow. 
C.  Single service kitchen = Two-gallon flow. 
D.  Food waste disposer = One-gallon flow. 
3.  Retention times. 
A.  Commercial kitchen waste/dishwasher = Two and one-half hours. 
B.  Single service kitchen/single serving = One and one-half hours. 
4.  Storage factors. 
A.  Fully equipped commercial kitchen eight-hour operation = One. 
B.  16-hour operation = Two. 
C.  24-hour operation = Three. 
D.  Single service kitchen = One and one-half. 
The uniform plumbing code includes a built-in safety factor that can yield very large grease trap size specifications. At this time, the city is not requiring traps larger than 4,000 gallons. However, the decision to use a trap smaller than that specified by formula and calculations above is to be addressed in the plan submission. 
b.  Method 2. Five-hour detention/peak flow. 
1.  Gallons of water used per hour of operation. 
2.  A x 0.75 = average "gray water" flow per hour. 
3.  B x 1.9 peak flow factor. 
4.  C x 5 hours detention = volume trap. 
Required volume of trap = A x B x C x D. 
(5)  Alternate sizing formulas/proposals. Facilities that propose the use of alternate sizing techniques and/or procedures that result in specifications that differ from calculated requirements (or are less than the minimum 750 gallon recommendation), must submit formulas and other bases to support proposed grease trap size/installation. Submission should also provide documentation of ability to meet effluent quality requirements. This proposal must be signed by a licensed plumbing contractor or engineer licensed in the state. 
(6)  Construction installation. All permitting, construction, and inspection activities must be completed in accordance with the city plumbing code. Additionally, the following specifications must be incorporated into grease trap design: 
a.  The grease interceptor shall be constructed with a minimum of two chambers or shall have a minimum of two tanks in series. If two-chambered, the dividing wall must extend to within one foot of the bottom of the tank and within two inches of top and be securely fastened to both sides. 
b.  There must be inlet and outlet tees made of schedule 40 PVC installed. The inlet tee should extend down approximately one-third the depth of the trap from the top and the outlet tee should be located 12 to 18 inches off of the bottom of trap. 
c.  Grease traps are to be installed at a minimum distance of ten feet from sinks and dishwashers to allow for adequate cooling of wastewater. Water temperatures must be less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit prior to entering grease trap. 
d.  All grease bearing waste streams should be routed through an appropriate grease trap/interceptor, including: three compartment sinks, pot/pan sinks, soup kettles, handwashing sinks, dishwashers, mop sinks and floor drains. 
Notable exceptions. Drains that receive "clear waste" only, such as from ice machines, condensation from coils and drink stations, may be plumbed to the sanitary system without passing through the grease interceptor with the condition that the receiving drain is a "hub" type that is a minimum of two inches above the finished floor. 
e.  All exterior or recessed grease traps and interceptors are to be installed with an effluent sampling well, equivalent to: 
1.  Parks Equipment Services Sample Well SWB-9; 
2.  American Industrial Pre-Cast Products Test Well; or 
3.  Uponor Sample Well. 
Sample wells will have a 15-inch diameter access cover and a minimum four-inch drop from inlet to outlet piping through the sampling well. Mechanical grease traps and interceptors that are installed above ground must be equipped with an influent flow regulator and an effluent valve assembly that allows for sample collection. 
(7)  Customer (generator) responsibilities. 
a.  It is the responsibility of the customer (waste generator) to ensure compliance with the city's discharge limitations. 
b.  Hazardous wastes, such as acids, strong cleaners, pesticides, herbicides, paint, solvents or gasoline should not be disposed of through grease or grit traps. If commercial dishwashers are discharged through a grease interceptor, care must be taken in system design. Dishwashers use detergents and elevated water temperatures that will melt grease. If the interceptor is either too small or too close to the commercial dishwasher, grease may pass through the interceptor and into the collection system. 
c.  Generators are responsible for maintaining grease traps in continuous proper working condition. Further, generators are responsible for inspecting, repairing, replacing, or installing apparatus and equipment as necessary to ensure proper operation and function of grease traps and compliance with discharge limitations at all times. 
d.  The generator must have a grease trap/grease interceptor service contract (for pumping, cleaning, and inspection) by a city permitted waste hauler, at a minimum frequency of every 90 days to ensure proper function. The trap shall be maintained more frequently if needed to meet the city's discharge criteria. Records of maintenance are required to be maintained on site for five years. (Ninety-day maintenance frequency assumes proper sizing and installation consistent with this guidance.) 
e.  Enzymes, solvents, and emulsifiers are not permitted, as they will only change the form of grease, allowing it to be carried out of the trap with the wastewater and deposited in the collection system (POTW). Biological treatment systems must be pre-approved by the control authority. These systems will not alleviate the necessity for inspection and proper maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 997, § 1, 10-9-2018)  
Sec. 54-102. - Schedule of penalties. 
(a)  If the POTW determines that a generator is responsible for a blockage of a collection system line the generator shall owe a civil penalty of $1,000.00 for the first violation, $1,500.00 for a second violation, and $2,000.00 for the third violation within a two-year period. Continuous violations shall result in an increase in penalty by $500.00 and may also result in termination of services. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a written warning for the first violation, a $1,000.00 civil penalty for the second violation, a $1,500.00 civil penalty for the third violation, and a $2,000.00 civil penalty for the fourth violation within a two-year period. Consistent violations will result in a $500.00 increase in civil penalty and may result in termination of service. 
(Ord. No. 997, § 2, 10-9-2018)  
Sec. 54-103. - Enforcement. 
The director of utilities or his designee shall have the administrative authority to enforce this article. Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this article, or any prohibition, limitation, or requirements contained in the article, the city will implement the enforcement response plan. Enforcement response necessary to initiate corrective action may include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Notice of violation. The city may serve upon any user a written notice stating the nature of violation. Within 24 hours of the time and date of the notice or first regular work day, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted for approval by the utility director. 
(2)  The city may suspend water service when such suspension necessary, in the opinion of the director, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which: 
a.  Presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment; and/or 
b.  Causes stoppages or excessive maintenance to be performed to prevent stoppages in the sanitary sewer system. 
Any person notified of a suspension of water service shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate termination of water utility services, to prevent or minimize damage to the sanitary sewer collection system or endangerment of any individuals. 
The city shall reinstate utility services when such conditions causing the suspension have been corrected or eliminated. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the cause(s) of the violation and the measure(s) taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city director of utilities, within 15 days of the date of the occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 997, § 3, 10-9-2018)  
Chapter 56 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 56-1—56-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of taxicabs, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.004; Type A municipality may regulate cabdrivers and similar occupations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.029. 
 
Sec. 56-19. - Annual license requirement. 
From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, any and all persons, firms, corporations or associations of persons operating taxicabs within the city shall pay to the city, at the office of the city secretary, and collector of taxes, in lawful money of the United States, the sum of $50.00 annually in advance on each vehicle operated by him before a license shall be issued. All licenses shall be so issued as to expire on December 31 of each year. On or before December 1 of each year, every person having a license shall apply in writing to the city council for a renewal license for the calendar year next ensuing. The license fee is for a period of 12 months. Upon the issuance of any license after January 1 of any year for the remainder of the year, there shall be collected such fractional part of the license fee hereinabove fixed as the remaining months in the calendar year (including the month in which such license is issued) bears to the 12-month period. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 1, 4-12-1966; Ord. No. 367, 11-21-1972)  
Sec. 56-20. - Determination of convenience and necessity. 
When application for a taxicab license has been made, the city council shall determine if a public convenience and necessity will justify the granting of such license, taking into consideration the public demand for additional taxicab service and the city council shall also consider the ability of the applicant to comply with any regulatory ordinances of the city and the equipment and service proposed to be furnished. The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish by clear, cogent and convincing evidence that the public convenience and necessity require such operation of the taxicab service for which the application has been made and that the applicant is fit, able and willing to perform such transportation of persons and property as proposed in the application. Proof that the applicant seeks renewal of an existing license for operating taxicabs shall constitute prima facie proof of public convenience and necessity, if such application for license renewal is made in writing to the city council on or before December 1 preceding expiration of the license sought to be renewed. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 2, 4-12-1966)  
Sec. 56-21. - Vehicle insurance requirements. 
Before any license shall be issued to any owner or operator of a taxicab or before any renewal of a license shall be granted, the owner or operator shall be required to file with the city secretary, and thereafter keep in full force and effect a motor vehicle liability policy with a company duly authorized to do business in the state and performable in the county, insuring the public against any loss or damage that may result to any person or property from the operation of such vehicle, provided that the maximum amount of recovery in such policy of insurance specified shall not, for each and every vehicle, be less than $30,000.00 for injury or death of one person and $60,000.00 in any one accident; and not less than $25,000.00 for injury to or destruction of property in any one accident. All motor vehicle liability policies shall contain a provision for a continuing liability thereon up to the full amount thereof, notwithstanding any recovery thereon. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 3, 4-12-1966)  
Sec. 56-22. - Revocation or suspension of license. 
(a)  A license issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked or suspended by the city council if the holder thereof has: 
(1)  Violated any of the provisions of this article; 
(2)  Discontinued operations for more than 30 days; 
(3)  Violated any ordinances of the city, or laws of the United States or the state, the violations of which reflect unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to offer public transportation. 
(b)  Prior to suspension or revocation, the holder shall be given notice of the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 4, 4-12-1966)  
Sec. 56-23. - Periodic vehicle inspections. 
(a)  Every vehicle operating under this article shall be periodically inspected by the police department at such intervals as shall be established by the city council, to ensure the continued maintenance of safe operating conditions. 
(b)  Vehicles must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. Every vehicle operating under this article shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition according to rules and regulations promulgated by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 5, 4-12-1966)  
Sec. 56-24. - Taxicab markings. 
Each taxicab shall bear on the outside of each rear door, in painted letter not less than six inches nor more than 12 inches in height, the name of the owner and, in addition, may bear an identifying design approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 6, 4-12-1966)  
Sec. 56-25. - Taxicab business responsiveness. 
All persons engaged in the taxicab business in the city operating under the provisions of this article shall render an overall service to the public desiring to use taxicabs. They shall answer all calls received by them for services inside the corporate limits of the city as soon as they can do so. If said services cannot be rendered within a reasonable time, they shall then notify the prospective passengers how long it will be before the said call can be answered and give the reason therefor. Any holder who shall refuse to accept a call anywhere in the corporate limits of the city at any time when such holder has available cabs; or who shall fail or refuse to give overall service, shall be deemed a violator of this article and the license granted to such holder shall be revoked at the discretion of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 280, § 7, 4-12-1966)  
Chapter 58 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Federal law reference—Preservation of local zoning authority concerning wireless telecommunications facilities, 47 USC 322(c)(7); limited federal preemption of state and local zoning laws affecting amateur radio facilities, Memorandum Opinion and Order, PRB-1, 101 FCC 2d 952 (1985) and 47 CFR 97.15(b); Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act, 42 USC 2000cc et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal zoning authority, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq.; zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.007; comprehensive plan, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 213.002; board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 211.008—211.013; zoning districts, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.005; regulation of political signs by municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.903; municipality may regulate parking on private property, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 431.001; regulation of amateur radio antennas by municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 250.002; Texas Religious Freedom Act, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 110.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 58-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 225, § I, 1-11-1961)  
Sec. 58-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory building means a subordinate building or a portion of the main building the use of which is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with and located on the same building site as the main building or principal use of the land. 
Accessory use means a use which is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with and on the same site as the main use of the premises. 
Boardinghouse means a building other than a hotel or motel where meals or lodging and meals for three or more persons are provided for compensation. 
Building means any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property. The term "building" includes the term "structure." 
Building, height of, means the vertical distance from the grade (elevation of the curb, sidewalk or average elevation of the ground around the structure) to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck lien of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, or gambrel roofs. 
Dwelling means a building or portion thereof, designed or used for residential occupancy, including one family, two family, or multiple family dwellings, but not including boarding and lodging houses, hotels, or tourist courts. 
Dwelling, multiple-family, means a single building or portion thereof, arranged or designed for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other. 
Dwelling, single-family, means a detached building arranged or designed for occupancy by only one family. 
Dwelling, two-family, means a building arranged or designed for occupancy by two families living independently of each other. 
Family means a person or persons occupying a dwelling, living together and maintaining a common household, with not more than two boarders or roomers. 
Farm means an area used for the growing of the usual farm products and their storage on the premises, as well as the raising thereon of the usual farm animals and poultry. 
Frontage means all the property abutting upon one side of a street between two intersecting streets measured along the street line. 
Garage, private, means an accessory building used only by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory, for the storage of motor-driven vehicles. Not more than one of the vehicles may be a commercial vehicle and that one of not more than three-ton capacity. 
Garage, public, means a building or portion thereof other than a private garage used for the equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling or storing motor-driven vehicles. 
Home occupation means an occupation or profession carried on by a member of the immediate family residing on the premises, provided no commodity is sold upon the premises; no person is employed other than a member of the immediate family; and no mechanical equipment is used except such as is permissible for domestic purposes. 
Lodging (or rooming) house means a building other than a hotel or motel where lodging for three or more persons is provided for compensation. 
Lot means a parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in this chapter, including one main building together with its accessory buildings, yard areas, and parking spaces required by this chapter, and having its principal frontage upon a street. 
Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot, depth of, means the distance from the front street line to the rear line measured in the mean direction of the side lot lines. 
Lot of record means a lot or parcel of land, the deed to which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk, prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
Lot width means the mean distance between side lot lines measured at right angles to the depth of the lot. 
Nonconforming use means any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived which does not conform with the regulations of the district within which it is located. 
Parking space means an area of not less than 180 square feet exclusive of driveways, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one motor vehicle and connected with a street or alley by a driveway which affords satisfactory ingress and egress for vehicles. 
Story means that portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
Story, half, means a space under a sloping roof at the top of the building, the floor of which is not more than two feet below the plate shall be counted as a half-story when not more than 60 percent of said floor area is used for rooms, baths, or toilets. A half-story containing independent apartment or living quarters shall be counted as a full story. 
Street means a public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
Structural alterations means any change in structural members of a building, such as walls, columns, beams or girders. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground. 
Trailer camp, mobile homes park means any lot or parcel of land which is used or offered for the accommodation of one or more trailers (or mobile homes) which are used for living, sleeping, business, or storage purposes. 
Yard means an open space on the same lot with a building unobstructed from the ground upward. 
Yard, front, means that portion of a yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot line, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or any projection thereof, other than the projections of the uncovered steps, uncovered porches, or terraces. On corner lots the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. 
Yard, rear, means that portion of a yard extending across the rear of the lot measured between the side lot lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projection other than steps, unenclosed porches or entranceways. 
Yard, side, means that portion of a yard between the main building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. 
(Ord. No. 225, § II, 1-11-1961)  
Sec. 58-3. - District boundaries and general regulations. 
(a)  For the purposes of this chapter the city is divided into five zoning districts to be known as follows: 
(1)  R-1 1st. Residential District. 
(2)  R-2 2nd. Residence District. 
(3)  B-1 1st. Business District. 
(4)  B-2 2nd. Business District. 
(5)  I Industrial District. 
(b)  The boundaries of the districts are shown upon a map which is made a part of this ordinance and which map is designated as the zoning district map. The zoning district map and all the information shown thereon is a part of this chapter and have the same force and effect as if the zoning district map and all the information shown thereon were all fully set forth or described herein. The original of this map is properly attested and on file with the city clerk. 
(c)  No building shall be erected or structurally altered, nor shall any building or premises be used for any purpose other than permitted in the district in which such building or premises is located. No lot area shall be reduced or diminished so that yards shall be smaller than prescribed by this chapter, nor shall the lot area per family be reduced in any manner except in conformity with the regulations hereby established for the district in which such building is located. 
(Ord. No. 225, § III, 1-11-1961)  
Sec. 58-4. - R-1 1st. Residential district use regulations. 
In any R-1 1st. Residential District, the following uses only are permitted: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Multiple-family dwellings. 
(4)  Churches, schools, and public buildings. 
(5)  Public parks and playgrounds. 
(6)  Golf courses and private clubs but not including those operated as a commercial enterprise. 
(7)  Truck gardens, farms, orchards, and nurseries, but not the raising of livestock. 
(8)  Institutions of a religious or philanthropic nature, but not including penal or mental institutions. 
(9)  Home occupations where no name-plate is used in connection with said use which exceeds two square feet in area. Such name-plate shall be flat against the wall of the main use building. 
(10)  Accessory buildings and accessory uses customarily incidental to the above uses. The term "accessory building" should also include church, school, and similar bulletin boards, or signs not exceeding ten square feet in area appertaining to the lease, hire, or sale of the building or premises, and provided further that such boards or signs shall be removed as soon as the premises are leased or sold, but in no event shall more than one sign of the above character be permitted upon any lot, except for the display of construction signs during the time a building is under construction. 
(Ord. No. 225, § IV, 1-11-1961)  
Sec. 58-5. - R-2 2nd. Residence district use regulations. 
In any R-2 2nd. Residence District, the following uses only are permitted: same as for R-1 1st. Residence District. 
(Ord. No. 225, § V, 1-11-1961)  
Sec. 58-6. - B-1 1st. Business district use regulations. 
In any B-1 1st. Business District, the following uses only are permitted: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-1 1st. Residential District. 
(2)  Stores and shops where goods are sold and services are rendered primarily at retail. 
(3)  Hotels, boarding and lodging houses. 
(4)  Motels, motor hotels, and tourist courts. 
(5)  Offices. 
(6)  Off-street parking lots for the parking of automobiles. 
(7)  Theaters (except drive-in theaters), assembly halls, and cafes. 
(8)  Public garages, filling stations, and automobile repair shops. 
(9)  Plumbing shop. 
(10)  Printing shop. 
(11)  Shoe, tire, or electrical repair shop or similar trade. 
(12)  Tinsmith shop. 
(13)  Wholesale merchandising. 
(14)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to the above uses. 
(15)  Storage provided it is limited to a reasonable supply of those articles which are to be used, displayed, or sold on the premises. 
(16)  Advertising signs, billboards, and bulletin boards. 
(17)  The following uses when approved by and subject to such requirements as the board of adjustment may consider necessary to protect adjacent property and prevent conditions which may become objectionable: 
a.  Drive-in theaters. 
b.  Trailer camp or park, or mobile homes park limited to the B-1 1st. Business District, provided that 2,500 square feet of lot area is provided for each unit. 
(18)  Amusement/gaming machine establishment. An amusement redemption machine is a skill or pleasure coin-operated machine that is designed, made and adapted solely for bona fide amusement purposes, and that by operation of chance or a combination of skill and chance affords the user, in addition to any right of replay, an opportunity to receive exclusively non-cash merchandise prizes, toys, novelties, or a representation of value redeemable for those items. 
(Ord. No. 225, § VI, 1-11-1961, Ord. No. 723, 6-17-2003)  
Sec. 58-7. - B-2 2nd. Business District use regulations. 
In any B-2 2nd. Business District, the following uses only are permitted: Any use permitted in the B-1 1st. Business District. 
(Ord. No. 225, § VII, 1-11-1961)  
Sec. 58-8. - I Industrial District use regulations. 
In any I Industrial District, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the B-1 Business District. 
(2)  And, in general, any use not in conflict with the enacted laws of the state, or any ordinances of the city except any trade, industry, or purposes which, in the opinion of the board of adjustment, when conducted under proper and adequate conditions and safeguards may create corrosive, toxic, or noxious fumes, gas, smoke, or odors, or offensive dust, vapor, noise or vibration. Provided, further, that no building or premises shall be used for any of the following specific purposes until approved by and subject to such requirements as the board of adjustment may consider necessary to protect adjacent property and prevent conditions which may become objectionable or offensive: 
a.  Acid manufacture. 
b.  Dead animals, reduction of. 
c.  Distillation of bones. 
d.  Fat rendering. 
e.  Fertilizer, manufacture of. 
f.  Garbage, disposal. 
g.  Glue, manufacture of. 
h.  Junk yards and auto salvage. 
i.  Stock yards or slaughtering of animals. 
j.  Wholesale storage of gasoline. 
k.  Any other use of buildings, or land that would be extremely hazardous to the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 225, § VIII, 1-11-1961)  
Sec. 58-9. - Manufactured Home district (MH). 
(a)  Purpose of district. The purpose of this district is to provide adequate space and restrictions for the placement of manufactured, mobile, and modular homes in the city. The MH district is established to provide housing densities compatible with existing and proposed neighborhoods by providing alternate housing types both in construction and economy within an approved manufactured home park or subdivision. No manufactured homes or mobile homes shall be allowed to be placed on any parcel or lot, except on lots located within an approved manufactured home park or subdivision. Manufactured homes shall be permitted on property zoned industrial, providing they are not used as storage and conform to city building code ordinances and regulations. 
(b)  Use regulations. In the MH district, no building, structure, land or premises will be used and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, except for one or more of the following uses and regulated by the following: permitted uses, manufactured home as a fixed dwelling, and manufactured home park. 
(Ord. No. 745, § 1(VIII (A)), 9-27-2004)  
Sec. 58-10. - HUD-Code manufactured homes and mobile homes; definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in sections related to HUD-Code manufacture homes and mobile homes, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
HUD-code manufactured home means a structure, constructed on or after June 15, 1976, meeting the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act as administered by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. The term "HUD-Code manufactured home" does not include mobile homes or recreational vehicles as defined in this subsection. 
Manufactured home means a HUD-Code manufactured home. 
Manufactured home park means a tract of land not less than five acres in size under single ownership, which is designed and improved to contain two or more spaces available for long-term lease or rent to the public for the placement of manufactured homes, and which may include private streets, buildings, and other facilities and services for common use by the residents, in conformance with the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
Manufactured home subdivision means a division of land not less than five acres in size for the purpose of sale of two or more lots intended to be developed with residential units including manufactured homes, and having all necessary public utilities, streets, and other facilities as required by section 58-14. 
Mobile home means a structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. The term "mobile home" does not include recreational vehicles as defined in this section. 
Modular home means a pre-fabricated home assembled on a permanent foundation that is not a manufactured home, and that has been constructed and inspected so that it complies with the standard building code as currently adopted by the city. 
Natural or artificial barrier means any river, pond, canal, railroad, levee, embankment, fence or hedge, or road or alley. 
Owner-occupied means a mobile home or HUD-Code manufactured home that is occupied by the lawful owner of the mobile home or HUD-Code manufactured home and the lot or land upon which it is placed. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicular-type portable structure without a permanent foundation that can be towed, hauled, or driven which is designed as a temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping, and travel use, and which includes, but is not limited to, travel-trailers, truck-campers, camping trailers, and self-propelled motor homes. 
Skirt means a device for the concealment of the undercarriage of a HUD-Code manufactured home or mobile home from view, which shall be constructed of either pre-fabricated metal or wood siding. 
Storage means placement or maintenance of a vacant HUD-Code manufactured home or mobile home within the city, whether in a manufactured home park or not, without lawfully connecting or subscribing to city electric, water, sewer or solid waste disposal services. 
Tiedowns means metal bands or other sufficient material, attached to the HUD-Code manufactured home or mobile home and to the ground for the purpose of holding the structure down, which must be in compliance with state and federal laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 745, § 1(VIII (B)), 9-27-2004)  
Sec. 58-11. - Storage prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to store a HUD-Code manufactured home or mobile home within the city limits. HUD-Code manufactured homes and mobile homes existing prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived are not exempt from this section. 
(Ord. No. 745, § 2.1, 9-27-2004)  
Sec. 58-12. - Occupancy requirements. 
(a)  Recreational vehicle outside a manufactured park. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy a recreational vehicle outside a manufactured home park for more than ten days, unless said occupancy is in conjunction with a related city-sponsored event. 
(b)  Storage use of recreational vehicle. A recreational vehicle may be used for storage purposes only, if it is not occupied for any purpose, is not connected to any utilities, is parked on private property, does not violate any of the city's fire and traffic codes, and has a current vehicle registration. 
(c)  HUD-Code manufactured home or mobile home; compliance regulations in manufactured home parks or industrial zoned property. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, occupy, or connect to city utilities, a HUD-Code manufactured home or mobile home within a manufactured home park or industrial zoned property without conforming to the following provisions: 
(1)  Application. An application must be submitted to the city building inspector containing the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the applicant. 
b.  The location and legal description of the property on which the HUD-Code manufactured home or mobile home will be located. 
c.  An affidavit by the applicant regarding the type of dwelling (whether HUD-Code manufactured home or mobile home) applied for and averring that the structure will be occupied. 
d.  The requisite information to ensure that the installation and maintenance of the HUD-Code manufactured home or mobile home will be in accordance with the rules and regulations required by this section. 
e.  Affidavit from the county appraisal district that not delinquent property taxes exist on the named HUD-Code manufactured home or mobile home. 
(2)  Application fee. The application shall be accompanied by the application fee as outlined in the building permit fees ordinance that has been approved and adopted by the city council. 
(3)  Installation. Approval for installation of HUD-Code manufactured homes or mobile homes shall be in an area designated, identified, and zoned as a manufactured home district or industrial. A special permit may be issued for installation of a mobile or manufactured home outside the designated district or industrial zone upon public hearing, as described in subsection (c)(5) of this section, conducted by the planning and zoning commission and further recommendation to the city council. The city council may give consideration for a variance based on this recommendation. 
(4)  Review and application by city inspector. The city inspector shall review the application to ensure that all city regulations are complied with. The inspector shall also ensure that all utilities are readily available. In the event that the application does not comply with the provisions of the city, the inspector shall cause a written notice to be issued to the applicant indicating the deficiencies and requirements for curing same. The applicant shall have a period of 30 days in which to cure the deficiencies noted. Otherwise, a new application will be required. 
(5)  Public hearing and issuance of permit. After review of the application, and if it otherwise complies with the rules and regulations for establishment of a HUD-Code manufactured home or mobile home on property outside a permitted area, then the inspector shall notify the applicant, in writing, and all property owners owning property, according to the most recent city tax rolls, within 200 feet of the lot for which an application has been submitted, of a public hearing to be held on the application. A fee in the amount of $150.00 shall be paid prior to scheduled date of public hearing, which shall be applied to publication costs and costs to notify property owners. A public hearing shall be held by the planning and zoning commission not less than ten days, nor more than 30 days, after such notification, at which time the commission shall determine whether the provisions of this section have been complied with. In cases of unavoidable necessity, the city council shall have the right to grant a variance to the applicant. The city council may also refuse to issue a permit to the applicant if the city council reasonably determines that the effect on the surrounding property and the appearance of the neighborhood will be adversely affected because of the size, appearance, relative placement or expected use of the structure. In the event of such refusal, the city council shall authorize the inspector to state in writing to the applicant the reasons for such refusal, in terms containing such specifics as will allow the applicant to correct any deficiencies, where possible. The city council may also establish reasonable conditions of approval for the license including such conditions that the city council may deem necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses and to preserve the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(6)  Issuance of permit. The city council of the city shall consider the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission at its next regular meeting and approve or disapprove the issuance of the permit, outside a permitted area. 
(Ord. No. 745, § 2.2, 9-27-2004)  
Sec. 58-13. - Existing structures. 
HUD-Code manufactured homes and mobile homes that are presently being occupied in compliance with previous regulations of the city shall not be required to comply with the provisions of section 58-12, but if an existing structure is moved or substantially rebuilt, the permit procedure must be followed prior to its occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 745, § 2.3, 9-27-2004)  
Sec. 58-14. - HUD-Code manufactured home parks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, occupy, or connect to city utilities a manufactured home park without conforming to the following standards and provisions: 
(1)  Application. An application must be submitted to the city building inspector containing the following information: 
a.  The name and address of the applicant. 
b.  The location and legal description of the property on which the park is to be located. 
c.  A complete plan of the park showing compliance with this section. 
d.  Copies of plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements to be constructed must accompany the application, including water, sewer, gas, electricity, telephone, solid waste disposal and other such facilities. 
e.  The requisite information to ensure that the establishment of the park shall comply with all rules and regulations applicable to such parts. 
(2)  Application fee. The application must be accompanied by an application fee of $150.00. 
(3)  Review of application by city building inspector. The city inspector shall review the application to ensure that all city regulations are complied with. The inspector shall also ensure that all utilities are readily available. 
(4)  Public hearing. After review of the application, if the application otherwise complies with the rules and regulations for establishment of a manufactured home park, then the inspector shall notify in writing the applicant and all property owners owning property, according to the most recent city tax rolls, within 200 feet of the land for which an application has been submitted, of a public hearing to be held on the application. The planning and zoning commission, in accordance with the zoning ordinance, shall hold a public hearing and make recommendation to the city council. 
(5)  Certificate issuance. An annual license fee of $150.00 plus $25.00 per unit space shall be paid at the time license is issued and by January 1 of each year thereafter. Upon payment of license renewal fee, the designated official shall issue a certificate renewing such license for another year. 
(6)  Transfers of title. A mobile home, manufactured home license may be transferred by its owner along with a conveyance of the park upon which it is situated by the owner. A copy of the document transferring the license shall be filed with the city inspector. 
(Ord. No. 745, § 2.3, 9-27-2004)  
Sec. 58-15. - Requirements for manufactured home parks. 
(a)  Manufactured home park plan. Manufactured home parks shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  The park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water; 
(2)  Single-wide manufactured home lot: 
Description 	Manufactured Home Park 	Manufactured Home 
Subdivisions 
Minimum lot area 	4,500 square feet 	4,500 square feet 
Lot width 	45 feet 	45 feet 
Lot depth 	100 feet 	100 feet 
Front yard 	20 feet 	20 feet 
Side yard 	10 feet 	10 feet 
Rear yard 	10 feet 	10 feet 
Coverage 	30% 	30% 
 
(3)  Double-wide manufactured home lot: 
Description 	Manufactured Home Park 	Manufactured Home 
Subdivisions 
Minimum lot area 	4,800 square feet 	4,800 square feet 
Lot width 	60 feet 	60 feet 
Lot depth 	80 feet 	80 feet 
Front yard 	20 feet 	20 feet 
Side yard 	10 feet 	10 feet 
Rear yard 	10 feet 	10 feet 
Coverage 	30% 	30% 
 
(4)  Recreational vehicle park: 
Description 	Recreational Vehicle Park 
Minimum lot area 	1,375 square feet 
Lot width 	25 feet 
Lot depth 	55 feet 
Front yard 	10 feet 
Rear yard 	5 feet 
Side yard 	5 feet 
 
(5)  All manufactured home lots shall either abut upon a city street or shall abut upon an entryway to the park of not less than 20 feet in width which shall have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. All entryways to the park shall be constructed with, at a minimum, a limestone base to a depth of three inches or equivalent; 
(6)  Walkways not less than two feet wide shall be provided from the manufactured home lots to the service building. The walkway shall be hard-surfaced, well-marked in the daytime and lighted at night; 
(7)  For each manufactured home lot, there shall be two off-street parking spaces provided, with a minimum dimension of nine feet by 20 feet each. For every four manufactured home lots or recreational vehicle spaces, there shall be at least one visitor parking space. Such visitor parking space shall have a minimum dimension of nine feet by 20 feet and shall be not more than 150 feet from any manufactured home lot or recreational vehicle space. Not less than eight percent of the total gross site area shall be devoted to recreational purposes to relieve congestion of people. The recreational area includes space for community building, community use facilities, swimming pools, etc. The recreation area shall be centrally located and free of traffic hazards; 
(8)  The structure of each HUD-Code manufactured home, mobile home or a recreational vehicle in a park shall be supported by and tied to a foundation and anchoring system meeting the current requirements of the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act as administered by the state department of housing and community affairs. Manufactured housing division, or successor agency, and the installation and maintenance of the structure shall otherwise be in accordance with federal and state laws and regulations; 
(9)  A stoop, porch, patio or deck must be provided at each entrance to the manufactured home; 
(10)  The space between ground level and the manufactured home or mobile home's floor level shall be skirted with non-degradable materials compatible in color, style and texture with the exterior of the home, if the concrete foundation does not already enclose that space; 
(11)  All spaces for recreational vehicles shall be of hard surface construction of an adequate width, and length to provide adequate space for the location of the recreational vehicle. 
(b)  Location. Manufactured home parks may be located only in conformity with the regulations of the city, and in addition to the requirements contained therein, each boundary of the park must be at least 50 feet from any permanent residential building located outside the park, unless separated there from by a natural or artificial barrier, or unless a majority of the property owners according to area within said 50 feet consent in writing to the establishment of the park. 
(c)  Maintenance. Every person owning or operating a manufactured home park shall maintain such park, and any facilities, fixtures, and permanent equipment in connection therewith, in a clean and sanitary condition and shall maintain said equipment in a state of good repair. 
(d)  Street development. General maintenance and development of streets and drives include a pavement seal with proper drainage, a street right-of-way for garbage pickup, fire lanes and emergency access and utilities. Internal streets or drives shall have a minimum pavement width of 24 feet that are continuous and connect with other internal or public streets and allow for two paved parking stalls of concrete, asphalt or an equal seal for each unit lot. If the internal street should become a dead end, a cul-de-sac shall be provided at the end having a minimum diameter of 80 feet, free of any parking and not exceeding 150 feet in length. Maintenance of all internal streets is the responsibility of the owner. Drainage by curb and gutter is required and should be integrated in the overall pavement width of the street. For dedication of the street system in a subdivision serving the general public, the developer/owner is required to follow street construction standards, which include curb and gutter and right-of-way requirements in the city subdivision ordinance. 
(e)  New construction. Any new construction or addition in the park must comply with the building ordinances enforced at time of construction and with approval of the building inspector. 
(f)  Office building. Each manufactured home park shall be provided with a building to be known and clearly designated as the office, in which shall be kept copies of all records pertaining to the management and supervision of the park, as well as, all rules and regulations of the park, and such records, rules and regulations shall be available for inspection by law enforcement officers, public health officials, and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 745, § 2.4, 9-27-2004)  
Sec. 58-16. - Operation rules and regulations for parks. 
It shall be the duty of the owner and his or her agent, representative, or manager to prescribe rules and regulations for the management of the park; to make adequate provisions for the enforcement of such rules; and to publish any such rules and regulations to the residents of such park. Copies of all such rules and regulations shall be furnished to the city council. In addition thereto, it shall be the duty of the owner, his agent, representative or manager to comply strictly with the following: 
(1)  Provide for regular inspection of the water and sanitary conveniences; 
(2)  Prohibit the placing or storage of unsightly material or vehicles of any kind; 
(3)  Provide or demand that all manufactured homes, mobile homes or recreational vehicles have skirts and tiedowns within 60 days of placement; 
(4)  Tiedowns shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations of the state and the United States. 
(Ord. No. 745, § 2.5, 9-27-2004)  
Sec. 58-17. - Lawfully connected to utilities. 
All structures licensed under this section shall be connected to all electric, water and sewer utilities, in addition to the city-contracted solid waste disposal service. 
(Ord. No. 745, § 2.6, 9-27-2004)  
Sec. 58-18. - Fuel. 
Bottled gas for cooking purposes shall not be used at individual manufactured homes, mobile homes or recreational vehicle lots. 
(Ord. No. 745, § 2.7, 9-27-2004)  
Sec. 58-19. - Penalty for violations. 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating this section or any portion thereof shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more $200.00. Each day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense and punished accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 745, § 4, 9-27-2004)  
Sec. 58-20. - Area, height, yards, and building size regulations for all districts. 
(a)  Generally. Except as provided in section 58-23 and subsection (b) of this section, the regulations for area, height, yards, and building size are set forth in the following table A (in the ordinance from which this section is derived), and the size and width of lots and yards shall be not less, nor the building heights more than, or building floor area less than stipulated for the respective districts. 
(b)  Regulations to supplement district regulations. The regulations hereinafter set forth qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the district regulations appearing in table A in the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(1)  Intensity of use. Any lot of record at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this section is derived having less area or width than herein required may be used only for a single-family dwelling, or any of the non-dwelling uses permitted in the district in which the lot is located. 
(2)  Front yard. When 30 percent or more of the lots on the same side of the street within the same block and within 200 feet are improved with buildings that have observed a greater or less depth of front yard than specified in table A in the ordinance from which this section is derived, then no portion of the new building shall project beyond a straight line drawn between the point closest to the street line of the building upon either side of the proposed building, or if there is a building upon only one side, then beyond a straight line projected from the front of the two nearest buildings, but this regulation shall not be interpreted to require a front yard of more than 50 feet in any residence or R-2(B-2?) 2nd. Business District. Where the street or road is curved, the setback line shall be parallel to the curve of the road and not a straight line. Double frontage lots must have the required front yard on both streets. A corner lot in the R-1 1st. and R-2 2nd. residence districts shall have a side yard on the side street of ten feet except that the buildable width of such lot shall not be reduced to less than 40 feet and no accessory building shall project beyond the front or side yard lines, along either street. 
(3)  Side yard. A side yard shall be provided on each side of a building in accordance with table A in the ordinance from which this section is derived, except that the buildable width of a lot of record having less width than herein required shall not be reduced to less than 40 feet, but in no case shall the side yard be reduced to less than four feet. For any non-dwelling use in the B-1, B-2 or I districts, a side yard is not required unless it abuts on any R-1 or R-2 residence district in which case there shall be a side yard of not less than ten feet. Garages detached or attached to the main use building in an R-1 1st. or R-2 2nd. residence district entering on the side street of a corner lot shall maintain a side yard of 20 feet in front of the garage. 
(4)  Rear yard. In the R-1 1st. and the R-2 2nd. residence districts, the depth of the rear yard shall be at least 25 percent of the depth of the lot, but such depth need not be more than 25 feet. For any non-dwelling use in any business or industrial district a rear yard is not required unless the lot abuts on a residence district, in which case the rear yard shall not be less than 15 feet. 
(5)  Height of building. When a building in the industrial district is located on a lot that abuts on a residence district or a publicly owned area other than a street, the height of the building shall not exceed three stories or 45 feet, unless the required yards are increased one foot for each foot of additional height above 45 feet. 
(Ord. No. 225, § IX, 1-11-1961; Ord. No. 351, 8-10-1971)  
Sec. 58-21. - Vehicle parking space. 
No building shall be erected or altered or land used for any purpose which will result in customers, employees or residents parking autos or trucks on the road or street right-of-way unless space for parking such vehicles is provided and maintained on the lot or tract of land used at the rate of one space for each resident family, one space for every three employees, and one space for every 200 square feet of floor area in any business structure. 
(Ord. No. 225, § X, 1-11-1961)  
Sec. 58-22. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  The lawful use of a building existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived may be continued even though such use does not conform with the provisions herein. If no structural alterations are made, a non-conforming use of a building may be changed to another non-conforming use of the same or more restricted classification. The foregoing provisions shall also apply to nonconforming uses in districts as may be hereafter changed. Whenever a nonconforming use of a building has been changed to a more restricted use or to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less restricted use. 
(b)  No building which has been damaged by fire, explosion, act of God, or the public enemy, to the extent of more than 50 percent of its value shall be restored except in conformity with the regulations of this section. 
(c)  In the event that the nonconforming use of any building or premises is discontinued or its normal operation stopped for a period of one year, the use of the same shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(d)  A nonconforming use occupying only a portion of a building may be extended throughout the building if the same has been lawfully acquired and actually devoted to such use previous to the adoption of this section or to any affecting amendment thereof. 
(e)  The city council may, by special permit, after public hearing and subject to such protective restrictions that are deemed necessary, authorize the location, extension or structural alteration of any of the following buildings or uses, or an increase in their height, in any district from which they are prohibited or limited by this section: 
(1)  Any public building erected and used by any department of a municipal, county, state, or federal government. 
(2)  Hospitals, clinics, and institutions except institutions for criminals or those for persons who are mentally ill or have contagious diseases; provided, however, that such buildings may occupy not over 50 percent of the total area of the lot or tract and will not have any serious and depreciating effect upon the value of the surrounding property; and provided, further, that the buildings shall be set back from all yard lines heretofore established an additional distance of not less than one foot for every foot of building height, and that adequate off-street parking space will be provided. 
(3)  Cemetery or mausoleum. 
(4)  Landing field, or landing strip for aircraft. 
(5)  Greenhouses, provided that any such structure shall not be less than six feet from all property lines. 
(6)  Nurseries. 
(7)  Roadside stands, commercial amusement or recreational development for temporary or seasonal periods. 
(8)  Removal of gravel, topsoil, or similar materials. 
(9)  Riding stables. 
(10)  Parking lots on land not more than 300 feet from the boundary of any commercial or industrial district, under such conditions as will protect the character of surrounding property. 
(11)  Areas for the dumping or disposal of trash. 
(12)  Radio towers and radio broadcasting stations. 
(13)  Any use that is not a nuisance per se and which is generally similar to the uses permitted in the district in which such use is located by special permit. 
(Ord. No. 225, § XI, 1-11-1961; Ord. No. 383, 11-12-1974)  
Sec. 58-23. - Exceptions and variations of the use, height, and area regulations. 
The district regulations hereinafter set forth in this section qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the district regulations appearing elsewhere in this chapter. 
(1)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools, when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not exceeding 60 feet and churches may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each foot additional building height above the height limit otherwise provided in the district in which the building is located. 
(2)  Chimneys, cooling towers, elevators, bulkheads, fire towers, monuments, stacks, stage towers, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers, spires, church steeples, radio towers or necessary mechanical apparatus, may be erected to any safe height not in conflict with existing or hereafter adopted ordinances of the city. 
(3)  Accessory buildings may be built in a required rear yard, but such accessory buildings shall have the same minimum side yard as is required for the main building or the main use of the premises to which the accessory building is incidental. Any accessory building shall not be nearer than five feet to any rear lot line. Nor shall any accessory building occupy any more than 30 percent of the total area of the rear yard. 
(4)  No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main building has actually commenced and no accessory building shall be used for dwelling purposes other than by domestic servants employed on the premises. 
(5)  Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed except for accessory buildings in the rear yard and except for the ordinary projection of sills, belt course, cornices, and ornamental features projecting not to exceed 12 inches. 
(6)  Fences constructed of solid wood or stone may be erected to a height not exceeding six feet along the boundaries of a lot, except that no such fence shall be erected within 50 feet of a street intersection, nor shall such a fence be erected in a front yard. Wire fences and other fences in which the openings between the materials of which the fence is constructed represents more than 70 percent of the total fence area may be erected to a height of six feet, except that no fence or hedge that cannot be viewed through or over from a six-foot height above the traveled street shall be constructed or planted within 50 feet of a street intersection. 
(7)  For the purpose of side yard regulations, a two-family, group house or a multiple dwelling shall be considered as one building occupying one lot. 
(8)  Buildings that are to be used for storage purposes only may exceed the maximum number of stories permitted in the district in which they are located but such buildings shall not exceed the number of feet of building height permitted in such districts. 
(9)  Temporary buildings that are used in conjunction with construction work only may be permitted in any district during the period the work is under way, but such temporary buildings shall be removed upon the completion of the construction work as determined by the administrative officer. 
(10)  More than one industrial, commercial, multiple-dwelling or institutional building may be erected upon a single lot or tract, but the yards and open spaces required around the boundaries of the lot or tract shall not be encroached upon by any such buildings nor shall there be any change in the intensity of use regulations. 
(11)  Railroad rights-of-way. On all existing rights-of-way of railroad companies, regardless of the zoning district in which such right-of-way is located, railroad trackage and accessories to railroad movement may be constructed or maintained. 
(Ord. No. 225, § XII, 1-11-1961; Ord. No. 485, 11-9-1983)  
Sec. 58-24. - Board of adjustment. 
(a)  Establishment. 
(1)  The city council shall hereby act as the zoning board of adjustment to hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the zoning ordinance, to issue specific cases a variance from the terms of the zoning ordinance, and to hear and decide other matters authorized by this section. 
(2)  Each case before the zoning board of adjustment must be heard by at least 75 percent of the members. 
(3)  Meetings of the board are held at the call of the presiding officer and at other times as determined by the board. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. 
(4)  Meetings of the board shall be held separate from city council meetings. Agendas of the board shall be posted separate from city council agendas. 
(5)  The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings that indicate the vote of each member on each question or the fact that a member is absent or fails to vote. The board shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions. The minutes and records shall be filed immediately in the board's office and are public records. 
(b)  Authority of board. 
(1)  The zoning board of adjustment may: 
a.  Hear and decide an appeal that alleges error in an order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of the ordinance from which this section derives; 
b.  Hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of a zoning ordinance when the ordinance requires the board to do so; 
c.  Authorize in specific cases a variance from the terms of a zoning ordinance if the variance is not contrary to the public interest and, due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of the ordinance is observed and substantial justice is done; and 
d.  Hear and decide other matters authorized by this section. 
(2)  In exercising its authority under subsection (b)(1)a., the board may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the administrative official's order, requirement, decision, or determination from which an appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision, or determination, and for that purpose the board has the same authority as the administrative official. 
(3)  In exercising its authority under subsection (b)(1)b., the board may grant special exceptions: 
a.  To permit the extension of a district where the boundary line of a district divides a lot held in a single ownership at the time of the passage of this section. 
b.  To interpret the provisions of this section in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown upon the maps fixing the several districts accompanying and made a part of this section where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map aforesaid. 
c.  To permit the reconstruction of a non-conforming building which has been damaged by explosion, fire, act of God, or public enemy, to the extent of more than 50 percent of its fair market value, where the board finds some compelling public necessity requiring a continuance of the non-conforming use, and the primary purpose of continuing the non-conforming use is not to continue a monopoly. 
d.  To permit the erection and use of a building or the use of premises for railroads or for public utility purposes. 
(4)  The concurring vote of 75 percent of the members of the board is necessary to: 
a.  Reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of an administrative official; 
b.  Decide in favor of an applicant on a matter on which the board is required to pass under this zoning ordinance; 
c.  Authorize a variation from the terms of this zoning ordinance. 
(c)  Appeal to board. 
(1)  Except as provided under subsection (c)(5), any of the following may appeal to the zoning board of adjustment a decision made by an administrative official: 
a.  A person aggrieved by the decision; or 
b.  Any officer, department, board, or bureau of the municipality affected by the decision. 
(2)  The appellant must file with the board and the official from whom the appeal is taken a notice of appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. The appeal must be filed within a reasonable time as determined by the rules of the board. On receiving the notice, the official from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record of the action that is appealed. 
(3)  An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action that is appealed unless the official from whom the appeal is taken certifies in writing to the board facts supporting the official's opinion that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case, the proceeding may be stayed only by a restraining order granted by the board or a court of record on application, after notice to the official, if due cause is shown. 
(4)  The board shall set a reasonable time for the appeal hearing and shall give public notice of the hearing and due notice to the parties in interest. A party may appear at the appeal hearing in person or by agent or attorney. The board shall decide the appeal within reasonable time. 
(5)  A member of the city council serving on the board of adjustment may not bring an appeal under this section. 
(Ord. No. 225, § XIII, 1-11-1961; Ord. No. 1044, § 1(Exh. A), 9-24-2019)  
Sec. 58-25. - Occupancy permits. 
(a)  Subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, no change in the use or occupancy of land, nor any change of use or occupancy in an existing building, except solely for single-family dwelling purposes, shall be made, nor shall any new building be occupied for any purpose until a certificate has been issued by the administrative officer. Every certificate of occupancy shall state that the new occupancy complies with all provisions of this section. 
(b)  No permit for excavation for, or the erection or alteration of, any building shall be issued before the application has been made and approved for a certificate of occupancy and compliance and no building or premises shall be occupied until that certificate and permit is issued. The city council shall determine the fee that shall be charged for certificates and permits. 
(Ord. No. 225, § XIV, 1-11-1961)  
Sec. 58-26. - Plats. 
Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a plat in duplicate, or duplicate prints thereof, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size, shape and location of the building to be erected, the size, shape and location of any existing buildings, and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of this section. A record of applications and plats shall be kept in the office of the administrative officer. 
(Ord. No. 225, § XV, 1-11-1961)  
Sec. 58-27. - Boundaries of districts; rules where uncertainty may arise. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the map accompanying and made a part of this section, the following rules apply: 
(1)  The district boundaries are either streets or alleys unless otherwise shown, and where the districts designated on the map accompanying and made a part of this section are bounded approximately by street or alley lines, the street or alley shall be construed to be the boundary of the district. 
(2)  Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated, and where the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the district boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines, and where the districts designated on the map accompanying and made a part of this section are bounded approximately by lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the districts unless the boundaries are otherwise indicated on the map. 
(3)  In any unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the district map accompanying and made a part of this section shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map. 
(Ord. No. 225, § XVI, 1-11-1961)  
Sec. 58-28. - Enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the person designated by the mayor as the administrative officer to enforce this section. Appeal from the decision of the administrative officer may be made to the board of adjustment. 
(b)  Any person, company or corporation requesting any variance, exception or amendment to the zoning section shall assume all costs incurred by the city in processing said application or request, a minimum fee of $50.00 per request or application shall be charged by the city. Said applicant shall furnish all information required by the city in processing said application for said variance exception or amendment. 
(Ord. No. 225, § XVII, 1-11-1961: Ord. No. 364, § XVII, 11-21-1972)  
Sec. 58-29. - Changes and amendments. 
The regulations imposed and the districts created by this chapter may be amended from time to time, but no such amendments shall be made without a public hearing before the city council, or until the zoning commission has studied and reported upon the change. At least 15 days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a recognized paper of general circulation in the city. In case of written protest against any proposed amendment, signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 percent of the frontage proposed to be altered or by the owners of 20 percent of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of 20 percent of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered as to such regulations or district, and filed with the clerk of the city, or if the zoning commission recommends against it, such amendment shall not be passed except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all of the members of the council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 225, § XVIII, 1-11-1961)  
Sec. 58-30. - Interpretation, purpose and conflict. 
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare. it is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any ordinance, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued, and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this section, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises and likewise not in conflict with this section; nor is it intended by this section to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces or larger lot areas than are imposed or required by such ordinances, agreements, or covenants, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. No. 225, § XIX, 1-11-1961)  
Sec. 58-31. - Violation and penalty. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $100.00 for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, the administrative officer, in addition to other remedies, may institute any proper action or proceedings in the name of the city to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about said premises. 
(Ord. No. 225, § XX, 1-11-1961)  
Sec. 58-32. - Validity. 
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid. 
(Ord. No. 225, § XXI, 1-11-1961)  
Sec. 58-33. - Applications, plans and fees. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful to construct or alter any building or structure in the city, without having first secured a permit therefor. 
(b)  Application. Application for such permits shall be made to the clerk, and shall be accompanied by plans and specifications in duplicate showing the work to be done; such plans shall be verified by the oath of either the owner of the premises or by the architect or contractor in charge of the operations. 
(c)  Approval of plans. Such applications with plans shall be referred to the building inspector, who shall examine the same to determine whether the proposed construction or alteration will comply with the section provisions relative thereto. Upon approval one set of plans shall be returned to the applicant with a permit, and the other shall be retained by the building inspector. No permit shall be issued until after approval of the plans. 
(d)  Variations. It shall be unlawful to vary materially from the submitted plans and specifications unless such variations are submitted in an amended plan to the building inspector and approved by him. 
(e)  Enforcement of provisions. The building inspector shall make or cause to be made such inspections as are necessary to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, and to make any tests or examinations of materials or methods to be used for the purpose of seeing that they comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(f)  Fees. The fees for building permits shall be as follows: 
(1)  $2.50 for work costing less than $1,000.00. 
(2)  For work costing more than $1,000.00, the fee shall be increased by $0.50 for each $500.00 of cost or part thereof (which shall be in addition to the minimum fee of $2.50). 
(g)  Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than $1.00 nor more than $100.00 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 287, § 1, 9-13-1966)  
Secs. 58-34—58-54. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MH MOBILE HOME DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 58-55. - Purpose of district. 
The purpose of this district is to provide adequate space and restrictions for the placement of manufactured and modular homes in the city. The MH district is established to provide housing densities compatible with existing and proposed neighborhoods by providing alternate housing types both in construction and economy within an approved mobile home park or subdivision. No mobile or modular home shall be allowed to be placed on any parcel or lot except on lots located within an approved mobile home park or subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 673, § 1.1001, 5-14-1999)  
Sec. 58-56. - Use regulations. 
In the MH Mobile Home District, no building, structure, land or premises will be used and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, except for one or more of the following uses and regulated by the following: permitted uses, manufactured home as a fixed dwelling, manufactured home park and modular homes. 
(Ord. No. 673, § 1.1002, 5-14-1999)  
Sec. 58-57. - Area and density regulations.  
(b)  The minimum front yard setback shall be ten feet from the nearest corner of the mobile home to the front line of the mobile home space. 
(c)  No mobile home shall be closer than ten feet to any property line nor closer than 25 feet to the property line adjoining a public street. 
(d)  For other structures on each space, the minimum front yard setback shall be at least ten feet. 
(e)  The minimum distance between mobile homes at any point shall be 20 feet. 
(a)  Maximum density: There will be a maximum of 10 units per acre 
(f)  The height limit for any structure intended for occupancy should be 35 feet. 
(g)  The average height of the frame above the ground elevation, measured at 90 degrees to the frame, shall not exceed three feet. 
(h)  Mobile homes must be skirted with nonflammable material before city utilities are connected. 
(Ord. No. 673, § 1.1003, 5-14-1999)  
Sec. 58-58. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
Accessory buildings including garages, tool sheds and greenhouses shall be permitted behind the front setback line. Accessory buildings shall not be used for commercial purposes. 
(Ord. No. 673, § 1.1004, 5-14-1999)  
Sec. 58-59. - Customary home occupations. 
Customary home occupations are not allowed in the MH Mobile Home District. 
(Ord. No. 673, § 1.1005, 5-14-1999)  
Sec. 58-60. - Off-street loading and parking regulations. 
A minimum of one off street parking space must be provided per unit. 
(Ord. No. 673, § 1.1006, 5-14-1999)  
Sec. 58-61. - Screening and fencing regulations. 
See section 58-23(6). 
(Ord. No. 673, § 1.1007, 5-14-1999)  
Sec. 58-62. - Specific use permit. 
Uses other than those unconditionally permitted to occur within the MH Mobile Home District may be permitted by means of a specific use permit authorized by the city. 
(Ord. No. 673, § 1.1008, 5-14-1999)  
Sec. 58-63. - Other requirements. 
Only one residential structure may be placed upon an approved lot or mobile home space. 
(Ord. No. 673, § 1.1009, 5-14-1999) 
