CITY OF TEXAS CITY, TEXAS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2019 S-9 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through
Ordinance 19-31, passed 11-18-2019
Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
OFFICIALS of the
CITY OF TEXAS CITY, TEXAS
(2019)
________
Matthew T. Doyle
Mayor
________
Phil Roberts, Commissioner At Large, Mayor Pro-Tem
Bruce Clawson, Commissioner At Large
Earl Alexander, Commissioner District 1
Abel Garza, Jr., Commissioner District 2
Dorthea Jones, Commissioner District 3
Jami Clark, Commissioner District 4
City Commission
________
Nicholas Finan
City Secretary
________
Rhomari Leigh
Justin Herter
Administrative Assistants
________
Russell F. Plackemeier
City Attorney
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 14-07
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF TEXAS CITY,
TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN;
PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF
AMENDING SUCH CODE; PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE; PROVIDING
FOR THE READING OF THIS ORDINANCE ON THREE (3) SEPARATE DAYS; AND PROVIDING
THAT THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE FROM AND AFTER ITS PASSAGE AND
ADOPTION AND PUBLICATION IN THE OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER OF THE CITY.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF TEXAS
CITY, TEXAS:
   SECTION 1:   That the Code entitled “Code of Ordinances, City of Texas City,
Texas,” published by American Legal Publishing Corporation, consisting of
Chapters 1 through 160, each inclusive, is adopted:
   SECTION 2:   That all ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted
on or before December 18, 2013, and not included in the Code or recognized and
continued in force by reference therein are repealed.
   SECTION 3:   That the repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be
construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a
subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.
   SECTION 4:   That additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the
form as to indicate the intention of the City Commission to make the same a
part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that
reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments.
   SECTION 5:   That Ordinances adopted after December 18, 2013, that amend or
refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as
if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.
   SECTION 6:   That this Ordinance shall become effective from and after its
passage and adoption and publication in the official newspaper of the City of
Texas City, Texas, after its third and final reading.
PASSED ON FIRST READING this 7th day of May, 2014.
_____________________________
Matthew T. Doyle, Mayor
City of Texas City, Texas
ATTEST:                  APPROVED AS TO FORM:
_____________________            _____________________________ 
Nicholas J. Finan               Ronald F. Plackemeier
City Secretary                  City Attorney
PASSED ON SECOND READING this 21st day of May, 2014.
_____________________________
Matthew T. Doyle, Mayor
City of Texas City, Texas
ATTEST:                  APPROVED AS TO FORM:
_____________________            _____________________________ 
Nicholas J. Finan               Ronald F. Plackemeier
City Secretary                  City Attorney
PASSED AND FINALLY ADOPTED this 4th day of June, 2014.
_____________________________
Matthew T. Doyle, Mayor
City of Texas City, Texas
ATTEST:                  APPROVED AS TO FORM:
_____________________            _____________________________ 
Nicholas J. Finan               Ronald F. Plackemeier
City Secretary                  City Attorney
CITY CHARTER
Editor’s note:
   Printed herein is the home rule charter of the city as originally adopted by
the voters on 2-16-1946. Subsequent to amendments adopted by voters on 11-7-
1995, the city republished the charter in a separate pamphlet, incorporating
all amendments to date, from which this part is derived. Amendments to the
charter, dating from its adoption in 1946, are reflected in the charter
comparative tables, supplied by the city, immediately following this charter.
     Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic
purposes, a uniform system of headings and catchlines has been used. Additions
made for clarity are indicated by brackets.
Article I.  Incorporation, Powers and Territory
   
Sec. 1.   Corporate name and status.
   
Sec. 2.   Enumerated powers not exclusive.
   
Sec. 3.   Boundaries of city.
Article II.  Governing Body
   
Sec. 1.   The city commission; term of office.
   
Sec. 2.   Qualifications for commission.
   
Sec. 3.   Election of commission.
   
Sec. 4.   Vacancies.
   
Sec. 5.   Salaries of mayor and commissioners.
Article III.  Procedures of the Commission; Legislation
   
Sec. 1.   Meetings of the commission.
   
Sec. 2.   Mayor and mayor pro tem.
   
Sec. 3.   City secretary.
   
Sec. 4.   Commission rules.
   
Sec. 5.   Quorum.
   
Sec. 6.   Introduction and passage of ordinances and resolutions.
   
Sec. 7.   When ordinances and resolutions shall take effect.
   
Sec. 8.   Authentication and publication of ordinances and resolutions.
Article IV.  Nominations and Elections
   
Sec. 1.   Municipal elections.
   
Sec. 2.   Commission rules.
   
Sec. 3.   Nominations.
   
Sec. 4.   Ballots.
   
Sec. 5.   Election of commission by plurality.
   
Sec. 6.   Laws governing city elections.
   
Sec. 7.   Canvassing elections.
Article V.  Recall
   
Sec. 1.   General provisions.
   
Sec. 2.   Recall election ordered.
   
Sec. 3.   Ballots in recall elections.
   
Sec. 4.   Result of recall election.
   
Sec. 5.   Limitations on recall petitions.
Article VI.  Initiative
   
Sec. 1.   Power to initiate ordinances.
   
Sec. 2.   Consideration of initiated ordinance by commission.
   
Sec. 3.   Submission of initiated ordinances to voters.
   
Sec. 4.   Election on initiated ordinance.
   
Sec. 5.   Initiated ordinance passed by the commission in amended form.
   
Sec. 6.   Initiated repealing ordinances.
Article VII.  Referendum
   
Sec. 1.   Power of referendum.
   
Sec. 2.   Referendum petition.
   
Sec. 3.   Consideration of referred ordinance by commission–Referendum
election.
   
Sec. 4.   Form of ballot for initiated and referred ordinances.
   
Sec. 5.   Preliminary action under referred ordinances.
   
Sec. 6.   Referendum on ordinances.
   
Sec. 7.   Publicity for ordinances and amendments.
   
Sec. 8.   Conflict of ordinances adopted and approved.
Article VIII.  Initiative, Referendum and Recall Petitions
   
Sec. 1.   Signatures to petitions.
   
Sec. 2.   Filing examination and certification of petitions.
   
Sec. 3.   Amendment of petitions.
Article IX.  Legal Department
   
Sec. 1.   City attorney; qualifications.
Article X.  Municipal Court
   
Sec. 1.   Creation and jurisdiction.
   
Sec. 2.   Appointment of municipal judge.
   
Sec. 3.   Duties of municipal judge.
   
Sec. 4.   Absence of municipal judge.
   
Sec. 5.   Clerk of court.
   
Sec. 6.   Divisions of court.
   
Sec. 7.   Administration.
Article XI.  Finance Administration
   
Sec. 1.   Director of finance.
   
Sec. 2.   Fiscal year.
   
Sec. 3.   City budget.
   
Sec. 4.   Filing of budget.
   
Sec. 5.   Budget hearing.
   
Sec. 6.   Transfer of appropriations.
   
Sec. 7.   Money to be drawn from treasury in accordance with appropriation.
   
Sec. 8.   Contracts and purchases.
   
Sec. 9.   Custody of city moneys.
   
Sec. 10.   Issuance of bonds.
   
Sec. 11.   Loans in anticipation of bond sales.
   
Sec. 12.   Temporary borrowing.
   
Sec. 13.   Annual audit.
Article XII.  Police Department
   
Sec. 1.   Chief of police, director of police department.
   
Sec. 2.   Special police.
   
Sec. 3.   City jail.
Article XIII.  Fire Department
   
Sec. 1.   Chief of fire department, director of such department.
Article XIV.  City Planning Board
   
Sec. 1.   Establishment, membership, duties, terms.
   
Sec. 2.   City Zoning Commission establishment, membership, duties, and terms
Article XV.  Park Commission
   
Sec. 1.   Establishment, membership, duties, terms.
Article XVI.  Taxation
   
Sec. 1.   Power to tax.
   
Sec. 2.   Sheriff’s sale.
Article XVII.  Public Utilities and Franchises
   
Sec. 1.   Powers of the city.
   
Sec. 2.   Franchises; powers of commission.
   
Sec. 3.   Term of franchise.
   
Sec. 4.   Right of regulation.
   
Sec. 5.   Consent of property owners.
   
Sec. 6.   Revocable permits.
   
Sec. 7.   Extensions.
   
Sec. 8.   Other conditions.
   
Sec. 9.   Franchise records.
   
Sec. 10.   Accounts of municipally owned utilities.
   
Sec. 11.   Public utilities.
   
Sec. 12.   Street rental.
Article XVIII.  Miscellaneous Provisions
   
Sec. 1.   Publicity of records.
   
Sec. 2.   Personal interest.
   
Sec. 3.   Compensation and tenure of officers and employees.
   
Sec. 4.   Official bonds.
   
Sec. 5.   Oath of office.
   
Sec. 6.   Special provision for garbage disposal.
   
Sec. 7.   Limitation of liability for damages.
   
Sec. 8.   Power of condemnation and special assessment.
   
Sec. 9.   Provision relating to assignment, execution and garnishment.
   
Sec. 10.   Power of the city to enforce ordinances.
   
Sec. 11.   Meaning of words and designations.
   
Sec. 12.   Saving clause.
   
Sec. 13.   Ordinances.
   
Sec. 14.   Power to construct and own.
   
Sec. 15.   Amending the Charter.
   
Sec. 16.   Meetings of boards, committees and commissions.
   
Sec. 17.   Conflicts of interest.
   
Sec. 18.   Rules of procedure.
   
Sec. 19.   Authority to rearrange and renumber.
ARTICLE I.  INCORPORATION, POWERS AND TERRITORY
Sec. 1.  Corporate name and status.
   The inhabitants of the City of Texas City, in Galveston County, Texas,
residing within its territorial limits, as these limits are now established or
are hereafter established in the manner provided by law, shall continue to be
and are hereby constituted a body-politic and corporate by the name of the City
of Texas City, and under that name shall have perpetual succession; may use a
corporate seal; may sue and be sued; may acquire property within or without its
boundaries for any municipal purpose, in fee simple or lesser interest or
estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease, or condemnation and may sell, lease,
hold, manage, and control such property as its interest may require; may
cooperate with the government of the United States or any agency of the
government of the United States or the government of the State of Texas, or any
political subdivision or agency of the State of Texas, to accomplish any lawful
purpose for the advancement of the interest, welfare, health, morals, comfort,
safety, and convenience of the city and its inhabitants; and may pass such
ordinances as may be expedient for maintaining and promoting the peace and
government and welfare of the city and for the performance of the functions
thereof; and, except as prohibited by the Constitution and laws of the State of
Texas or restricted by the Charter, the city shall have and may exercise all
municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of every nature
whatsoever.
Sec. 2.  Enumerated powers not exclusive.
   The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be held or
deemed to be exclusive, but, in addition to the powers enumerated herein or
implied hereby, or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, it is intended
that the City of Texas City shall have, and may exercise, all powers of local
self-government, and all powers under the Constitution and laws of the State of
Texas which would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate. All
powers of the city, whether expressed or implied, shall be exercised in the
manner prescribed by this Charter, or if not prescribed therein, then in the
manner provided by ordinance or resolution of the commission.
Sec. 3.  Boundaries of city.
   The boundaries of the city shall be the same as have been heretofore
established and now exist and those boundaries established and changed
hereafter in all annexation and disannexation proceedings of the city, filed in
the office of the city secretary.
   The city commission may by ordinance annex territory adjacent to the city,
with or without the consent of the owners or inhabitants of the annexed
territory, and subject to the procedural rules prescribed by the laws of the
State of Texas.
   The city commission may by ordinance annex territory adjacent to the city,
subject to the procedural rules prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas.
(Ord. 19-31, passed 11-18-2019)
ARTICLE II.  GOVERNING BODY
Sec. 1.  The city commission; term of office.
   The governing body of the City of Texas City shall be a commission composed
of the mayor and six commissioners to be known as the Commission of the City of
Texas City. The members of the city commission shall be elected from the City
of Texas City for two-year terms in a manner prescribed elsewhere in this
Charter. As hereinafter used in this Charter the word commission shall be
construed to mean a mayor and six commissioners. All rules and regulations
governing the commission as to terms of office, qualifications, nomination and
election, vacancies, and recall elections shall also apply to the mayor. Except
as otherwise provided in this Charter or by applicable law the city commission
shall be authorized to exercise, or cause to be exercised, all powers conferred
upon the city by this Charter or by applicable law.
Sec. 2.  Qualifications for commission.
   The mayor and each commissioner shall, in addition to the other
qualifications prescribed by law:
   (1)   Be at least 21 years of age and a qualified resident voter in the
city;
   (2)   If a candidate for a district commissioner position, be a resident of
the district from which election is sought for at least twelve (12) months
prior to the date of the election and continue to reside in said district
during term of office;
   (3)   If a candidate for mayor or an at-large commissioner position, be a
resident of the city for at least twelve (12) months prior to the date of the
election and continue to reside in the city during term of office.
   A member of the commission ceasing to possess any of the qualifications
specified in this section or convicted of a felony while in office, shall
immediately forfeit his/her office.
   If a member of the commission is absent for three (3) consecutive, regular
meetings without an explanation acceptable to a majority of the commission, the
office of that commissioner shall be declared vacant at the next regular
meeting.
Sec. 3.  Election of commission.
   The mayor an[d] two (2) commissioners, called “at-large commissioners,”
shall be elected by a vote from the qualified voters from the entire city, and
each of the four commissioners called “district commissioners” shall be elected
by a vote from the qualified voters within their respective districts. Any
candidate desiring to run for one of these offices shall so indicate in a
written notice timely filed with the city secretary.
   The city shall be divided into four (4) numbered districts. The city
commission shall establish the boundaries of each of the districts by
ordinance. Whenever the commission shall annex additional land into the city,
the commission shall thereafter provide for the inclusion of the annexed land
within one (1) or more districts. Not less than once in every ten (10) years,
within two (2) years following the date of each decennial federal census, the
city commission shall determine the boundaries of each of the districts by
ordinance adopted according to law. From time to time, the commission may by
ordinance amend the boundaries of the districts when, in the commission’s sole
determination, such amendment is necessary so that all districts are drawn and
configured to provide equal and fair representation to all citizens of the
city.
   In the election of the commissioners for at-large positions, the two
candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected and
the candidate in the election of each district commissioner position receiving
the highest number of votes in such district shall be declared elected. In the
election of the mayor, the candidate receiving the highest number of votes
shall be declared elected.
   There shall be no runoff elections, either for the office of commissioner or
for the office of the mayor.
   In the event the election of a commissioner or mayor cannot be determined
because of a tie vote, on the first day following the official canvass of the
election, the mayor shall call a second election to be held not less than
twenty days nor more than thirty days after such order of election to determine
the winner between the candidates receiving tie votes. At the second election,
the candidate receiving the highest number of qualified votes shall be declared
elected.
Sec. 4.  Vacancies.
   A vacancy on the commission shall be filled by a majority vote of the
remaining members of the commission at the earliest practicable date after the
vacancy occurs and the person appointed shall serve until the next regular
commission election. If the vacancy is in the office of mayor, the commission
shall appoint a mayor from its own members if less than one year remains in the
term of the mayor; however, if one year or more remains in the term of the
mayor, the remaining members of the commission may appoint a mayor from its own
members or call a special election to be held on an authorized uniform election
date to fill such vacancy. The commission shall not appoint more than one
commissioner in any twelve month period, and in case a vacancy has been filled
by the commission within twelve months prior to the subsequent vacancy, or if
more than one vacancy occurs at the same time or before a prior vacancy has
been filled, the commission shall order an election to be held on the next
uniform election date provided by the Texas Election Code following the date
the last vacancy occurred for the purpose of electing the successor or
successors to the offices vacated. However, should a vacancy occur in the
office of mayor and that office is filled as above provided, the vacancy in the
office of commissioner thereby created shall not be counted when considering
whether two (2) or more vacancies should be filled by election.
Sec. 5.  Salaries of mayor and commissioners.
   The salary of the mayor shall be fixed by the commission not to exceed one
thousand, five hundred dollars per month. The salary of each commissioner shall
be fixed by the commission not to exceed five hundred dollars per month.
(Ord. 19-31, passed 11-18-2019)
ARTICLE III.  PROCEDURES OF THE COMMISSION; LEGISLATION
Sec. 1.  Meetings of the commission.
   At the first regular meeting of the commission following a regular municipal
election, the commission shall meet at the usual place for holding its meetings
and the newly elected members shall assume the duties of office without party
or partisan mark or designation. Thereafter the commission shall meet at such
times as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution, but not less frequently
than once each month. Special meetings shall be called by the city secretary
upon request of the mayor or a majority of the commission. Any such notice
shall state the subject or subjects to be considered at the special meeting.
The commission shall, by ordinance, determine its own rules and order of
business. A quorum of the commission, which shall consist of four (4) members,
shall be necessary for the transaction of business. Minutes shall be taken and
recorded by the city secretary or deputy, and such minutes shall constitute a
public record. An abstention from voting shall constitute and be recorded as a
“no” vote unless the commissioner has filed an affidavit declaring a conflict
of interest under state law in which case it shall be recorded as an
“abstention.” All meetings of the commission and of committees thereof shall be
open to the public, except as allowed by state law, and the rules of the
commission shall provide that the citizens of the city shall have a reasonable
opportunity to be heard at any such meetings in regard to any matter considered
thereat. Unless otherwise established by the commission all meetings shall be
conducted pursuant to Robert’s Rule of Order.
Sec. 2.  Mayor and mayor pro tem.
   At the first regular meeting after every election, held for the purpose of
electing new city commissioners, the members of the city commission shall elect
one of their members to serve as mayor pro tem, and he/she shall perform all
the duties of the mayor in his/her absence or disability. The mayor shall
preside at meetings of the commission and shall exercise such other powers and
perform such other duties as are or may be conferred and imposed upon him/her
by this Charter and the ordinances of the city.  The mayor shall serve as the
chief executive officer of the city. He/she shall be recognized as the head of
the city government for all ceremonial purposes, by the courts for serving
civil processes, and by the governor for purposes of military law. In the time
of public danger or emergency, the mayor shall take command of the police,
maintain order and enforce the law. If a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor,
or in the case of his absence or disability, the mayor pro tem shall act as
mayor until a successor is elected or appointed and has qualified. (Ord. 19-31,
passed 11-18-2019)
Sec. 3.  City secretary.
   The chief executive officer shall appoint a city secretary who shall hold
his/her office at the pleasure of and report to the chief executive officer or
his/her designee. (Ord. 19-31, passed 11-18-2019)
Sec. 4.  Commission rules.
   The commission shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its
members and, in such cases, shall have the power to subpoena witnesses and
compel the production of all pertinent books, records, and papers; but the
decision of the commission in any such case shall be subject to review by the
courts. The commission shall determine its own rules and order of business and
keep a journal of its proceedings. It shall have power to compel the attendance
of absent members, may punish its members for disorderly behavior and, by vote
of not less than a majority of all its members, may expel a member for
disorderly conduct or the violation of its rules; but no member shall be
expelled unless notified of the charge against the member and given an
opportunity to be heard in his/her own defense.
Sec. 5.  Quorum.
   A majority of all the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum to
do business, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time and compel the
attendance of absent members in such manner and under such penalties as may be
prescribed by ordinance. The affirmative vote of a majority of all members of
the commission shall be necessary to adopt any ordinance, resolution, or order;
except that a vote to adjourn, or an action regarding the attendance of absent
members, may be adopted by a majority of the members present. No member may be
excused from voting except on matters involving the consideration of his/her
own official conduct or when his/her financial interests are involved.
Sec. 6.  Introduction and passage of ordinances and resolutions.
   Ordinances and resolutions shall be introduced in the commission only in
written or printed form. All ordinances, except ordinances making
appropriations and ordinances codifying or rearranging existing ordinances or
enacting a code of ordinances, shall be clearly expressed in the title.
Ordinances making appropriations shall be confined to the subject of
appropriations. No ordinance shall be passed until it has been read on three
separate days, unless the requirements for reading it on three separate days be
dispensed with by a vote of not less than a majority of all members of the
commission. The final reading of each ordinance shall be in full unless written
or printed copy thereof shall have been furnished to each member of the
commission prior to such reading. The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the
passage of all ordinances and resolutions and entered upon the journal of the
proceedings of the commission. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be
“Be it ordained by the City Commission of the City of Texas City.”
Sec. 7.  When ordinances and resolutions shall take effect.
   Ordinances making the annual tax levy, appropriation ordinances, ordinances
and resolutions pertaining to local improvements and assessments, ordinances
and resolutions providing for or directing any investigation of city affairs,
resolutions requesting information from administrative officers or directing
administrative action, and emergency measures shall take effect at the time
indicated therein. All ordinances, except those imposing any penalty, fine or
forfeiture, and all resolutions shall take effect immediately upon final
passage unless otherwise specifically provided therein. Ordinances adopted by a
vote of the electors shall take effect at the time indicated therein, or if no
time be specified, then ten days after their adoption. No measure making or
amending a grant, renewal or extension of a franchise or other special
privilege shall ever be passed until it has been read on three separate days.
Sec. 8.  Authentication and publication of ordinances and resolutions.
   Upon its final passage, each ordinance or resolution shall be authenticated
by the signatures of the mayor and of the city secretary and shall be
systematically recorded in a manner approved by the commission. Any ordinance
may also be authenticated by the signatures of the city secretary and three
members of the commission. The caption of every ordinance imposing any penalty,
fine, or forfeiture shall, after passage thereof, be published in one issue of
the official paper; and proof of such publication shall be made by the printer
or publisher of such paper, making affidavit before some officer authorized by
law to administer oaths, and filed with the person performing the duties of
city secretary and said affidavit shall be prima facie evidence of such
publication and promulgation of such ordinance in courts of the state; and such
ordinance so published shall take effect, and be in force, from and after ten
days after publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances
not required to be published shall take effect, and be in force, from and after
the passage, unless otherwise provided.
   The commission shall, as soon as practicable after the commencement of each
fiscal or municipal year, enter into a contract with a public newspaper of the
city as the official paper thereof, and to continue as such until another is
selected, and shall cause to be published therein all ordinances, notices, and
other matters required by this Charter or by the ordinances of the city to be
published. (Ord. 19-31, passed 11-18-2019)
ARTICLE IV.  NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
Sec. 1.  Municipal elections.
   The regular election for the choice of members of the commission shall be
held every even year on the first Saturday in May. The commission may by
resolution order a special election, fix the time for holding the same, and
provide all means for holding such special election in accordance with state
law.
Sec. 2.  Commission rules.
   The commission shall make all necessary rules and regulations, not
inconsistent with this Charter or with the election laws of the State of Texas,
for the conduct of elections, for the prevention of fraud in elections, and for
the recount of the ballots in case of doubt or fraud.
Sec. 3.  Nominations.
   Any qualified voter under
Article II, Section 2 of the city desiring to have his/her name placed upon the
official ballot for any election may do so by filing with the city secretary a
written request for that purpose, signed by himself/herself, at least thirty
days prior to the date of said election; provided however, all such persons
shall pay to the city secretary a filing fee of twenty-five dollars at the time
of filing his/her request. (Ord. 19-31, passed 11-18-2019)
Sec. 4.  Ballots.
   The full names of candidates nominated for the commission and for mayor in
accordance with the provisions of this Charter, except such as may have
withdrawn, died, or become ineligible, shall be printed on the official ballot
in the order determined by the drawing of lots by the candidates or their
appointed representatives.
Sec. 5.  Election of commission by plurality.
   At any regular or special municipal election the candidates for the office
of mayor and commissioner, to the number to be elected, who shall have received
the greatest number of qualified votes cast at any such election shall be
declared elected.
Sec. 6.  Laws governing city elections.
   All city elections shall be governed, except as otherwise provided by the
Charter, by the laws of the State of Texas governing general and municipal
elections, so far as same may be applicable thereto; and in event there shall
be any failure of the general laws or this Charter to provide for some feature
of the city elections, then the city commission shall have the power to provide
for such deficiency, and no informalities in conducting a city election shall
invalidate the same, if it be conducted fairly and in substantial compliance
with the general laws, where applicable, and the Charter and ordinances of the
city.
Sec. 7.  Canvassing elections.
   The election judges and other necessary election officials for conducting
all such elections shall be appointed by the commission. The election judges
shall conduct the elections, open the ballot boxes, take therefrom and count
the ballots, whether for candidates or questions, and enter the result on the
tally sheet as provided by the general election laws of Texas, or as may be
provided by ordinance. They shall certify to the count so made, seal the tally
sheet up with their certificate and return it at once to the city secretary.
Within three days after an election, the commission shall meet, open the
returns, canvass and officially declare the result of the election as to
candidates and questions, and issue certificates of election to candidates
elected as hereinbefore provided.
ARTICLE V.  RECALL
Sec. 1.  General provisions.
   Any member of the commission may be removed from office by recall. Any voter
of the city may make and file with the city secretary an affidavit containing
the name of any member of the commission whose removal is sought and a
statement of the grounds for removal. The city secretary shall thereupon
deliver to the voter making such affidavit, copies of petition blanks demanding
such removal, printed forms of which the city secretary shall keep on hand.
Such blanks shall be issued by the secretary with the city secretary’s
signature and official seal thereto attached; they shall be dated and addressed
to the commission and shall indicate the name of the person to whom issued, the
number of blanks so issued, and the name of the member whose removal is sought.
A copy of the petition shall be entered in the record book to be kept for the
purpose in the office of the secretary. If the Mayor or one of the at-large
commissioners’ removal is sought, the recall petition to be effective must be
returned and filed with the secretary within thirty days after the filing of
the affidavit, and it must bear the signatures of voters of the city to the
number of at least fifty percent of the number of voters who cast their votes
at the last preceding regular municipal election; provided, however, that the
petition shall not be effective unless it bears the signatures of at least one
hundred voters of the city.
   If the removal of a district commissioner is sought the recall petition to
be effective must be returned and filed with the city secretary within thirty
days after the filing of the affidavit and bear the signatures of voters of
said district in a number equal to at least fifty percent of the number of
voters who voted in the district at the last preceding regular municipal
election at which said district commissioner was elected; provided, however,
the petition shall not be effective unless it bears the signatures of at least
one hundred voters of the said district.
Sec. 2.  Recall election ordered.
   If a recall petition, or amended petition as defined in
Article VIII, Section 3, shall be certified by the city secretary to be
sufficient the city secretary shall at once submit it to the commission with
the city secretary’s certificate to that effect and notify the member whose
removal is sought of such action. If the member of the commission whose removal
is sought does not resign within five days after such notice, the commission
shall thereupon fix a day for holding a recall election as provided in state
law. Any such election shall be held not less than forty-five nor more than
sixty days after the petition has been presented to the commission, and at the
same time as any other special or general election held within such period; but
if no such election is to be held within such period, the commission shall call
a special election to be held within the time aforesaid.
   In case of a recall election for a district commissioner, only qualified
voters residing in the subject commissioner’s district shall be eligible to
vote in the recall election. (Ord. 19-31, passed 11-18-2019)
Sec. 3.  Ballots in recall elections.
   Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following
requirements: For the member of the commission whose removal is sought, the
question to be submitted shall be: “SHALL (name of person) BE REMOVED FROM THE
COMMISSION BY RECALL?” With respect to the mayor if the mayor’s removal is
sought, the question shall be: “Shall (name of person) be removed as mayor by
recall?” Immediately below such question there shall be printed on the ballots
the two following propositions, one above the other, in the order here
indicated:
   “Against the recall of (name of person)”
   “For the recall of (name of person)”
Sec. 4.  Result of recall election.
   If a majority of the votes cast on the question of recalling a member of the
commission shall be against the member’s recall the member shall continue in
office for the remainder of the member’s unexpired term, but subject to recall
as before. If a majority of such votes be for the recall of the member
indicated on the ballots the member shall, regardless of any defect in the
recall petition, be deemed removed from office, and the member’s place shall be
filled in the manner prescribed in
Article II, Section 4.
Sec. 5.  Limitations on recall petitions.
   No recall petitions shall be filed against a member of the commission within
three months after the member takes office, nor, in respect to a member
subjected to a recall election and not removed thereby, until at least six
months after such election.
ARTICLE VI.  INITIATIVE
Sec. 1.  Power to initiate ordinances.
   The voters shall have power to propose any ordinances, except an
appropriation ordinance or an ordinance making a tax levy, and to adopt or
reject the same at any polls, such power being known as the initiative. Any
initiated ordinance may be submitted to the commission by petition signed by
voters of the city equal in number to at least ten percent of those who voted
at the last regular municipal election, provided, however, that the petition
must bear the signatures of at least one hundred voters of the city. All
petition papers circulated with respect to an initiated resolution or ordinance
shall be uniform in character and shall contain the proposed resolution or
ordinance in full.
Sec. 2.  Consideration of initiated ordinance by commission.
   If an initiated petition, or amended petition as defined in
Article VIII, Section 3, be found sufficient by the city secretary, the city
secretary shall immediately so certify and promptly submit the ordinance
therein set forth to the commission, which shall at once read the proposed
ordinance and refer it to an appropriate committee, which may be a committee of
the whole. Provisions shall be made for a public hearing upon the proposed
ordinance before the committee to which it is referred and notice of such
hearing shall be published in the official newspaper one time at least five
days before the date fixed for the hearing. Thereafter the committee shall
report the ordinance to the commission, with its recommendations thereon, not
later than sixty days after the date on which such ordinance was submitted to
the commission by the city secretary. Upon receiving the ordinance from the
committee, the commission shall proceed at once to consider it and to take
final action thereon within thirty days from the date of such committee report.
Sec. 3.  Submission of initiated ordinances to voters.
   If the commission fails to pass an ordinance proposed by the initiative
petition, or pass it in a form different from that set forth in the petition
therefor, the committee of the petitioners hereinafter provided for may, by an
additional petition signed by voters, in no case less than fifty in number and
equal to at least five percent of the number who voted at the last regular
municipal election, who did not sign the petition by which the ordinance was
originally proposed to the commission, require that it be submitted to a vote
of the voters either in its original form or with any change or amendment which
was presented in writing during the consideration thereof by the commission or
its committee. If the committee of petitioners require the submission of a
proposed ordinance to a vote of the voters they shall certify that fact to the
city secretary and file in the city secretary’s office a certified copy of the
measure, in the form in which it is to be submitted, together with the
additional petition as provided in this section, within ten days after final
action on such ordinance by the commission.
Sec. 4.  Election on initiated ordinance.
   Upon receipt of the certified copy of a proposed ordinance and the
additional petition presented in accordance with the foregoing section from the
committee of the petitioners, the city secretary shall, if the city secretary
finds the additional petition sufficient, certify that fact to the commission
at its next regular meeting. When an initiative petition has been finally
determined sufficient, the city commission shall promptly consider the proposed
initiative ordinance in the manner prescribed for enacting ordinances. The city
commission shall either adopt the ordinance proposed within thirty (30) days
thereafter, or it shall submit such proposed ordinance to the voters at the
next election date authorized under state law. If when submitted to the voters,
a majority of those voting on a proposed ordinance shall vote in favor thereof,
it shall thereupon be an ordinance of the municipality.
Sec. 5.  Initiated ordinance passed by the commission in amended form.
   When an ordinance proposed by initiative petition is passed by the
commission in a changed or amended form, and the committee of the petitioners
require that such proposed ordinance be submitted to a vote of the voters as
provided in
Article VI, Section 3, hereof, the ordinance as passed by the commission shall
not take effect until after such vote and, if the proposed ordinance so
submitted be approved by a majority of the voters voting thereon, the ordinance
as passed by the commission shall be deemed repealed.
Sec. 6.  Initiated repealing ordinances.
   Proposed ordinances for repealing any existing ordinance or ordinances, in
whole or in part, may be submitted to the commission as provided in the
preceding sections for initiating ordinances. Initiated ordinances adopted by
the voters shall be published, and may be amended or repealed by the
commission, as in the case of other ordinances, but in no case shall they be
repealed until twelve (12) months have expired after the adoption of the
ordinance.
ARTICLE VII.  REFERENDUM
Sec. 1.  Power of referendum.
   The voters shall have power to approve or reject at the polls any ordinance
passed by the commission, or submitted by the commission to a vote of the
voters, except an appropriation ordinance or an ordinance making the annual tax
levy, such power being known as the referendum. Ordinances submitted to the
commission by initiative petition and passed by the commission without change,
or passed in an amended form and not required by the committee of the
petitioners to be submitted to a vote of the voters, shall be subject to the
referendum in the same manner as other ordinances.
Sec. 2.  Referendum petition.
   After the final passage by the commission of any ordinance which is subject
to referendum, a petition signed by the voters of the city equal in number to
at least twenty percent of those who voted at the last preceding regular
municipal election, in no case less than one hundred fifty voters, may be filed
with the city secretary requesting that any such ordinance, or any specified
part thereof, be either repealed or submitted to a vote of the voters.
Sec. 3.  Consideration of referred ordinance by commission–Referendum election.
   If a referendum petition or amended petition as defined in
Article VIII, Section 3, be found sufficient by the city secretary the city
secretary shall certify that fact to the commission at the next regular meeting
and the ordinance or part thereof specified in the petition shall not go into
effect, or further action thereunder shall be suspended if it shall have gone
into effect, until and unless approved by the voters, as hereinafter provided.
Upon receipt of the secretary’s certificate, the commission shall proceed to
reconsider the ordinance or part thereof and its final vote upon such
consideration shall be upon the question “Shall the ordinance (or part of the
ordinance) specified in the referendum petition be repealed”; if upon such
reconsideration the ordinance, or part thereof, be not repealed it shall be
submitted to the voters at the next election date authorized by state law. If
when submitted separately to the voters any ordinance or part thereof be not
approved by a majority of those voting thereon, it shall be deemed repealed.
Sec. 4.  Form of ballot for initiated and referred ordinances.
   Ordinances, or parts thereof, submitted to vote of the voters in accordance
with the initiative and referendum provisions of this Charter shall be
submitted by ballot title which shall be prepared in all cases by the city
attorney or as directed by the commission. The ballot title may be distinct
from the legal title of any such initiated or referred ordinance and shall be a
clear, concise statement, without argument or prejudice, descriptive of the
substance of such ordinance or part thereof. The ballot used in the voting upon
any ordinance, or part thereof, shall have below the ballot title the following
propositions, one above the other, in the order indicated:
   “FOR THE ORDINANCE”
   “AGAINST THE ORDINANCE”
   Any number of ordinances, or parts thereof, may be voted on at the same
election and may be submitted on the same ballot, but the ballot used for
voting thereon shall be for that purpose only.
Sec. 5.  Preliminary action under referred ordinances.
   In case a petition be filed requiring that an ordinance passed by the
commission involving the expenditure of money, a bond issue or a public
improvement be submitted to a vote of the voters, all steps preliminary to such
actual expenditure, actual issuance of bonds, or actual execution of the
contract for such improvement, may be taken prior to the election; provided,
that the provisions of this article shall not apply to any ordinance which
comes within the provisions of the bond and warrant laws of the State of Texas,
nor shall the same apply to any ordinance authorizing the issuance of tax or
revenue bonds which have been previously authorized by a vote of the people.
Sec. 6.  Referendum on ordinances.
   Any ordinance which, in accordance with the provisions of
Article III, Section 7, of this Charter, shall have gone into effect prior to
the filing of a referendum petition thereon shall be subject to referendum as
in the case of other ordinances, and further action thereunder shall be
suspended from the date of the secretary’s certification to the commission that
a sufficient referendum petition has been filed. If, when submitted to a vote
of the voters, any such ordinance be not approved by a majority of those voting
thereon it shall be considered repealed and all rights and privileges conferred
by it shall be null and void except that any ordinance so repealed shall be
deemed sufficient authority for any payments made or expenses incurred in
accordance therewith prior to the date of the secretary’s certification to the
commission that a sufficient referendum petition has been filed, provided that
the repeal of any such ordinance by referendum shall not affect any bona fide
contract previously entered into by the city under authority of such ordinance
prior to the date of said certification.
Sec. 7.  Publicity for ordinances and amendments.
   At any election at which any ordinance or charter amendment is to be
submitted to the voters the form of the notice shall be in accordance with
applicable state law. The city secretary shall cause to be published one time,
at least fourteen days before any such election, the arguments for or against
such ordinances or charter amendments which may have been filed with the city
secretary not less than twenty days before such election. Such arguments shall
be signed by the person, persons, or officers of organizations who shall
deposit with the city secretary at the time of filing a sum of money sufficient
to cover the proportionate cost of publishing for the space taken by the
arguments. The text of every ordinance or charter amendment shall also be
displayed at the polling place in such election; but the validity of an
ordinance or charter amendment approved by the voters shall not be questioned
because of errors or irregularities in publication or display.
Sec. 8.  Conflict of ordinances adopted and approved.
   If two or more ordinances adopted or approved at the same election conflict
in respect of any of their provisions, they shall go into effect in respect of
such of their provisions as are not in conflict and the one receiving the
highest affirmative vote shall prevail insofar as their provisions conflict.
ARTICLE VIII.  INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL PETITIONS
Sec. 1.  Signatures to petitions.
   The signatures to initiative, referendum or recall petitions need not all be
appended to one paper, but to each separate petition there shall be attached an
affidavit of the circulator thereof as provided by this section. Each signer of
any petition paper shall sign his/her name in ink or indelible pencil and shall
indicate after his/her name place of residence by street and number, or other
description sufficient to identify the place. There shall appear on each
petition the names and addresses of five voters of the city, and on each paper
the names and addresses of the same five voters, who, as a committee of the
petitioners, shall be regarded as responsible for the circulation and filing of
the petition. The affidavit attached to each petition shall be as follows:
STATE OF TEXAS            )
                        ss.
COUNTY OF GALVESTON      )
                                                       , being duly sworn,
deposes and says that he/she, and he/she only, personally circulated the
foregoing paper, that all the signatures appended thereto were made in his/her
presence, and that he/she believes them to be the genuine signatures of the
persons whose names they purport to be.
Signed                                  (Signature of Circulator)
                                         
Notary Public
(or other officer authorized to administer oaths)
   The foregoing affidavit shall be strictly construed and any affiant
convicted of swearing falsely as regards to any particular thereof shall be
punishable in accordance with existing law.
Sec. 2.  Filing examination and certification of petitions.
   All petition papers comprising an initiative, referendum or recall petition
shall be assembled and filed, with the city secretary as one instrument. Within
ten days after a petition is filed, the city secretary shall determine whether
each paper of the petition is properly attested and whether the petition is
signed by a sufficient number of voters. The city secretary shall declare any
petition paper entirely invalid which is not attested by the circulator thereof
as required by
Article VIII, Section 1, of this Charter. Upon completing his/her examination
of the petition, the city secretary shall certify the result of his/her
examination to the commission. If the city secretary shall certify that the
petition is insufficient, the city secretary shall set forth in his/her
certificate the particulars in which it is defective and shall at once notify
the committee of the petitioners of his/her finding.
Sec. 3.  Amendment of petitions.
   An initiative, referendum, or recall petition may be amended at any time
within ten days after the making of a certificate of insufficiency by the city
secretary, by filing a supplementary petition upon additional papers signed and
filed as provided in case of an original petition. The city secretary shall,
within five days after such an amendment is filed, make examination of the
amended petition and, if the city secretary’s certificate shall show the
petition still to be insufficient, the city secretary shall file it in the city
secretary’s office and notify the committee of the petitioners of the findings
and no further action shall be had on such insufficient petition. The finding
of the insufficiency of a petition shall not prejudice the filing of a new
petition for the same purpose.
ARTICLE IX.  LEGAL DEPARTMENT
Sec. 1.  City attorney; qualifications.
   The head of the department of law shall be the city attorney who shall be
appointed by the commission. The city attorney shall be an attorney at law who
shall have practiced in the State of Texas for at least three years. The city
attorney shall be the chief legal adviser of and attorney for the city and all
departments and offices thereof in matters relating to their official powers
and duties. It shall be the city attorney’s duty, to:
   (1)   perform all services incident to the department of law;
   (2)   attend meetings of the commission whenever requested by the commission
to do so;
   (3)   give advice in writing when so requested by the commission, the mayor,
or the director of any department;
   (4)   prosecute or defend, as the case may be, all suits or cases to which
the city may be a party;
   (5)   prosecute all offense against the ordinances of the city and for such
offenses against the laws of the state as may be required by law;
   (6)   prepare all contracts, bonds, and other instruments in writing in
which the city is concerned, or to endorse approval of the form and correctness
thereof; and
   (7)   perform such other duties of a legal nature as the commission may by
ordinance require.
   In addition to the duties imposed upon the city attorney by this charter or
required by ordinance or resolution of the commission, the city attorney shall
perform any duties imposed by law upon the chief legal officer of
municipalities.
   The commission shall be authorized to employ special counsel to assist the
city attorney in important legal matters or to represent the city in any legal
matter in which the city attorney is disqualified. Any special counsel
appointed by the city attorney shall be subject to the confirmation of the city
commission in advance of any such appointment. Upon recommendation of the city
attorney, the commission shall be authorized to employ special counsel to
assist the city attorney in important legal matters or to represent the city in
any legal matter.
   Administratively, the city attorney shall report to the chief executive
officer or his/her designated representative. (Ord. 19-31, passed 11-18-2019)
ARTICLE X.  MUNICIPAL COURT
Sec. 1.  Creation and jurisdiction.
   There is hereby created and established a court to be held in the City of
Texas City which shall be known as the municipal court of the City of Texas
City, which court shall have jurisdiction within the territorial limits of said
city of all criminal cases arising under the ordinances of such city, and shall
have concurrent jurisdiction with the justices of the peace of the precincts in
which the city is or may be situated of all criminal cases arising under the
criminal laws of the state, where the offense is committed within the
territorial limits of said city and the punishment is by fine only and the
maximum of said fine shall not exceed that set by state law. Said court shall
have no civil jurisdiction, except for the forfeiture and collection of bonds
given in proceedings pending therein. It shall also have jurisdiction of
violations of ordinances of the city enacted for the preservation and
protection of the watersheds of the city’s water supply and the purity of the
water supply of the city, whether such offenses are committed inside or outside
of the corporate limits of the City of Texas City. Said court shall have
jurisdiction in cases where a person is required by the provisions of this
Charter, or by ordinance passed in pursuance thereof, to obtain a license for
any calling, occupation, business or vocation, upon complaint before said court
to adjudge said person guilty of violating any rule, regulation or ordinance of
the city in relation thereto, and in addition to the punishment to be imposed
therefor may suspend or revoke the license so granted.
Sec. 2.  Appointment of municipal judge.
   The court shall be presided over by a judge who shall be known as the
municipal judge. The municipal judge shall be appointed every two (2) years by
a majority vote of all members of the city commission. The municipal judge
shall hold office at the pleasure of the city commission. The municipal judge
shall receive such compensation as shall be prescribed by the city commission
in conformity with the provisions of this Charter.
Sec. 3.  Duties of municipal judge.
   The municipal judge shall have full power and authority to enforce all
process of said court and to punish witnesses for failing to obey subpoenas and
to compel their attendance by process of attachment, and to punish all contempt
of the municipal judge’s court by fine or imprisonment, or both. The municipal
judge may require of all persons arrested for offenses committed in the city a
bond or bonds for his/her or their appearance before said court, and no such
bond shall be taken except it be executed by the person in whose behalf it is
made with two or more good and sufficient sureties, to be approved by the
municipal judge and all bonds taken in proceedings in said court shall be
payable to the City of Texas City. The municipal judge shall have power and
authority to administer official oaths and affirmations and to give
certificates thereof, and either the municipal judge or clerk of said court
shall have full power and authority to issue subpoenas, writs of capias, search
warrants, executions and all other process known to the law which justice
courts are by law authorized to issue in similar cases.
Sec. 4.  Absence of municipal judge.
   If the municipal judge shall be temporarily incapacitated or on vacation,
the city commission is authorized to appoint some qualified person who shall
act in the place and stead of the municipal judge, and who shall receive the
compensation therefor as fixed by the city commission at the time of the
temporary municipal judge’s appointment, but not for longer than 60 days.
Sec. 5.  Clerk of court.
   There shall be a clerk or clerks of said court and such deputies as may be
created or provided for by ordinance, which clerks and deputies shall be
appointed by the commission and shall be subject to removal at any time by the
commission and shall receive such salaries as may be fixed by the commission.
Said clerks shall have the power to do and perform all things and acts usual or
necessary to be performed by clerks of courts in issuing process of said court
and conducting the business thereof; and the city commission may require such
clerks or deputies to perform such other duties, in addition to the duties of
clerk or deputy clerks, as may be prescribed or may provide that some other
employee or employees of said city, in addition to their duties, may perform
the duties of such clerk or deputy clerk without extra compensation.
Sec. 6.  Divisions of court.
   The commission may create additional divisions of the municipal court
whenever the future needs of the city may require it, and may pass all
ordinances necessary to organize and administer same; and any additional
municipal judge shall be appointed as prescribed in this Charter for the
municipal judge and shall be subject to the rules and regulations prescribed
for such officers.
Sec. 7.  Administration.
   Administration, budget oversight, and internal audit control shall be under
the supervision of the chief executive officer or his/her designated
representative.
ARTICLE XI.  FINANCE ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 1.  Director of finance.
   There shall be a department of finance, the director of which shall be
appointed by appointed by the chief executive officer and confirmed by a
majority of the city commission. The director of finance shall have knowledge
of municipal accounting and taxation and shall have had experience in budgeting
and financial control. The department of finance shall have authority and shall
be required:
   (1)   To prepare the budget, as outlined in sections 3, 4 and 5 of this
article and to assist the chief executive officer in its execution after
authorization by the commission as required by section 6.
   (2)   To maintain accounting control over the finances of the city
government, for which purpose it is empowered to operate a set of general
accounts embracing all the financial transactions of the city, and such
subsidiary accounts and cost records as may be required by ordinance or by the
chief executive officer for purposes of administrative direction and financial
control; to prescribe the forms of receipts, vouchers, bills, or claims to be
filed by all departments and agencies of the city government; to examine and
approve all contracts, orders, and other documents by which the city incurs
financial obligations, having ascertained before approval that the moneys have
been duly appropriated and allotted to meet such obligations and will become
available when the obligations have become due and payable; to audit and
approve all bills, invoices, payrolls, and other evidences of claims, demands
or charges against the city government and to determine the regularity,
legality, and correctness of such claims, demands, or charges; to make monthly
reports on all receipts and expenditures of the city government, to make
monthly reports on funds, appropriations, allotments, encumbrances, and
authorized payments, to the chief executive officer, the commission, and the
head of the department or agency directly concerned; to inspect and audit any
accounts or records of financial transactions which may be maintained in any
department or agency of the city government apart from or subsidiary to the
general accounts; and to perform such other duties pertaining to the financial
records of the city government as the commission may require by ordinance.
   (3)   To invest all funds deemed in excess of current needs in the manner
authorized by the laws of the State of Texas and the investment policy approved
by the commission; current needs are hereby defined as expenditures to be
required within a given ninety (90) day period.
   (4)   To control the purchase, storage, and distribution of all supplies,
materials, equipment, and contractual services required by the city government,
or by any department or agency thereof, in the manner provided by ordinance; to
establish and enforce standard specifications with respect to such supplies,
materials, and equipment; to inspect or supervise the inspection of all
deliveries of supplies, materials, and equipment, and to determine their
quality, quantity, and conformance with specifications, to have charge of such
general storerooms and warehouses as the commission may provide by ordinance;
and to transfer to or between city departments or to sell surplus, obsolete or
unused supplies, materials, and equipment.
   (5)   To make all special assessments for public improvements, and to give
such notice of these assessments to the property owners as may be required by
law.
   (6)   To collect, have custody of, and disburse all taxes, licenses, fees,
and other moneys belonging to the city government subject to the provisions of
this charter and ordinances enacted thereunder; to have custody of all
investments and invested funds of the city or in possession of the city in a
fiduciary capacity and to keep a record of such investments, and to have
custody of all bonds and certificates of city indebtedness, including such
bonds and certificates unissued or canceled, and the receipt and delivery of
city bonds and certificates for transfer, registration, or exchange. (Ord. 19-
31, passed 11-18-2019)
Sec. 2.  Fiscal year.
   The fiscal year of the city government shall begin on the first day of
October each year and shall end on the last day of September the following
year. Such year shall constitute the budget year of the city government.
Sec. 3.  City budget.
   The city budget shall be preceded by a budget message which shall explain
the budget both in fiscal terms and work programs. It shall outline the
proposed financial policies of the city for the ensuing fiscal year, describe
the important features of the budget, indicate any major changes from the
current year in financial policies, expenditures, and revenues together with
the reasons for such changes, and include such other material deemed relevant
to commission consideration of the document.
   The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all city funds and
activities for the ensuing fiscal year, and except as required by law or this
charter, shall be in such form as the chief executive officer deems desirable
or the commission may require. In organizing the budget, the most feasible
combination of expenditure classification by fund, organization unit, program,
purpose, activity, or object shall be utilized. It shall begin with a clear
general summary of its contents; shall show in detail all estimated income,
indicating the proposed property tax levy, and all proposed expenditures,
including debt service, for the ensuing fiscal year; and shall be so arranged
as to show comparative figures for actual and estimated income and expenditures
for three fiscal years - the last completed fiscal year, the year of
preparation of the budget, and the projections for the ensuing fiscal year. It
shall indicate in separate sections:
   (1)   proposed expenditures for operations during the ensuing fiscal year,
detailed by departments, in terms of their respective work programs, and the
method of financing such expenditures;
   (2)   proposed capital improvement expenditures during the ensuing fiscal
year, detailed by purpose and the proposed method of financing each capital
expenditure;
   (3)   anticipated net surplus or deficit for the ensuing fiscal year of each
utility owned or enterprise fund operated by the city and the proposed method
of its disposition; budgets for each utility or enterprise fund giving detailed
income and expenditure information shall be included; and
   (4)   detailed schedules indicating the city’s debt position and debt
service requirements.
   The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of estimated
income.
Sec. 4.  Filing of budget.
   The budget prepared by the finance department shall be filed with the city
secretary not less than thirty days prior to the time the commission makes its
tax levy for the current fiscal year, and such budget shall be available for
the inspection of any taxpayer.
Sec. 5.  Budget hearing.
   The city commission shall each year provide for a public hearing on such
budget, which hearing shall take place on some date to be fixed by the city
commission not less than fifteen days subsequent to the time such budget is
filed as provided in this section, and prior to the time the city commission
makes its tax levy. Public notice of the hour, date and place of such hearing
shall be given by the city commission by publication in the official newspaper
for at least two issues immediately preceding the date of said hearing, and any
taxpayer of the city shall have the right to be present and participate in such
hearing. At the conclusion of such hearing, the budget as prepared by the
finance department shall be acted upon by the city commission. The city
commission shall have the authority to make such changes in the budget as in
their judgment the law warrants and the best interest of the taxpayers of the
city demand. When the budget has been finally approved by the city commission,
the budget as so approved shall be filed with the city secretary and taxes
levied only in accordance therewith, and no expenditure of the funds of the
city shall thereafter be made except in strict compliance with such adopted
budget, except that in case of grave public necessity, emergency expenditures
to meet unusual and unforeseen conditions, which could not, by reasonably
diligent thought and attention, have been included in the original budget, may
from time to time be authorized by the city commission, as amendments to the
original budget. In all cases where such amendment to the original budget is
made, a copy of the order or resolution of the city commission amending such
budget shall be filed with the city secretary and attached to the budget
originally adopted. In the preparation of the budget, the chief executive
officer shall have the authority to require the heads of all departments to
furnish such information as may be necessary for the chief executive officer to
have in order that the budget covering the expenditures of the city may be
properly prepared. (Ord. 19-31, passed 11-18-2019)
Sec. 6.  Transfer of appropriations.
   The commission may, upon the recommendation of the chief executive officer,
transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or any portion thereof within a
department of the city government to another.
Sec. 7.  Money to be drawn from treasury in accordance with appropriation.
   No money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city, nor shall any
obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance of the
annual budget, or of such budget when changed as authorized by sections 5 and 6
of this article. At the close of each fiscal year any unencumbered balance of
an appropriation shall revert to the fund from which appropriated and shall be
subject to reappropriation; but appropriations may be made by the commission,
to be paid out of the income of the current year, in furtherance of
improvements or other objects or works which will not be completed within such
year, and any such appropriation shall continue in force until the purpose for
which it was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned.
Sec. 8.  Contracts and purchases.
   The city commission may by ordinance establish the maximum amount of funds
which the chief executive officer shall be authorized to expend for budgeted
items and establish the minimum amount of funds which the chief executive
officer shall be authorized to expend for budgeted items which must be let on
the basis of competitive bids; provided, however, all expenditures or purchases
in excess of the amount established by state law must be let on the basis of
competitive bids. The city commission may, by ordinance, establish a figure
above which all contracts or purchases must be approved in advance by the city
commission. All contracts and purchases shall be handled in a manner to obtain
the best value for the city.
Sec. 9.  Custody of city moneys.
   All moneys received by any department or agency of the city for or in
connection with the business of the city government shall be paid promptly into
the treasury and shall be deposited with responsible banking institutions in
accordance with procedures established by the city commission. These
institutions shall be designated by the chief executive officer, with the
approval of the commission, in accordance with such regulations and subject to
such requirements as to security for deposits and interests thereon as may be
established by ordinance or by state law. All interest or moneys belonging to
the city shall accrue to the benefit of the city government.
Sec. 10.  Issuance of bonds.
   The city may issue bonds to pay for any property or public improvement, but
no bonds shall be issued to pay current expenses. The enumeration, in the
preceding sentence, of particular powers of the city in connection with the
issuance of bonds shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive; and, in addition
to the powers enumerated or implied in the preceding sentence, or appropriate
to the exercise of such powers, it is intended that the City of Texas City
shall have and may exercise the authority to issue revenue bonds for the
purchase of utilities or any other self-liquidating asset for which revenue
bonds may lawfully be issued. It is intended that the City of Texas City shall
have and may exercise the authority to issue bonds for the construction and
extra-ordinary maintenance of necessary civic improvements or facilities within
or without the city limits. No tax bonds of the city, excepting refunding
bonds, shall be issued until first approved by a majority of the duly qualified
voters of the City of Texas City voting at an election on such issue and all
bonds shall be authorized by ordinance passed by an affirmative vote of at
least a majority of the members of the commission. The city shall have full
authority to issue bonds, warrants and other obligations under the provisions
of the general laws relating to the issuance of bonds, warrants and obligations
by a municipal corporation as each of said laws has heretofore been amended or
hereafter may be amended.
Sec. 11.  Loans in anticipation of bond sales.
   At any time after a bond ordinance has taken effect as provided herein, the
city may borrow money for the purpose for which bonds are to be issued, in
anticipation of the receipt of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds and within
the maximum authorized amount of the bond issue. Such loans shall be due and
payable not later than three years after the time of taking effect of the
ordinance authorizing the bonds upon which they are predicated. But the limits
of the life of the bonds, as herein prescribed, shall be construed to include
the term of such temporary loan.
Sec. 12.  Temporary borrowing.
   For the purpose of temporary borrowing, the city commission shall have the
power by ordinance to raise money on the credit of the city by the issuance of
warrants or notes in anticipation of the collection of taxes or of special
assessments.
Sec. 13.  Annual audit.
   As soon as practicable after the close of each fiscal year, an independent
audit shall be made of all accounts of the city government and corporations
established by the city. The certified public accountants, appointed by the
commission, shall have no personal interest, directly or indirectly, in the
financial affairs of the city or any of its officers. The scope of the audit
shall require a limited review of city-owned property and the results shall be
reported with each annual audited financial report. Upon completion of the
annual audit, the combined balance sheet thereof shall be published in the
official newspaper of the city within thirty (30) days of commission acceptance
of such audit. Copies of all audits shall be placed on file with the city’s
public library, the director of finance and the city secretary.
ARTICLE XII.  POLICE DEPARTMENT
Sec. 1.  Chief of police, director of police department.
   The director of the police department shall be the chief of police. The
chief of police shall be appointed by the chief executive officer and confirmed
by the city commission.
Sec. 2.  Special police.
   No persons, except as otherwise provided by general law or the Charter or
the ordinances passed in pursuance thereof, shall act as special police or
special detective, except upon written authority from the chief executive
officer duly approved by the city commission. Such authority, when conferred,
shall be exercised only under the direction and control of the chief of police
and for the time specified in the appointment.
Sec. 3.  City jail.
   Subject to the direction of the city commission, the chief of police shall
have control and management of the city jail.
ARTICLE XIII.  FIRE DEPARTMENT
Sec. 1.  Chief of fire department, director of such department.
   The fire department shall be under the control and direction of the chief of
such department, who shall be appointed by the chief executive officer and
confirmed by the city commission.
ARTICLE XIV.  CITY PLANNING BOARD
Sec. 1.  Establishment, membership, duties, terms.
   The commission may at any time after the adoption of this charter establish
and maintain a city planning board of five members to serve without
compensation and to have such powers and duties as the commission may prescribe
relative to city planning in accordance with state law. The commission by duly
enacted ordinance may increase the specified number of board members Two of the
members of the planning board shall also be members of the city commission, who
shall be appointed by the commission upon the recommendation of the mayor. 
Each member appointed shall be appointed for a term of four years. Any vacancy
in and during the unexpired term of an appointed member shall be filled by the
commission upon recommendation of the mayor. The chief executive officer shall
provide the planning board with the necessary clerical help, office equipment,
and supplies. (Ord. 19-31, passed 11-18-2019)
Sec. 2.  City Zoning Commission establishment, membership, duties, and terms.
   The commission may at any time after the adoption of this Charter establish
and maintain a city zoning commission of five members to serve without
compensation and to have such powers and duties as the commission may prescribe
relative to city zoning in accordance with state law.  The commission by duly
enacted ordinance may increase the specified number of board members.  Members
of the board shall be appointed by the commission, upon the recommendation of
the mayor. Each member appointed shall be appointed for a term of two years. 
Any vacancy in and during the unexpired term of an appointed member shall be
filled by the commission upon recommendation of the mayor.  The chief executive
officer shall provide the zoning commission with the necessary help, office
equipment, and supplies. (Ord. 19-31, passed 11-18-2019)
ARTICLE XV.  PARK COMMISSION
Sec. 1.  Establishment, membership, duties, terms.
   The commission may at any time after the adoption of this Charter establish
and maintain a park commission of nine (9) members to serve without
compensation and have such powers and duties as the commission may prescribe
relative to the planning, building, and managing of parks, playgrounds and
swimming pools. Of the members first appointed, one shall be appointed for a
term of one year, two for a term of two years and two for a term of three
years. Thereafter, each member appointed shall be appointed for a term of three
years. Any vacancy during the unexpired term of an appointed member shall be
filled by the commission upon the recommendation of the mayor. The city
commission may increase the number of board members by ordinance. The chief
executive officer shall provide the park commission with the necessary clerical
help, office equipment and supplies.
ARTICLE XVI.  TAXATION
Sec. 1.  Power to tax.
   The city commission shall have the power under provisions of state law to
levy, assess, and collect an annual tax upon all taxable properties within the
city for all municipal purposes.
Sec. 2.  Sheriff’s sale.
   The city shall be authorized and is hereby given the right to be designated
trustee for the benefit of other taxing entities in any tax foreclosure suit
pursuant to state law. Additionally, the city shall be authorized and is hereby
given the right to bid on and purchase property for its own benefit at any such
tax sale.
ARTICLE XVII.  PUBLIC UTILITIES AND FRANCHISES
Sec. 1.  Powers of the city.
   In addition to the city’s power to buy, own, construct, maintain, and
operate utilities and to manufacture and distribute electricity, gas, or
anything else that may be needed or used by the public (see powers made part of
this Charter in
Article I, Section 2), the city shall have such further powers as may now or
hereafter be granted under the constitution and laws of the State of Texas.
Sec. 2.  Franchises; powers of commission.
   The city commission shall have power by ordinance to grant, amend, renew and
extend all franchises, and to regulate all public utilities of every character
within the City of Texas City, and for such purposes is granted full power. All
ordinances granting, amending, renewing, or extending franchises for public
utilities, shall be read at three separate regular meetings of the city
commission, and shall not be finally passed until thirty days after the first
reading; and no such ordinance shall take effect until sixty days after its
final passage; and pending such time, the full text of such ordinance shall be
published once each week for four consecutive weeks in the official newspaper
of the City of Texas City, and the expenses of such publication shall be borne
by the proponent of the franchise. No public utility franchise shall be
transferable except with the approval of the commission expressed by ordinance;
and copies of all transfers and mortgages or other documents affecting the
title or use of public utilities shall be filed with the mayor or the city
secretary within ten days after the execution thereof. Such franchise shall not
be transferred indirectly through the acquisition of the capital stock of the
grantee company by another corporation, except through such approval by the
city commission and the filing of all documents relating to the purchase of
such stock, including the corporate affiliations of the purchasing company.
Sec. 3.  Term of franchise.
   No public franchise hereafter granted shall exceed a term of thirty years.
Sec. 4.  Right of regulation.
   All grants, renewals, extensions, or amendments of public utility
franchises, whether it be so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject
to the right of the city:
   (1)   To repeal the same by ordinance at any time for misuse or nonuse, or
for failure to begin construction within the time prescribed or otherwise to
comply with the terms prescribed.
   (2)   To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service, and the
maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest practicable standard of
efficiency.
   (3)   To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of service
and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates.
   (4)   To prescribe the form of accounts and at any time to examine and audit
the accounts and other records of any such utility and to require annual and
other reports by each such public utility; provided, that if a public service
commission or other authority shall be given the power by law to prescribe the
forms of accounts for public utilities throughout the state or throughout any
district of which the city is a part, the forms so prescribed shall be
controlling so far as they go, but the commission may prescribe other and more
detailed forms for the utilities within its jurisdiction.
   (5)   To impose such other regulations as may conducive to the safety,
welfare, and accommodation of the public.
Sec. 5.  Consent of property owners.
   The consent of abutting and adjacent property owners shall not be required
for the construction, extension, maintenance or operation of any public
utility, but any property owner shall be entitled to recover from the owner of
such public utility the actual amount of damages to such property on account
thereof less any benefits received therefrom, provided suit is commenced within
two years after the damage is begun.
Sec. 6.  Revocable permits.
   Permits revocable at the will of the commission for such minor or temporary
public utility privileges as may be specified by general ordinance may be
granted and revoked by the commission from time to time in accordance with the
terms and conditions to be prescribed thereby; and such permits shall not be
deemed to be franchises as the term is used in this Charter. Such general
ordinance, however, shall be subject to the same procedure as an ordinance
granting a franchise and shall not be passed as an emergency measure.
Sec. 7.  Extensions.
   All extensions of public utilities within the city limits shall become a
part of the aggregate property of the public utility, shall be operated as
such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained
in this Charter and in any original grant hereafter made. The right to use and
maintain any extension shall terminate with the original grant and shall be
terminable as provided in section 4 of this article. In case of an extension of
a public utility operated under a franchise hereafter granted, such right shall
be terminable at the same time and under the same conditions as the original
grant.
Sec. 8.  Other conditions.
   Every public utility franchise hereafter granted shall be held subject to
all the terms and conditions contained in the various sections of this article,
whether or not such terms are specifically mentioned in the franchise. Nothing
in this Charter shall operate to limit in any way, except as specifically
stated, the discretion of the commission or the electors of the city in
imposing terms and conditions in connection with any franchise grant.
Sec. 9.  Franchise records.
   Within six months after this Charter takes effect every public utility and
every owner of a public utility franchise shall file with the city, as may be
prescribed by ordinance, certified copies of all the franchises owned or
claimed, or under which such utility is operated. The city shall compile and
maintain a public record of public utility franchises operating within the
city. (Ord. 19-31, passed 11-18-2019)
Sec. 10.  Accounts of municipally owned utilities.
   Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the
city, in such manner as to show the true and complete financial results of such
city ownership and operation, including all assets, appropriately subdivided
into different classes, all liabilities subdivided by classes, depreciation
reserve, other reserves and surplus; also all revenues, operating expenses
including depreciation, interest payments, rental, and other disposition of
annual income. The accounts shall show the actual capital cost to the city of
each public utility owned, also the cost of all extensions, additions, and
improvements, and the source of the funds expended for such capital purposes.
They shall show as nearly as possible the cost of any service furnished to or
rendered by any such utility to any other city or governmental department. The
commission shall annually cause to be made and published a report showing the
financial results of such city ownership and operation, giving the information
specified in this section or such data as the commission shall deem expedient.
Sec. 11.  Public utilities.
   The commission shall have the power and shall be authorized to regulate, by
ordinance, the rates and compensation to be charged by all persons, companies,
or corporations, using the streets, alleys or public grounds of the City of
Texas City, and engaged in furnishing water, gas, light, power, electricity or
sewerage service to the public, and also to prescribe rules and regulations
under which such commodities shall be furnished, and service rendered, and to
fix penalties to enforce such charges, rules and regulations. The governing
body shall not prescribe any rate or compensation which will yield more than a
fair return upon the fair value of the property used and useful in rendering
such service to the public, but which return in no event shall ever exceed 8%
per annum. (Ord. 19-31, passed 11-18-2019)
Sec. 12.  Street rental.
   The commission shall have the power and shall be authorized to charge and
collect from all persons, companies, corporations, utilities or franchise
holders using the streets, alleys or public grounds in the City of Texas City,
a rental for use of such streets, alleys or public grounds.
ARTICLE XVIII.  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Sec. 1.  Publicity of records.
   All records and accounts of every office, department, or agency of the city
shall be open to inspection by any citizen or by any representative of the
press at all reasonable times in accordance with state law.
Sec. 2.  Personal interest.
   Except as provided by state law, no member of the commission nor any officer
or employee of the city shall have a financial interest, direct or indirect, in
any contract with the city, or be financially interested directly or
indirectly, in the sale to the city of any land, materials, supplies, or
services, except on behalf of the city as an officer or employee. Any violation
of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office and any officer or
employee of the city found guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit his/her office
or position. Any violation of this section, with the knowledge expressed or
implied of the person or corporation contracting with the city shall render the
contract voidable by the commission.
Sec. 3.  Compensation and tenure of officers and employees.
   The amount of salary or compensation of officers and employees shall be
provided for in the budget, which shall provide, as nearly as conditions allow,
uniform compensation for like services. An increase in compensation of any
officer or employee in the administrative service, within the limits provided
for the class, may be granted at any time by the mayor or other appointed
authority upon the basis of efficiency and seniority. All appointive officers
and employees of the city shall hold their office and employment at the
pleasure of the city commission.
Sec. 4.  Official bonds.
   The director of finance, and such other officers or employees as the
commission may by general ordinance require so to do, shall give bond in such
amount and with such surety as may be approved by the commission. The premiums
on such bonds shall be paid by the city.
Sec. 5.  Oath of office.
   Every officer of the city shall, before entering upon the duties of his/her
office, take and subscribe to the oath or affirmation prescribed by the state
constitution.
Sec. 6.  Special provision for garbage disposal.
   The city commission shall further have the right by ordinance to adopt and
prescribe rules and regulations for the handling and disposition of all
garbage, trash and rubbish within the City of Texas City and shall further have
the right to prescribe that the city alone shall remove all such garbage, trash
and rubbish, and shall have the right to fix charges and compensation to be
charged by the city for the removal of same, providing rules and regulations
for the collection thereof, making the same a personal obligation of the person
for whom the same is hauled and disposed of, and providing penalties against
all other persons hauling such garbage, trash, or rubbish, and providing for a
full and adequate system of covering the City of Texas City or such portions
thereof as the city commission may determine for the removal and disposition of
all such garbage, trash, and rubbish.
Sec. 7.  Limitation of liability for damages.
   Before the city shall be liable for damages for personal injuries of any
kind, or for damages to or destruction of property of any kind, the person
injured, or the owner of the property damaged or destroyed, or someone in his/
her behalf, shall give the chief executive officer notice in writing of such
injury or destruction, duly verified, within sixty (60) days after the injury
or damage occurs, the amount for which claimant will settle, the actual
residence of the claimant by street and number and the actual residence of such
claimant for six (6) months immediately preceding the occurrence of such injury
or destruction, and the names and addresses of the witnesses upon whom the
claimant relies to establish his/her claim. Failure to notify the chief
executive officer within the time and manner specified herein shall exonerate,
excuse and exempt the city from any liability whatsoever.
Sec. 8.  Power of condemnation and special assessment.
   The city shall have all powers of condemnation and special assessment
provided by state law.
Sec. 9.  Provision relating to assignment, execution and garnishment.
   The property, real and personal, belonging to the city shall not be liable
to be sold or appropriated under any writ of execution of cost bill; and no
lien of any kind shall ever exist against any such property owned by the city
except that the lien be created or authorized by this charter or state law. The
funds belonging to the city in the hands of any person, firm or corporation,
shall not be liable to garnishment; nor shall the city be liable to garnishment
on account of any debt it may owe for funds or property it may have on hand or
owing to any person. Neither the city nor any of its officers or agents shall
be required to answer any writ of garnishment on any account whatever. The city
shall not be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its
employees, agents, or contractors, except as required by state or federal law.
(Ord. 19-31, passed 11-18-2019)
Sec. 10.  Power of the city to enforce ordinances.
   The city may enforce its ordinances by fines not exceeding the amount set by
state law and may also provide by ordinance for the payment of such fines by
labor in a work-house or on any public work or place of the city, but no
ordinance shall provide a lesser penalty than is prescribed for a like offense
by the laws of the state. Provision may also be made by ordinance for the
collection of fines imposed and executions issued in civil cases.
Sec. 11.  Meaning of words and designations.
   All words and designations used in this Charter are to be taken and
construed in the sense in which they are understood in common language taking
into consideration the context and subject matter relative to which they are
employed.
Sec. 12.  Saving clause.
   If any part of this Charter shall be declared invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not invalidate the remainder of the
Charter. The provisions of this Charter shall supersede all laws and ordinances
not consistent herewith, insofar as the City of Texas City is affected thereby.
Sec. 13.  Ordinances.
   Except as provided in section 12 of this article, nothing in this Charter
shall be taken in anywise to affect or repeal any law heretofore legally passed
by the commission of the City of Texas City, nor to affect any other act of the
mayor, commission or other officer or officers of the City of Texas City
legally performed, under which any rights have been vested, and all ordinances,
orders, laws, and grants shall be continued in full force and effect.
Sec. 14.  Power to construct and own.
   The city shall have the right to construct, reconstruct, erect, improve,
enlarge, extend, own, maintain, operate, and regulate such waterworks plants
and systems, sanitary sewer plants and systems, and storm sewer plants and
systems for the use of the city and its inhabitants, but shall not have the
power or right to sell any such plants or systems unless such sale is first
authorized by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the city at an
election called by the commission for that purpose. The commission shall have
the power to prescribe rates for water furnished, prescribe rates for
connections to any such plants and systems, to prescribe rates for the use of
such sewers, prescribe penalties for refusal to connect with such sanitary
sewers, provide that the water of any consumer may be cut off for failure or
refusal to pay water or sewer charges, and to establish such rules and
regulations with reference thereto as the city commission may deem expedient;
to acquire by purchase or donation suitable grounds on which to erect such
works and systems, and necessary rights-of-way; and to do anything whatsoever
necessary to construct, operate and maintain same.
Sec. 15.  Amending the Charter.
   Amendments to this Charter may be framed and submitted to the voters of the
city in the manner provided by state law.
Sec. 16.  Meetings of boards, committees and commissions.
   All boards and commissions established in this charter shall meet at least
once quarterly and submit the minutes of their meetings to the city commission.
All meetings shall be held in accordance with
Article III, Section 1 of this charter. The need for other boards, committees
and commissions appointed by the city commission will be reviewed annually by
the chief executive officer, and appropriate recommendation for their
continuance made to the city commission. (Ord. 19-31, passed 11-18-2019)
Sec. 17.  Conflicts of interest.
   The use of public office for private gain is prohibited. The commission
shall implement the prohibition by ordinance. The ordinance shall address the
following matters:
   (1)   Acting in an official capacity on matters in which the official has a
private financial interest clearly separate from that of the general public;
   (2)   The acceptance of gifts and other things of value;
   (3)   Acting in a private capacity on matters dealt with as a public
official and the use of confidential information; and
   (4)   Appearances by city officials and department heads before other city
agencies on behalf of private interests.
Sec. 18.  Rules of procedure.
   The commission shall by ordinance determine its own rules and order of
business. A quorum of the commission, which shall consist of four (4) members,
shall be necessary for the transaction of business. If a member of the
commission is absent for three (3) consecutive, regular meetings without an
explanation acceptable to a majority of the commission, the office of that
commissioner shall be declared vacant at the next regular meeting. Minutes
shall be taken and recorded by the city secretary or deputy, and such minutes
shall constitute a public record. An abstention from voting shall constitute
and be recorded as a “no” vote unless the commissioner has filed an affidavit
declaring a conflict of interest under state law in which case it shall be
recorded as an “abstention.”
Sec. 19.  Authority to rearrange and renumber.
   The city commission is authorized, by ordinance, to rearrange and renumber
all articles, sections, and paragraphs of this Charter, or any amendment
thereto, as the commission shall deem appropriate.
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE
      The original charter, Articles I through XXI, is set out as adopted on 2-
16-1946. The following table shows the disposition of amendments thereto.
 
Ordinance Number Adoption Date Section Disposition
       4-10-1947                  Art. I, § 3
       3-28-1952                  Art. I, § 3
       9-9-1952                   Art. I, § 3
       9-9-1952                   Art. II, § 3
       9-9-1952                   Art. II, § 5
       9-9-1952                   Art. IV, § 3
       9-9-1952                   Art. XX, § 3
       11-19-1952                 Art. I, § 3
       1-20-1954                  Art. I, § 3
       9-11-1957                  Art. I, § 3
61-07  4-19-1961                  Art. I, § 3
63-18  8-7-1963                   Art. I, § 3
64-23A 12-26-1964                 Art. I, § 3
64-24  12-26-1964                 Art. I, § 3
66-03  4-6-1966                   Art. I, § 3
73-06  3-7-1973   Am’d No. 1, §Art. II, § 3
76-21  5-19-1976                  Art. I, § 3
77-38  12-21-1977 Am’d (a)      Art. II, § 1
                  Am’d (b), § 1Art. II, § 3
91-21  6-5-1991                   Art. I, § 3
92-24  10-7-1992                  Art. I, § 3
93-49  10-6-1993                  Art. I, § 3
95-05  3-1-1995                   Art. I, § 3
 
   The following table shows changes resulting from the charter amendment
election of 11-7-1995, pursuant to election ordered by Ord. 95-14 on 8-9-1995:
 
Election Election Date Section Disposition
Ordered 11-
by Ord. 7-   Am’d Art. I, §§ 2, 3              Art. I, §§ 2, 3
95-14   1995
             Deleted Art. I, § 4
             Am’d Art. II, §§ 2, 3, 4          Art. II, §§ 2, 3, 4
             Am’d Art. III, § 1                 Art. III, § 1
             Am’d Art. IV, §§ 1, 3, 7          Art. IV, §§ 1, 3, 7
             Am’d Art. V, §§ 1, 2, 3           Art. V, §§ 1, 2, 3
             Am’d Art. VI, §§ 1, 3, 4, 5, 6    Art. VI, §§ 1, 3, 4, 5, 6
             Am’d Art. VII, §§ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6Art. VII, §§ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
             Am’d Art. VIII, §§ 1, 2           Art. VIII, §§ 1, 2
             Am’d Art. IX, § 1                  Art. IX, § 1
             Am’d Title: Art. X                  Art. X: Title
             Am’d Art. X, § 1                   Art. X, § 1
             Deleted Art. X, §§ 2, 3, 9
             Am’d Art. X, § 4                   Art. X, § 2
             Am’d Art. X, § 5                   Art. X, § 3
             Am’d Art. X, § 6                   Art. X, § 4
             Am’d Art. X, § 8                   Art. X, § 6
             Added new Art. X, § 7
             Am’d Title: Art. XI                 Art. XI: Title
             Am’d Art. XI, §§ 1, 2, 3, 5       Art. XI, §§ 1, 2, 3, 5
             Deleted Art. XI, § 6
             Am’d Art. XI, §§ 7, 9, 10, 11, 14 Art. XI, §§ 6, 8, 9, 10, 13
             Am’d Art. XII, §§ 1, 2            Art. XII, §§ 1, 2
             Deleted Art. XII, §§ 4, 6
             Am’d Art. XII, § 5                 Art. XII, § 3
             Deleted Art. XIII, §§ 1, 2
             Am’d Art. XIII, § 3                Art. XIII, § 1
             Deleted Art. XIV
             Deleted Art. XV
             Am’d Art. XVI, § 1                 Art. XIV,* § 1
             Am’d Art. XVII, § 1                Art. XV,* § 1
             Deleted Art. XVII, § 2
             Deleted Art. XVIII, §§ 2 through 20 Added new § 2 to Art. XVI*
             Deleted Art. XIX
             Am’d Title: Art. XX                 Art. XVII:** Title
             Am’d Art. XX, § 12                 Art. XVII,** § 12
             Am’d Art. XXI, § 10                Art. XVIII,** § 7
             Am’d Art. XXI, §§ 1, 2, 5, 12, 17 Art. XVIII, ** §§ 1, 2, 5, 10,
                                                   15
             Deleted Art. XXI, §§ 6, 7, 8, 16
                                                   Added five new sections to Art.
                                                   XVIII**
HL/maf:
2/21/96
 
   * Because of the deletion of Articles XIV and XV this Article Number is as
it appears in the Revised and Amended Charter, and is different from the pre-
amended Charter.
   ** Because of the deletion of Articles XIV, XV and XIX this Article Number
is as it appears in the Revised and Amended Charter, and is different from the
pre-amended Charter.
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.17   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.18   Altering or tampering with code
   
10.19   Recording of ordinances; ordinance book as evidence
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Texas City, Texas,
shall be designated as the Code of Texas City, and may be so cited.
Statutory reference:
   Authority of municipality to codify ordinances, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code
Ch. 53
§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CHARTER or THIS CHARTER. The Home Rule Charter of the city, adopted by
the voters on 2-16-1946, as amended.
      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Texas City,
Texas.
      CITY COMMISSION. Whenever the words COMMISSION, or THE COMMISSION or THE
CITY COMMISSION are used, they shall mean the City Commission of the City of
Texas City, Texas.
      CODE,THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.
      COMPUTATION OF TIME. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act
to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day
on which the notice is given or the act is done shall be counted in computing
the time, but the day on which the proceeding is to be had shall not be
counted.
      COUNTY. Galveston County, Texas.
      DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY. Whenever a provision of this code requires or
authorizes an officer or employee of the city to do some act or perform some
duty, it shall be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate,
delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms
of the provision specifically designate otherwise.
      EASEMENT. A right, liberty, privilege or advantage without profit which
the owner of one parcel of land may have in the lands of another; or a right in
the owner of one parcel of land, by reason of the ownership, to use the land of
another for a special purpose not inconsistent with a general property right in
the owner.
      HIGHWAY. Includes any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or
square, bridges, viaducts, tunnels, underpasses, overpasses and causeways in
the city, dedicated or devoted to public use.
      JOINT AUTHORITY. Words purporting to give authority to three or more
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving the authority to a
majority of officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath and, in such cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of the municipality, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
      OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named, they mean
standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city.
      OWNER. Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety, of the whole or of a part of the building or land.
      PENAL CODE DEFINITIONS. The provisions of Tex. Penal Code Titles 1
through 3 shall apply in the interpretation of this code to the extent that the
Penal Code mandates that they shall apply.
      PERSON.
         (a)   Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver.
         (b)   Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty,
the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as applied to any unincorporated entity, shall
mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers or agents thereof.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every species of property, except real
property, as defined in this section.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      PROPERTY. Real and personal property.
      REAL PROPERTY. Lands, tenements and hereditaments.
      ROADWAY. The portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular traffic.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIDEWALK. Any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line
of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      SIGNED. Any symbol executed or adopted by a person with present
indication to authenticate a writing.
      STATE. The State of Texas.
      STREET. Includes any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place or
square, bridges, viaducts, underpasses, overpasses, tunnels and causeways in
the city, dedicated or devoted to public use.
      SUBCHAPTER.
         (a)   A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
         (b)   Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
(1998 Code, § 1-2)
Charter reference:
   Meaning of words and designations, see
Art. XVIII, § 11
§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of the municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of
the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or”, if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in a section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the municipality exercising the powers, duties
or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the
word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within the municipality for the transaction of all
municipal business.
§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of that act or the giving of that notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
   (B)   Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their
passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.15  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force,
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.16  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to the
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.17  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example:  (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example:  (Tex. Local Gov’t Code, § 54.001)  (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord.
20, passed 1-1-1985)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
   § 39.01  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      Inspection of public records, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code §§ 552.001 et
seq.
§ 10.18  ALTERING OR TAMPERING WITH CODE.
   It shall be an offense for any unauthorized person to change or amend, by
addition or deletion, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or delete
pages or portions thereof, or to alter or to tamper with this code in any
manner whatsoever which will cause a law of the city to be misrepresented
thereby.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 10.19  RECORDING OF ORDINANCES; ORDINANCE BOOK AS EVIDENCE.
   All ordinances adopted or passed by the City Commission shall be inscribed
at large by the Secretary in a special book to be kept for that purpose by the
Secretary. The book of ordinances and all copies and extracts therefrom shall
be evidence of the tenor and contents of the ordinances therein inscribed, as
well as such as have been heretofore or as may be hereafter therein so
inscribed.
(1998 Code, § 1-6)
§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.
   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited
or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or
wherever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is
provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this code or any such
ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 in all cases arising
under the ordinances of the city that govern fire safety, zoning and public
health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, and in all other cases
arising under the ordinances of the city such violation shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding $500; provided, however, that, no penalty shall be greater
or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the
laws of the state. Each day any violation of this code or of any ordinance
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense; provided, however, that,
the imposition of any such fine for any such violation shall not constitute an
estoppel for other relief against any such violation available at law.
(1998 Code, § 1-7)
Statutory reference:
Enforcement authority; penalty, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 54.001
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
      
31.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   LAW ENFORCEMENT AND FIRE DEPARTMENT
      
33.   COURTS
      
34.   PERSONNEL POLICIES
      
35.   EMERGENCIES AND EMERGENCY SERVICES
      
36.   FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION
      
37.   RECORDS AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 30:  OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Elections
   
30.02   License and permit denial, suspension and revocation
   
30.03   Bonds
   
30.04   Defaulters not eligible for office
   
30.05   Residency requirements
   
30.06   Conflicts of interest
   
30.07   City Secretary
City Commission
   
30.20   Commission districts
   
30.21   Time and place of meetings
Cross-references:
   Fire Department, see
Ch. 32
   Personnel Policies, see
Ch. 34
   Police Department, see
Ch. 32
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01  ELECTIONS.
   All elections pertaining to municipal affairs shall be governed by the
election laws of the state and applicable provisions of the Charter.
(1998 Code, § 42-1)
§ 30.02  LICENSE AND PERMIT DENIAL, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   Any provision of this code which provides for denial, suspension or
revocation of a license or permit shall be construed, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this code, to include a requirement that no such
license or permit shall be denied, suspended or revoked under such provision,
except in accordance with Tex. Occupations Code Ch. 53.
(1998 Code, § 2-1)
§ 30.03  BONDS.
   (A)   Mayor and Commissioners.
      (1)   Before taking the oath of office, the Mayor and each Commissioner
shall make a bond in the sum of not less than $3,000, each executed by an
approved surety company authorized to do business in the state, conditioned for
the faithful performance of the duties of their office. The bond shall be
approved within 20 days after the entry upon the minutes of the city of the
election or appointment of such officials, and payable to the city for the use
and benefit of the city.
      (2)   These bonds shall be approved by the outgoing Mayor and
Commissioners, or by the remaining members of the Board of Commissioners in
case of filling a vacancy thereof.
   (B)   Other officers and employees. All other officers and employees shall
be bonded with an approved surety company in amounts which, in the judgment of
the Commission, are deemed sufficient.
(1998 Code, § 2-61)
Charter reference:
   Authority to require bonds, see
Art. XVIII, § 4
§ 30.04  DEFAULTERS NOT ELIGIBLE FOR OFFICE.
   No person who is in debt to the city for any sum of money, other than
current utility bills, shall be eligible for any elective city office.
(1998 Code, § 2-62)
§ 30.05  RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All elected officials shall reside within the city. All department
heads shall reside within the city; however, the Mayor, at his or her
discretion, may allow for variance for department heads on, a case-by-case
basis.
   (B)   Any employee, other than elected officials and department heads, may
reside beyond the city limits; provided, the employee meets the requirements
set forth in division (C) below.
   (C)   (1)   Each employee residing outside the city limits shall respond to
a civil emergency in not more than 20 minutes from the time he or she is
notified.
      (2)   To RESPOND, in all cases except for firefighters and police
officers, means that the employee when notified shall report to a designated
official or department head, or representative thereof, within the city at the
place to which he or she is directed.
      (3)   To RESPOND for firefighters means that the firefighter when
notified shall report to the Fire Chief or his or her representative at the
central fire station, 1725 25th Street North, Texas City, Texas.
      (4)   To RESPOND for police officers means that the police officer when
notified shall report to the Chief of Police or his or her representative at
the police station, 1004 9th Avenue North, Texas City, Texas.
      (5)   Employees electing to reside outside the city limits should select
residences near enough so as to enable them to respond to civil emergencies
within the time specified in this section.
   (D)   The City Commission expressly finds that the standards set forth in
division (C) above, with respect to the time within which city employees who
reside outside the city limits must respond to a civil emergency, are
reasonable.
(1998 Code, § 2-63)
§ 30.06  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   (A)   This section shall be known as the “City Conflicts of Interest
Ordinance”.
   (B)   No public official or employee shall engage in or accept private
employment or render services for private interests when such employment or
service is, directly or indirectly, in conflict with the proper discharge of
that person’s official duties; or which may affect or impair the official’s
independence of judgment or action in the performance of official duties.
   (C)   No public official or employee shall represent, directly or
indirectly, any private person or interest:
      (1)   Before any city department, agency, commission or board, except in
matters of purely public or civic concern and then only without compensation or
remuneration;
      (2)   In any action or proceeding against the interest of the city or in
any litigation in which the city or any city department, agency, commission or
board is a party, but nothing in this division (C)(2) shall limit the authority
of the City Attorney and his or her staff; or
      (3)   In any action or proceeding in the Municipal Court which was
instituted by a public official or an employee in the course of that person’s
official duties, but nothing in this division (C)(3) shall limit the authority
of the City Attorney and his or her staff.
   (D)   No public official shall use confidential information obtained during
the proper discharge of his or her official duties to advance the financial or
other private interest of himself, herself or others.
   (E)   (1)   No public official or employee shall accept any gift, favor,
service or other thing of value in excess of $50 and which would reasonably be
calculated to improperly influence him or her in the discharge of his or her
official duties and which would not be given or offered to him or her were he
or she not a public official or an employee of the city.
      (2)   No public official or employee shall grant in the discharge of his
or her official duties any improper favor, service or thing of value.
   (F)   (1)   A breach by an employee of any of the provisions of this section
may result in the immediate reprimand, suspension and/or termination of the
employee.
      (2)   Any breach of any of the provisions of this section by a public
official shall result in the matter being reviewed by the entire Commission and
appropriate action being taken by a majority vote of the Commission.
(1998 Code, § 2-64)  (Ord. 95-25, passed 12-20-1995)  Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
Regulation of conflicts of interests, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code §§ 171.001 et
seq.
§ 30.07  CITY SECRETARY.
   (A)   In addition to the duties imposed upon the City Secretary by the City
Charter, ordinance or resolution of the City Commission, or required by law,
the City Secretary shall perform any duties imposed by the Mayor or the Mayor’s
designee.
   (B)   (1)   Administratively, the City Secretary shall report directly to
the Mayor, or to the Mayor’s designee.
      (2)   The Mayor shall be responsible for all personnel matters involving
the City Secretary; except that, removal of the City Secretary may only be by
the City Commission, consistent with the City Charter.
   (C)   The position of Deputy City Secretary is hereby created by the City
Commission.
   (D)   The Deputy City Secretary shall have the power and duty to execute all
documents required by any law or ordinance to be executed by the City
Secretary, and affix the seal of the city thereto whenever required, including
documents required by any law or ordinance to be executed by the City
Secretary.
(1998 Code, § 2-65)  (Ord. 04-18, passed 5-19-2004; Ord. 13-41, passed 9-18-
2013)
CITY COMMISSION
§ 30.20  COMMISSION DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Districts are as follows.
      (1)   District No. 1. District No. 1 of the City Commission districts
shall be comprised of the following county election precincts, or portions of
precincts, located within the city limits: 335, 336, 337, 338, 312 and the
portion of precinct 173 within confines as follows: bounded on the north by
Moses Bayou; on the east by Union Pacific Railroad; on the south by 25th Avenue
Extension; and on the west by the Gulf Coast Water Authority Canal.
      (2)   District No. 2. District No. 2 of the City Commission districts
shall be comprised of the following county election precincts, or portions of
precincts, located within the city limits: 151, 280, 301, the portion of 347
north of Palmer Highway, 150 (excluding the area bounded on the west by 23rd
Street; on the north by 34th Avenue North; the south by Loop 197 North; and on
the east by 16th Street ditch), 199, 172, 159, 196, 197 and the portion of
precinct 173 east of Union Pacific Railroad.
      (3)   District No. 3. District No. 3 of the City Commission districts
shall be comprised of the following county election precincts, or portions of
precincts, located within the city limits: 168, 345, 369, 342, 343, and the
portion of 347 south of Palmer Highway.
      (4)   District No. 4. District No. 4 of the City Commission districts
shall be comprised of the following county election precincts, or portions of
precincts, located within the city limits: 146, 148, 149 and a portion of
precinct 150 within confines as follows: bounded on the west by 23rd Street;
bounded on the north by 34th Avenue North; bounded on the south by Loop 197
North; and bounded on the east by 16th Street ditch.
   (B)   The official map delineating the City Commission districts shall
remain on file in the office of the City Secretary.
(1998 Code, § 2-31)  (Ord. 02-07, passed 2-6-2002; Ord. 04-05, passed 3-3-2004;
Ord. 06-05, passed 2-1-2006; Ord. 06-08, passed 2-15-2006; Ord. 13-04, passed
3-20-2013)
Charter reference:
   Reapportionment required, see
Art. II, § 3
§ 30.21  TIME AND PLACE OF MEETINGS.
   (A)   (1)   The regular meetings of the City Commission shall be held and
convened on the first and third Wednesdays of each calendar month of the year
in the council room of the City Hall.
      (2)   These meetings shall commence at 5:00 p.m.
   (B)   If the regular scheduled meetings should fall on a holiday, the Mayor
may reschedule the meeting or cancel it entirely.
(1998 Code, § 2-32)  (Ord. 07-22, passed 6-20-2007)
CHAPTER 31:  CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Recreation and Tourism Board
   
31.01   Established
   
31.02   Qualifications of members
   
31.03   Organization; officers; meetings
   
31.04   Rules of procedure
   
31.05   Quorum
   
31.06   Powers and duties
   
31.07   Compensation of members; expenses
Firefighters’ and Police Officers’ Civil Service Commission
   
31.20   Established; membership
   
31.21   Meetings
   
31.22   Quorum
   
31.23   General powers and duties
   
31.24   Civil suits
   
31.25   Publication of rules, regulations and classification and seniority
lists
   
31.26   Office space
Cross-reference:
   City Commission, see §§
30.20 and
30.21
   Fire Department, see
Ch. 32
   Police Department, see
Ch. 32
RECREATION AND TOURISM BOARD
§ 31.01  ESTABLISHED.
   Pursuant to the authority set forth in the Charter, there is hereby created
in and for the city a board which shall be known as the “Recreation and Tourism
Board”, comprised of nine members.
(1998 Code, § 82-31)  (Ord. 99-76, passed 12-15-1999)
§ 31.02  QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.
   Each member of the Board shall be a resident citizen of the city, unless
this qualification shall be waived by a majority vote of the City Commission,
and each member shall be a taxpayer and qualified voter within the city.
(1998 Code, § 82-32)  (Ord. 99-76, passed 12-15-1999)
§ 31.03  ORGANIZATION; OFFICERS; MEETINGS.
   The members of the Board shall organize and select their own officers and
shall hold meetings regularly, at least once a month, and shall designate the
time and place of the meeting.
(1998 Code, § 82-33)  (Ord. 99-76, passed 12-15-1999)
§ 31.04  RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure for the conduct of its
business and shall keep a record of its proceedings.
(1998 Code, § 82-34)  (Ord. 99-76, passed 12-15-1999)
§ 31.05  QUORUM.
   A simple majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum of
the Board for the transaction of its business.
(1998 Code, § 82-35)  (Ord. 99-76, passed 12-15-1999)
§ 31.06  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The powers and duties of the Recreation and Tourism Board shall be as
follows:
   (A)   Act in an advisory capacity in all matters pertaining to public parks
and recreational and tourism facilities operated by the city;
   (B)   Consider the annual budget of the Recreation and Tourism Board and
make recommendations with respect thereto to the City Commission; and
   (C)   Assist in the planning of parks, recreation and tourism programs,
promote and stimulate public interest in the programs, establish policies and
procedures for said programs and, to that end, solicit, to the fullest possible
extent, the cooperation of the school authorities and other public and private
organizations.
(1998 Code, § 82-36)  (Ord. 99-76, passed 12-15-1999)
§ 31.07  COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS; EXPENSES.
   The members of the Recreation and Tourism Board shall serve without
compensation and, whenever it is deemed necessary by the Board to incur any
expense in performing the duties assigned to the Board, an estimate of the
proposed expenses shall be submitted to the City Commission. No debts of any
kind or character shall be made or incurred by the Board or anyone acting for
the Board, unless the expenditure has been specifically authorized by the City
Commission prior to the time the obligations are incurred.
(1998 Code, § 82-37)  (Ord. 99-76, passed 12-15-1999)
FIREFIGHTERS’ AND POLICE OFFICERS’ CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
§ 31.20  ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   Commission established. There is hereby constituted a commission, to
be known as the “Firefighters’ and Police Officers’ Civil Service Commission”,
in compliance with applicable state law.
   (B)   Director. The Director of the Commission shall be appointed by the
Commission and shall meet the same requirements as provided for members of the
Commission.  The Director may either be a member of the Commission, another
employee of the city or some other person.  The duties of the Director shall be
in accordance with Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 143.012 and the City of Texas City
Civil Service Commission Rules and Regulations, as adopted, including, but not
limited to, the following:
      (1)   The Director shall serve as secretary to the Commission, attending
the regular and special meetings of the Commission, and recording its official
actions.
      (2)   Supervise all examinations, including the preparation, scheduling,
scoring, and security of test materials;
      (3)   Classifying of Fire and Police Department positions;
      (4)   Other such matters as may be deemed reasonably necessary in regard
to the efficient and effective administration of the Civil Service System for
the city.
   (C)   Members. The Commission shall consist of three members, who shall each
be appointed by the City Commission upon the recommendation of the Chief
Executive Officer.  Initially, two members shall be appointed for a term of
three years and one for a term of two years.  Thereafter, all appointments to
such Civil Service Commission shall be for terms of three years.  A Commission
member may not be reappointed to more than a third consecutive term unless the
member's reappointment to a fourth or subsequent consecutive term is confirmed
by a two-thirds majority of all the members of the municipality's governing
body.
(Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 143.006)
   (D)   Chairperson; vice-chairperson.  Each January, the members shall elect
a chairperson and a vice-chairperson.
(Tex. Local Gov’t Code §143.006(e))
   (E)   Vacancies. In case of a vacancy in the Commission, a person shall be
appointed by the the Chief Executive Officer to serve for the remainder of the
unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointment.
   (F)   Qualifications. The Director and all Commissioners shall be of good
moral character, shall be resident citizens of the city, shall have resided in
the city for a period of more than three years, shall each be over the age of
25 years and shall not have held any public office within the preceding three
years.
   (G)   Removal of Director; members.
      (1)   The Director or members of the Commission may be removed by a two-
third vote of the City Commission for any act contrary to the best interest of
the service or failure to act in a manner to promote the best interest of the
service, having first given to the member a copy of the charges against him or
her.
      (2)  The Director or member so charged shall have the right of a public
hearing and the right of appeal to the District Court as allowed employees of
the classified service under the Civil Service Law.
   (H)   Compensation of Director; members. The Director and members of the
Commission shall serve without compensation.
(1998 Code, § 90-61)
§ 31.21  MEETINGS.
The members of the Civil Service Commission shall, at a date, hour and place
set by the Civil Service Commission, hold meetings, as may be required in the
proper discharge of their duties, but in no event less often than annually.
§ 31.22  QUORUM.
   Two members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction
of business.
(1998 Code, § 90-63)
§ 31.23  GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Commission shall, as a body, have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   After public hearing, approve such rules and regulations for the
proper conduct of its business as it shall find necessary and expedient;
      (2)   After public hearing, adopt, modify or reject such classification
and compensation plans for firefighters and police officers, together with
rules for their administration, as may be recommended by the Director after a
thorough survey of the personnel and departmental organization of the Fire
Department and Police Department. No such plans or any amendments thereof shall
be effective until adopted by ordinance of the City Commission;
      (3)   Formulate minimum standards and qualifications for each class of
position in the classified service;
      (4)   Make provisions for open, competitive and free examinations for
persons making proper application and meeting the requirements as prescribed in
the Civil Service Law, this subchapter and the rules and regulations of the
Commission;
      (5)   Authorize temporary appointments to the classified service if no
eligible list has been prepared for the position, and limit temporary
appointments to a maximum period of three continuous months;
      (6)   Make rules and regulations governing promotions, allowing credit
for efficiency and credit for seniority, and providing for promotion
examinations;
      (7)   Require compliance by department heads with the provisions of the
Civil Service Law governing suspensions, both disciplinary and indefinite;
      (8)   Investigate disciplinary suspensions to see whether there is just
cause for suspension;
      (9)   Render a decision, within 30 days from the date of any indefinite
suspension, as to the status of the suspended employee;
      (10)   Make rules and regulations providing for a system of service or
efficiency ratings for all employees in the classified service, which ratings
shall be used for purposes of promotion, demotion, layoff and reinstatement;
      (11)   Make rules and regulations regarding leaves of absence, regular
and sick, with and without pay. These rules shall conform to state laws and
city ordinances on the subject;
      (12)   Make investigations either on petition of a citizen or of its own
motion concerning the enforcement and effect of this subchapter, and require
observance of the rules and regulations made under the provisions of this
subchapter. In these investigations, the Commission shall have the power to
subpoena witnesses and papers relevant to the investigation;
      (13)   Hear and determine appeal of complaints respecting the
administrative work of the Director, the rejection of an applicant for
admission to an examination, and such other matters as may be referred to the
Commission by the Director;
      (14)   Make such investigations as may be requested by the Mayor and the
City Commission and report thereon; and
      (15)   Contract or arrange, within its budget allowance, for such
technical services in connection with personnel selection and administration as
may be necessary, including the preparation and conduct of examinations.
   (B)   No rule or regulation shall ever be adopted by the Commission which
will permit the appointment or employment of any person without good moral
character, or any person unfit mentally or physically, or any person
incompetent to discharge the duties of the appointment or employment.
(1998 Code, § 90-64)
§ 31.24  CIVIL SUITS.
   It shall be the duty of the Commission to begin and conduct all suits which
may be necessary for the proper enforcement of this subchapter and of the rules
of the Commission and to defend all civil suits which may be brought against
the Commission. The Commission shall be represented in these suits by the City
Attorney, but the Commission may in any case, with the approval of the City
Commission, be represented by special counsel appointed by the Commission.
(1998 Code, § 90-65)
§ 31.25  PUBLICATION OF RULES, REGULATIONS AND CLASSIFICATION AND SENIORITY
LISTS.
   The Commission shall cause to be published in printed, mimeographed or
similar form all rules and regulations which may be promulgated by it, and
shall so publish classification and seniority lists for each department in the
classified service, and these rules and regulations shall be made available
upon demand.
(1998 Code, § 90-66)
§ 31.26  OFFICE SPACE.
   The City Commission shall provide adequate and suitable office space for the
conduct of the business of the Commission.
(1998 Code, § 90-67)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 143.006(f)
CHAPTER 32:  LAW ENFORCEMENT AND FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
Classification Plan for Firefighters and Police Officers
   
32.001   Definitions
   
32.002   Establishment and adoption
   
32.003   Class specifications generally
   
32.004   Interpretation of class specifications
   
32.005   Allocation of positions to classes; use of class titles
   
32.006   Reallocation of position when duties change
   
32.007   Hearing on appeals from allocation
   
32.008   Status of present employee upon reallocation to different class
   
32.009   Fire Department; classes of positions
   
32.010   Police Department; classes of positions; authorized strength
Civil Service System for Firefighters and Police Officers
   
32.025   Definitions
   
32.026   Establishment
   
32.027   Status of present employees
   
32.028   Political activities; leaves of absence
   
32.029   Employees engaging in strikes
Police Department Generally
   
32.040   Appointment of Chief of Police
   
32.041   Control and direction of Police Department
   
32.042   Responsibilities of Chief of Police
   
32.043   Oath of police officers
   
32.044   Duties of police
   
32.045   Arrest without warrant
   
32.046   Searching of prisoners; disposition of weapons and valuables taken
from prisoners
   
32.047   Record of commitments and prisoners
   
32.048   Payment of fines and costs; prisoner labor authorized
   
32.049   Supervision and hours of prisoner labor
Reserve Force
   
32.060   Established
   
32.061   Qualifications for membership
   
32.062   Members to serve at discretion of Chief of Police; call to service
   
32.063   Compensation of members; status under Civil Service Law
   
32.064   Eligibility of members for benefits
   
32.065   Reserve force supplemental to regular police force
   
32.066   Rules and regulations
Acceptance of Cash in Lieu of Bond
   
32.080   Authorized
   
32.081   Receipt
   
32.082   Power of attorney to be procured from accused
   
32.083   Custody of money
   
32.084   Disposition of money after court hearing
Abandoned, Lost or Unclaimed Property
   
32.095   Custody
   
32.096   Recovery by owner; conflicting claims
   
32.097   Notification of owner; holding period prior to sale
   
32.098   Notice of sale; conduct of sale
   
32.099   Sales to be for cash; rejection of bids; disposition of proceeds
   
32.100   Records of sales
   
32.101   Disposition of unsold property
Fire Department Generally
   
32.115   Fire Chief; obstructing operations of Fire Department
   
32.116   Arson reward established
   
32.117   Procedure for offering arson reward
   
32.118   Payment of arson reward
   
32.119   Smoking prohibited in auditoriums, theaters and rooms of public
accommodation; causing fire; posting of notice in rooms
   
32.120   Duty of operators of public accommodations to give fire alarm
   
32.121   Gasoline containers
   
32.122   Dispensing motor fuels from mobile devices
   
32.123   Tank trucks transporting flammable, corrosive or toxic materials;
route map; use of designated routes; construction requirements; required signs
and equipment
Fire Marshal
   
32.135   Position established
   
32.136   Appointment, removal and compensation
   
32.137   Right of entry
   
32.138   Investigation of fires
   
32.139   Duty when evidence indicates arson
   
32.140   Taking of testimony generally
   
32.141   Authority to summon witnesses, require production of evidence and
administer oaths
   
32.142   Investigations may be private; separation of witnesses
   
32.143   Misconduct of witnesses summoned by fire marshal or designee
   
32.144   Inspection of premises; order to correct dangerous conditions
   
32.145   Record of fires
   
32.146   Reports to State Fire Marshal
 
   
32.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Firefighters’ and Police Officers’ Civil Service Commission, see §§
31.20 through
31.26
CLASSIFICATION PLAN FOR FIREFIGHTERS AND POLICE OFFICERS
§ 32.001  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLOCATE. The act of assigning each position to its proper class.
   CLASS. A position or group of positions that involves similar duties and
responsibilities and requires similar qualifications and which is properly
designated by one title indicative of the nature of the work.
   CLASSIFICATION PLAN.
      (1)   A grouping into classes of positions which are of approximately
equal difficulty and responsibility;
      (2)   Class titles, descriptive of the work of the class, which will
identify each class; and
      (3)   Written class specifications for each class of positions containing
a description of the nature of work and of the relative responsibility of the
positions in the class, illustrative examples of work performed in the class,
requirements in terms of knowledge, skills and abilities necessary for
performance of the work and a statement of experience and training desirable
for recruitment into the class.
   CLASSIFIED SERVICE. Members of the Fire Department and the Police Department
of the city, as defined under “firefighter” and “police officer” in this
section; provided that, the Chief or head of the Fire Department and the Chief
or head of the Police Department shall not be included within the CLASSIFIED
SERVICE.
   COMMISSION. The Firefighters’ and Police Officers’ Civil Service Commission
of the city.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Firefighters’ and Police Officers’ Civil Service
designated by the Firefighters’ and Police Officers’ Civil Service Commission
to act in the capacity of Secretary to the Commission and Director of Civil
Service.
   FIREFIGHTER. One who engages in the fighting and extinguishment of fires.
   POLICE OFFICER. One who engages in the actual enforcement of laws and the
maintenance of public order.
   POSITION. A group of current duties and responsibilities, assigned or
delegated by competent authority, requiring the services of an employee.
   VACANCY. A position, duly created, which is not occupied and for the filling
of which a valid requisition has been received by the Director.
(1998 Code, § 90-121)
§ 32.002  ESTABLISHMENT AND ADOPTION.
   (A)   In accordance with the provisions of Tex. Local Gov’t Code §§ 143.001
et seq., as amended, there is hereby established a classification plan for all
employees in the Fire and Police Departments in the classified service of the
city.
   (B)   (1)   Upon the recommendation of the Director, the City Commission
hereby establishes and adopts the classification plan set forth in the
provisions of this subchapter as the official classification plan of all
positions in the classified service of the city.
      (2)   The City Commission reserves to itself the sole right to designate
new classes of positions, or combine, divide, alter or abolish existing
classes, subject only to the provisions of the Civil Service Law and this
subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 90-122)
§ 32.003  CLASS SPECIFICATIONS GENERALLY.
   (A)   The Director shall cause to be maintained in the offices of the
Commission, in looseleaf or other suitable form, accurate, complete and up-to-
date specifications for every class of positions in the classified service.
   (B)   These specifications shall include:
      (1)   The title of the class;
      (2)   A statement of the duties performed and the responsibilities
exercised by each class of positions;
      (3)   Examples of tasks performed by employees holding positions within
the class; and
      (4)   The minimum and desirable qualifications required of an incumbent
for the satisfactory performance of the duties and tasks and the exercise of
the responsibilities.
(1998 Code, § 90-123)
§ 32.004  INTERPRETATION OF CLASS SPECIFICATIONS.
   The specifications for the various classes of positions are hereby declared
to have the following force and effect.
   (A)   The specifications are descriptive only and are not restrictive. They
are intended to indicate the kinds of positions that should be allocated to the
respective classes as determined by their duties, responsibilities and
qualification requirements. The use of a particular expression or restriction
as to duties, qualification requirements or other attributes shall not be held
to exclude others not mentioned if these others are similar as to kind and
quality.
   (B)   In determining the class to which any position shall be allocated, the
specifications for each class shall be considered as a whole. Consideration is
to be given to the general duties, the specific tasks, the responsibilities,
the special and desirable qualifications and the relationships to other classes
as affording a picture of the positions that the class is intended to include.
   (C)   Titles, as far as possible, are intended to be suggestive of the kind
of work performed by the incumbent of the position and indicative of the rank.
   (D)   The duties statement shall be construed as a general description of
the kind of work performed by the incumbent of a position that is properly
allocated to the class and not as describing or limiting what the duties of any
position shall be.
   (E)   The examples of work shall be construed as typical tasks only,
illustrative of the duties as outlined by the general statement. These examples
are not intended to be complete or exclusive, and the fact that the actual
tasks performed by the incumbent of a position do not appear thereon shall not
be taken to mean that the position is necessarily excluded from the class;
provided that, the tasks constituting the main work or employment are duly
covered by the general statement of the duties. Any one example of a typical
task taken without relation to the general statement of duties and all other
parts of the specifications shall not be construed as determining whether a
position should be allocated to the class.
   (F)   The statement of special and desirable qualifications constitutes a
part of the description of the kind of employment by expressing the minimum and
desired qualifications expected of any new appointee if he or she is to perform
the work properly, and is to be so construed and not as imposing in itself any
new or additional requirements for the filling of positions. Even though they
may not be mentioned in the qualifications statement, such qualifications as
should be properly required in common of all incumbents of all positions, such
as good physical health, freedom from defects, citizenship, honesty, sobriety
and industry, are to be considered as part of the qualification requirements.
(1998 Code, § 90-124)
§ 32.005  ALLOCATION OF POSITIONS TO CLASSES; USE OF CLASS TITLES.
   The Director shall allocate each position in the classified service to its
appropriate class in the classification plan. The allocation shall be based on
the duties and responsibilities of the present incumbents of the positions and
shall be entered on the official roster cards maintained by the Commission. The
title of the class shall forthwith become the title of the individual positions
and shall be used in payrolls submitted to the proper disbursing officer, in
requests to the Commission for the certification of eligibles, in reports made
to the Commission as provided by the rules and regulations of the Commission
and in any other official records and communications of the Commission and of
all budget and financial officers.
(1998 Code, § 90-125)
§ 32.006  REALLOCATION OF POSITION WHEN DUTIES CHANGE.
   (A)   Whenever a new position should be established or the duties of an
existing position are so changed that in effect the old position as described
in the class specification for the class to which it was originally allocated
no longer exists and in its place there is created a position which should be
allocated to a different class, the Director, in consultation with the
department heads, shall report this fact to the Commission and send in on the
Commission’s prescribed form a full statement of the circumstances and a
description of the duties as changed.
   (B)   Upon the recommendation of the Commission, after a full investigation
of the actual and proposed duties, responsibilities and qualification
requirements, the City Commission may allocate or reallocate the position to
its appropriate class in accordance with the classification plan then in
effect.
   (C)   If necessary, a new class shall be established to provide for the new
position. The Commission shall likewise from time to time of its own motion
make investigations of any or all positions in the classified service and
shall, in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, make
recommendations to the City Commission for the allocation of positions whenever
the facts are such as to warrant this action.
(1998 Code, § 90-126)
§ 32.007  HEARING ON APPEALS FROM ALLOCATION.
   If an employee believes that his or her position has been improperly
allocated, he or she may protest by presenting his or her reason therefor upon
such forms or documents as the Director may prescribe. The claim shall be
investigated by the Director and the Commission, then referred to the City
Commission for its decision, which shall be final.
(1998 Code, § 90-127)
§ 32.008  STATUS OF PRESENT EMPLOYEE UPON REALLOCATION TO DIFFERENT CLASS.
   If a position at any time is reallocated to a different class to correct an
error in the original allocation, the incumbent shall continue in the position
without tests or other proofs of fitness. If a position is reallocated to
another class on account of changed duties and responsibilities, the incumbent
may, upon written recommendation of the department head, the passing of a non-
competitive examination given by the Director and approval of the Commission,
continue in the position. This shall not apply if an employee is actually
transferred to another position involving substantially different or higher
qualifications, but only in those cases where new duties and responsibilities
have been added or absorbed by the incumbent in addition to his or her
regularly assigned work.
(1998 Code, § 90-128)
§ 32.009  FIRE DEPARTMENT; CLASSES OF POSITIONS.
   (A)   Effective on October 16, 2014, at 12:01 a.m., the following classes of
positions, and number of positions within each classification, were hereby
established in the classified service of the city’s Fire Department:
 
Firefighter          42
Engineer             19
Captain              11
Battalion Fire Chief 3
Assistant Fire Chief 1
Total                76
 
   (B)   Effective on December 21, 2016, at 12:01 a.m., the following classes
of positions, and number of positions within each classification, are hereby
established in the classified service of the city’s Fire Department:
 
Firefighter          39
Engineer             19
Captain              11
Battalion Fire Chief 3
Assistant Fire Chief 1
Total                73
 
(1998 Code, § 90-151)  ( Ord. 01-05, passed 3-7-2000; Ord. 00-74, passed 11-1-
2000; Ord. 04-14, passed 6-2-2004; Ord. 04-30, passed 7-7-2004; Ord. 05-05,
passed 4-6-2005; Ord. 06-41, passed 12-6-2006; Ord. 07-08, passed 2-7-2007;
Ord. 07-51, passed 12-19-2007; Ord. 08-52, passed 12-17-2008; Ord. 09-06,
passed 2-18-2009; Ord. 14-27, passed 10-15-2014; Ord. 16-38, passed 12-21-2016)
§ 32.010  POLICE DEPARTMENT; CLASSES OF POSITIONS; AUTHORIZED STRENGTH.
   (A)   Classes of positions. The following classes of positions are hereby
established in the classified service of the City Police Department:
      (1)   Patrol officer;
      (2)   Corporal;
      (3)   Sergeant;
      (4)   Identification officer;
      (5)   Identification officer, sergeant; and
      (6)   Captain.
(1998 Code, § 90-171)
   (B)   Authorized strength.
      (1)   Effective on January 17, 2018, the following classes of positions,
and number of positions within each classification, were hereby established in
the classified service of the city’s Police Department:
 
Assistant Police Chief    1
Captain                   3
Lieutenant                4
Sergeant                  9
Corporals/Police Officers 68
Total                     85
 
      (2)   Effective on July 18, 2018, the following classes of positions, and
number of positions within each classification, are hereby established in the
classified service of the city’s Police Department:
 
Assistant Police Chief    1
Captain                   3
Lieutenant                4
Sergeant                  8
Corporals/Police Officers 69
Total                     85
 
(1998 Code, § 90-172)  (Ord. 00-62, passed 10-4-2000; Ord. 00-63, passed 10-4-
2000; Ord. 03-22, passed 7-2-2003; Ord. 03-39, passed 10-1-2003; Ord. 06-03,
passed 1-18-2006; Ord. 06-31, passed 7-19-2006; Ord. 07-03, passed 2-17-2007;
Ord. 07-34, passed 9-19-2007; Ord. 08-08, passed 2-20-2008; Ord. 08-39, passed
9-17-2008; Ord. 11-14, passed 5-4-2011; Ord. 11-30, passed 9-7-2011; Ord. 16-
23, passed 7-6-2016; Ord. 16-37, passed 12-21-2016; Ord. 17-15, passed 5-3-
2017; Am. Ord. 18-02, passed 1-17-2018; Am. Ord. 18-14, passed 7-18-2018)
CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM FOR FIREFIGHTERS AND POLICE OFFICERS
§ 32.025  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHIEF EXECUTIVE. The officer of the city having the final authority to make
the appointment to the position to be filled, being the Mayor.
   CIVIL SERVICE LAW. Tex. Local Gov’t Code §§ 143.001 et seq.
   CLASSIFIED SERVICE. The members of the Fire Department and the Police
Department as defined under “firefighter” and “police officer” in this section;
provided that, the Chief or head of the Fire Department and the Chief or head
of the Police Department shall not be included in the CLASSIFIED SERVICE.
   COMMISSION. The Firefighters’ and Police Officers’ Civil Service Commission
of the city.
   DEPARTMENT HEAD. The Chief or head of the Fire Department or the Chief or
head of the Police Department.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Firefighters’ and Police Officers’ Civil Service
designated by the Firefighters’ and Police Officers’ Civil Service Commission
to act in the capacity of Secretary to the Commission and Director of Civil
Service.
   FIREFIGHTER. Any member of the Fire Department appointed to the position in
substantial compliance with the provisions of Tex. Local Gov’t Code §§ 143.001
et seq., or entitled to civil service status under §
32.027 of this chapter. The term includes FIREFIGHTERS who perform fire
suppression, fire prevention, fire training, fire safety education, fire
maintenance, fire communications, fire medical emergency technology, fire
photography or fire administration.
   POLICE OFFICER. Any member of the Police Department appointed to such
position in substantial compliance with the provisions of Tex. Local Gov’t Code
§§ 143.001 et seq., or entitled to civil service status under §
32.027 of this chapter.
   PUBLIC HEARING. An opportunity given after public notice of at least five
days for any citizen or party interested to appeal and be heard at reasonable
length on the matter involved.
(1998 Code, § 90-31)
§ 32.026  ESTABLISHMENT.
   In accordance with Tex. Local Gov’t Code §§ 143.001 et seq., which was
adopted by the qualified voters of the city, there is hereby established a
Civil Service System for Firefighters and Police Officers.
(1998 Code, § 90-32)
§ 32.027  STATUS OF PRESENT EMPLOYEES.
   Any person holding a position in the classified service at the time of the
adoption of the Civil Service Law by the voters of the city, who shall have
served in the service of the city continuously for at least six months, shall
enjoy civil service status without competitive examinations, but shall
thereafter be subject in all other respects to the provisions of this
subchapter and the rules and regulations of the Commission. Any other persons
in the classified service shall be regarded as holding their positions under
temporary appointments.
(1998 Code, § 90-34)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 143.005
§ 32.028  POLITICAL ACTIVITIES; LEAVES OF ABSENCE.
   (A)   Employees in the Fire Department or Police Department shall not be
permitted to take an active part in any political campaign of another for an
elective position of the city if they are in uniform or on active duty. As used
in this section, the term ACTIVE PART means making political speeches, passing
out cards or other political literature, writing letters, signing petitions,
actively and openly soliciting votes or making public derogatory remarks about
candidates for these elective positions.
   (B)   Firefighters and police officers coming under the provisions of this
subchapter are not required to contribute to any political fund or render any
political service to any person or party whatsoever; and no person shall be
removed, reduced in classification or salary, or otherwise prejudiced by
refusing to do so; and any official of the city coming under the provisions of
this subchapter who attempts such actions shall be guilty of violating the
provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   No firefighter or police officer shall be refused reasonable leave of
absence without pay; provided that, a sufficient number of employees to carry
out the normal functions of the Department shall be provided, for the purpose
of attending any fire or police school, convention or meeting, the purpose of
which is to secure more efficient departments and better working conditions for
the personnel thereof, nor shall any rule ever be adopted affecting their
constitutional right to appear before or petition the legislature; provided,
however, that, the Civil Service Commission or the City Commission may not
further restrict the rights of employees of the Police and Fire Departments to
engage in political activities, except as expressly provided in this section.
(1998 Code, § 90-35)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code §§ 143.071, 143.086
§ 32.029  EMPLOYEES ENGAGING IN STRIKES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any employee in the classified service of the
city to engage in any strike against the city.
   (B)   In addition to the penalty provided in §
32.999(B) of this chapter, any employee who has been convicted of a violation
of the provisions of this section shall thereby be automatically released and
discharged from the classified service and shall thereafter be ineligible to
receive any pay or compensation out of any public funds provided for the
support of the classified service.
(1998 Code, § 90-36)  Penalty, see §
32.999
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 143.087
POLICE DEPARTMENT GENERALLY
§ 32.040  APPOINTMENT OF CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the chief executive officer and
confirmed by the City Commission.
(1998 Code, § 70-1)
§ 32.041  CONTROL AND DIRECTION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   The Police Department and officers and employees thereof shall be under the
charge, control and direction of the Chief of Police, subject to such rules,
regulations and orders as may be prescribed by the Civil Service Commission.
(1998 Code, § 70-2)
§ 32.042  RESPONSIBILITIES OF CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The Chief of Police shall at all times be responsible for the conduct of the
Police Department and shall devote all of his or her time and energy to the
discharge of the duties of his or her office.
(1998 Code, § 70-3)
§ 32.043  OATH OF POLICE OFFICERS.
   Each police officer of the city shall take the constitutional oath of office
before entering upon the discharge of the duties of his or her office.
(1998 Code, § 70-4)
§ 32.044  DUTIES OF POLICE.
   The officers and employees of the Police Department are charged with the
duties of preserving the public peace, detecting and preventing crime,
arresting offenders, protecting the rights of persons and property, preserving
order at elections, public meetings and public places, preventing and removing,
if possible, nuisances on and in all public streets, highways, alleys, waters
and other places, the enforcement of the penal code of the state and the penal
provisions of this code and other ordinances of the city, and performing and
discharging such other duties as are now or may hereafter be imposed upon them
by the laws of the state or by the ordinances of the city.
(1998 Code, § 70-5)
§ 32.045  ARREST WITHOUT WARRANT.
   (A)   A peace officer or any other person may, without a warrant, arrest an
offender when the offense is committed in his or her presence or within his or
her view, if the offense is one classed as a felony or as an offense against
the public peace.
   (B)   A peace officer may arrest an offender without a warrant for any
offense committed in his or her presence or within his or her view.
(1998 Code, § 70-6)
Statutory reference:
   Arrest without warrant, see Tex. C.C.P. Art. 14.01 et seq.
§ 32.046  SEARCHING OF PRISONERS; DISPOSITION OF WEAPONS AND VALUABLES TAKEN
FROM PRISONERS.
   It shall be the duty of every police officer to search every prisoner
apprehended by him or her and placed in jail, and the prisoner shall be so
searched in the presence of another person when practicable to do so. All
weapons and valuables shall be taken from the prisoner and placed under lock
for safekeeping until such time as the judge of the Municipal Court orders
their release to the owner thereof.
(1998 Code, § 70-7)
§ 32.047  RECORD OF COMMITMENTS AND PRISONERS.
   The Chief of Police shall keep or cause to be kept in his or her office a
record of all commitments issued and delivered to him or her, to be designated
the record of commitments and prisoners. This record shall show the case
number, the name of the defendant, the nature of the offense, the date of
commitment, the amount of fine and costs assessed, the amount of fine and costs
collected, the date of release of prisoners and the reason therefor. In the
column of this record providing for entering the reason for release shall be
stated the disposition of the case.
(1998 Code, § 70-8)
§ 32.048  PAYMENT OF FINES AND COSTS; PRISONER LABOR AUTHORIZED.
   Every person upon whom a fine or a fine and costs shall be imposed by the
Municipal Court for the violation of any law of the state, provision of this
code or ordinance of the city, and who is unable to pay or fails to pay the
fine or the fine and costs imposed, shall be committed to the jail of the city
or the county until the fine or the fine and costs shall be paid or satisfied
by imprisonment. Every person so committed to jail may be required to work upon
the public streets or upon any public work of the city. All fines or fines and
costs shall be satisfied by rating the imprisonment at $50 per day if not
worked or $200 per day if worked.
(1998 Code, § 70-9) (Ord. 13-39, passed 9-4-2013)
§ 32.049  SUPERVISION AND HOURS OF PRISONER LABOR.
   Every prisoner who shall be required to labor, under the provisions of §
32.048 of this chapter shall do so under the supervision of the Chief of Police
or some person detailed by the Chief of Police for that purpose. The person so
convicted shall not be required to work more than eight full hours during one
day.
(1998 Code, § 70-10)
RESERVE FORCE
§ 32.060  ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established in the city a Police Reserve Force composed of
two units, Unit I and Unit II.
(1998 Code, § 70-31) (Ord. 13-39, passed 9-4-2013)
Statutory reference:
Reserve police force, authority, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 341.012
§ 32.061  QUALIFICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (A)   MEMBERS OF UNIT I OF THE POLICE RESERVE FORCE shall be officers
retired from active duty with the City Police Department and shall otherwise be
a licensed police officer pursuant to standards established by the State
Commission on Law Enforcement Officers’ Standards and Education.
   (B)   MEMBERS OF UNIT II OF THE POLICE RESERVE FORCE shall consist of
otherwise licensed peace officers, excepting retirees of the City Police
Department, who are licensed pursuant to standards established by the State
Commission on Law Enforcement Officers’ Standards and Education. All police
reserves must meet all standards established for a full-time city police
officer.
(1998 Code, § 70-32) (Ord. 13-39, passed 9-4-2013)
§ 32.062  MEMBERS TO SERVE AT DISCRETION OF CHIEF OF POLICE; CALL TO SERVICE.
   (A)   Members of the Police Reserve Force shall serve at the discretion of
the Chief of Police and may be called into service at any time the Chief of
Police deems it necessary to have additional officers to preserve the peace and
enforce the law.
   (B)   The Chief of Police authorizes the person appointed to carry a weapon
and act as a peace officer at all times, regardless of whether the person is
engaged in the actual discharge of official duties.
(1998 Code, § 70-33) (Ord. 13-39, passed 9-4-2013)
§ 32.063  COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS; STATUS UNDER CIVIL SERVICE LAW.
   Members of the police reserve force shall serve without compensation and
shall not be classified as police officers under the Municipal Civil Service
Law (Tex. Local Gov’t Code §§ 143.001 et seq.) or be entitled to the benefits
of this statute other than as may be required by state and federal law.
(1998 Code, § 70-34)
§ 32.064  ELIGIBILITY OF MEMBERS FOR BENEFITS.
   Members of the Police Reserve Force shall be eligible for all applicable
federal, state and city benefits only while serving as a police reserve officer
and only while on duty with the city.
(1998 Code, § 70-35)
§ 32.065  RESERVE FORCE SUPPLEMENTAL TO REGULAR POLICE FORCE.
   Officers of the Police Reserve Force shall act only in a supplementary
capacity to the regular police force.
(1998 Code, § 70-36)
§ 32.066  RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All officers of the Police Reserve Force shall be subject to the rules
and regulations as promulgated by the City Police Chief.
   (B)   A copy of such rules and regulations is available in the office of the
Chief of Police.
(1998 Code, § 70-37) (Ord. 13-39, passed 9-4-2013)
ACCEPTANCE OF CASH IN LIEU OF BOND
§ 32.080  AUTHORIZED.
   Such members of the Police Department of the city as may from time to time
be designated by the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to accept from
persons arrested for misdemeanor offenses pending in the Municipal Court such
sums of money in cash as shall, from time to time, be designated by the Judge
of the Municipal Court in lieu of bail bonds, at the option of the accused
person.
(1998 Code, § 70-61)
Statutory reference:
   Bail and recognizance, authority to require or take, forfeiture in
misdemeanors, see Tex. C.C.P. Arts. 23.14, 44.42, 44.43
   Payable in money, see Tex. C.C.P. Art. 43.02
   Right to bail, see Tex. C.C.P. Art. 1.07 and Constitution Art. I, § 11
   Taking by arresting officer, see Tex. Code of Crim. Pro. Art. 23.14
§ 32.081  RECEIPT.
   Any member of the Police Department, pursuant to the authority granted by
this subchapter, who shall accept money in cash from a person arrested for
misdemeanor offenses shall issue to the person a receipt showing the date upon
which the money is received and the sum thereof. The receipt shall likewise
state the nature of the offense charged and the date and hour at which the case
against the accused person shall be heard.
(1998 Code, § 70-62)
§ 32.082  POWER OF ATTORNEY TO BE PROCURED FROM ACCUSED.
   No member of the Police Department shall accept any money in cash or issue
any receipt therefor unless and until he or she shall first procure an
instrument in writing empowering him or her to enter a plea of guilty for the
accused person should he or she fail to appear at the time stipulated in the
receipt.
(1998 Code, § 70-63)
§ 32.083  CUSTODY OF MONEY.
   The Judge of the Municipal Court shall be custodian of all money received
under authority of this subchapter. Any member of the Police Department who
shall receive money in accordance with this subchapter shall surrender the
money to the Judge of the Municipal Court as soon as possible after receiving
the money, and in no event at a time later than that stipulated for the
appearance of the accused person. The Judge shall execute a receipt for the
money in such form as shall be prescribed by the City Attorney.
(1998 Code, § 70-64)
§ 32.084  DISPOSITION OF MONEY AFTER COURT HEARING.
   Should any person who has tendered money to a member of the Police
Department under authority of the provisions of this subchapter fail to appear
at the time stipulated, the sum of money deposited in lieu of bail bond shall
be applied as a credit on any fine assessed by the Judge of the Municipal Court
upon a hearing of the cause. Should the Judge find the accused person not
guilty of the offense charged, the money shall be placed in safekeeping by the
Judge and surrendered to the person so acquitted upon demand. Nothing in this
section shall be construed as a limitation on the authority of the Judge of the
Municipal Court to assess fines as he or she shall deem fit under the
circumstances, and any money in excess of the amount of the fine shall be
returned to the accused person upon demand. Should a fine in excess of the sum
deposited be assessed, nothing in this section shall prevent recovery of the
balance due from the accused person by due process of law.
(1998 Code, § 70-65)
ABANDONED, LOST OR UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
§ 32.095  CUSTODY.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall be the custodian of all abandoned, lost and
unclaimed property which comes into the possession of any police officer or any
city employee engaged in the cleaning or repair of streets or public places.
   (B)   The Chief of Police may delegate to any police officer designated by
him or her the duty of storing and protecting the property and keeping suitable
records thereof.
(1998 Code, § 70-91)
§ 32.096  RECOVERY BY OWNER; CONFLICTING CLAIMS.
   When the disposition of the lost, abandoned or unclaimed property is not
otherwise governed by law or by order of a court, the Chief of Police shall
surrender the property, if claimed, to any person known to be the owner, on
producing satisfactory evidence of ownership or right to possession, upon
payment of any proper fees owing to the city because of the city’s storage of
the property. If the right of the claimant is not certain, the Chief may, in
his or her discretion, require the claimant to give reasonable security for the
return of the property or its value; and if there could be conflicting claims
the Chief may request the Legal Department to file an interpleader suit.
(1998 Code, § 70-92)
§ 32.097  NOTIFICATION OF OWNER; HOLDING PERIOD PRIOR TO SALE.
   The Chief of Police shall make a reasonable attempt to locate and notify the
owner of each item of lost, abandoned or unclaimed property that is in custody
of the Chief of Police. When the disposition of the property is not otherwise
governed by law or by order of a court, and the property remains unclaimed for
two years after it comes into the custody of the Chief of Police, it shall be
sold as specified in this subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 70-93)
§ 32.098  NOTICE OF SALE; CONDUCT OF SALE.
   From time to time, as lost, abandoned and unclaimed property accumulates so
that it should be disposed of, or can be disposed of to advantage, the Chief of
Police shall offer it for sale at public auction. The City Commission may, in
its discretion, authorize the employment of a professional auctioneer to
conduct the sale. Notice of the time and place of the sale, and a brief
description of the property, shall be given by posting at the City Hall and by
one advertisement in the official newspaper. The posting of notice and the
publication of the advertisement shall be not less than ten and not more than
20 days before the sale.
(1998 Code, § 70-94)
§ 32.099  SALES TO BE FOR CASH; REJECTION OF BIDS; DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.
   All sales pursuant to this subchapter shall be for cash. The Chief of Police
may reject any bid he or she deems insufficient. After deducting the actual
costs of the sale and storing of the property, the proceeds shall be placed in
the General Fund.
(1998 Code, § 70-95)
§ 32.100  RECORDS OF SALES.
   The Police Department shall turn all property over to public works who
prepares an inventory and records the date and price obtained for each item
sold pursuant to this subchapter. This list shall be turned over to the Finance
Department for recordkeeping, so that it may be determined later what amount
should be paid to any person who may thereafter establish a legal right to part
of the proceeds.
(1998 Code, § 70-96)
§ 32.101  DISPOSITION OF UNSOLD PROPERTY.
   Property for which no sufficient bid is offered at a sale pursuant to this
subchapter may be kept and again offered for sale, or may be otherwise disposed
of as ordered by a Municipal Judge.
(1998 Code, § 70-97)
FIRE DEPARTMENT GENERALLY
§ 32.115  FIRE CHIEF; OBSTRUCTING OPERATIONS OF FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Appointment of Fire Chief; general powers and duties. The City
Commission shall appoint the Chief of the Fire Department, who shall be the
supervisor of all work in the Fire Department. In all fire emergency
situations, the Chief shall be under the direction of and report to the Mayor
or his or her designee. The Fire Department and officers and employees thereof
shall be under the charge, control and direction of the Fire Chief, subject to
such rules, regulations and orders as may be prescribed by the Civil Service
Commission and the city.
   (B)   Authority of Fire Chief at scene of emergency. The Fire Chief or his
or her authorized representative shall be in charge at the scene of a fire or
other emergency under the purview of the Fire Department involving the
protection of life or property or any part thereof and shall have the power and
authority to direct such operation as may be necessary to extinguish or control
any fire, explosion or like emergency, perform any rescue operation, administer
pre-hospital emergency medical care until arrival of emergency medical services
as directed and authorized by adopted medical protocols, investigate the
existence of suspected or reported fires, gas leaks or other hazardous
conditions or situations, or take any other action necessary in the reasonable
performance of his or her duty. In the exercise of such power, the Fire Chief
may prohibit, without use of force, any person, vehicle, vessel or object from
approaching the scene and may remove or cause to be removed or keep away from
the scene any vehicle, vessel or object which may impede or interfere with the
operation of the Fire Department, and any person not actually and usefully
employed in the mitigation of such emergency, or in the preservation of life or
property in the vicinity thereof.
   (C)   Obstructing operations of Fire Department. Any person who obstructs
the operations of the Fire Department in connection with extinguishing any fire
or other emergency, or disobeys any lawful command of the Fire Chief, Fire
Marshal or officer of the Fire Department who may be in charge at such a scene
or any part thereof or any police officer assisting the Fire Department, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (D)   Continuation of position of Fire Marshal. This section does not repeal
the ordinance creating the Fire Marshal and the duties and responsibilities
outlined in §§
32.135 through
32.146 of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 54-1)  (Ord. 00-74, passed 11-1-2000)
§ 32.116  ARSON REWARD ESTABLISHED.
   The Mayor is hereby required, authorized and empowered to offer a reward of
not less than $500 payable to the person who shall be responsible for the
arrest and conviction of any person committing in the city the crime of arson
as arson is now defined by the State Penal Code.
(1998 Code, § 54-2)  (Ord. 08-56, passed 2-21-2009)
§ 32.117  PROCEDURE FOR OFFERING ARSON REWARD.
   (A)   Whenever the Mayor shall be informed that any fire occurring in the
city was of an incendiary origin, he or she shall call for a report on the fire
by the City Fire Marshal. If the Marshal shall report that the fire was caused
by the Commission of the crime of arson, it shall become the duty of the Mayor
to offer the reward prescribed in §
32.116 of this chapter, which reward shall be in the form of a proclamation
duly issued by the Mayor under his or her official signature and attested by
the seal of the city.
   (B)   It shall be posted upon conspicuous places, one of which shall be the
City Hall, in accordance with the regulations of the State Insurance
Department.
(1998 Code, § 54-3)
§ 32.118  PAYMENT OF ARSON REWARD.
   Upon information being given by any person causing the arrest and conviction
of any person guilty of the specific crime of arson, and upon the final
conviction of the person, the informant shall be entitled to receive the reward
offered in §
32.116 of this chapter from the city.
(1998 Code, § 54-4)
§ 32.119  SMOKING PROHIBITED IN AUDITORIUMS, THEATERS AND ROOMS OF PUBLIC
ACCOMMODATION; CAUSING FIRE; POSTING OF NOTICE IN ROOMS.
   (A)   Smoking prohibited in auditoriums and theaters. It shall be unlawful
for any person to smoke any pipe, cigar or cigarette in the city auditorium or
in any school auditorium, theater or motion picture theater in the city.
(1998 Code, § 54-5)
   (B)   Smoking in rooms of public accommodations; causing fire. It shall be
unlawful for any person, as guest or occupant of any hotel, roominghouse,
tourist court or other place renting rooms for the accommodation of the public,
by smoking or attempting to light or to smoke cigars, cigarettes, pipes or
tobacco in any manner in which lighters or matches are employed, or in the
disposition of lighted matches, cigars or cigarettes or live embers of any
smoking materials, in a careless, reckless or negligent manner, whether
willfully or negligently, to set fire to any mattress, bedding, furniture,
curtains, drapes or other household fittings.
(1998 Code, § 54-6)
   (C)   Posting of notice in rooms. It shall be the duty of every person who
shall directly as owner, or as operator, manager or agent for another, keep or
be concerned in keeping any hotel, roominghouse, tourist court or place renting
rooms for the accommodation of the public, to post a copy of division (B)
above, plainly printed, with the heading in not less than 14-point type and the
body of division (B) above in not less than ten-point type, in each sleeping
room of all hotels, roominghouses, tourist courts or other places renting rooms
for the accommodation of the public within the city.
(1998 Code, § 54-7)
Penalty, see §
32.999
§ 32.120  DUTY OF OPERATORS OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS TO GIVE FIRE ALARM.
   It shall be the duty of every person who shall directly as owner, or as
operator, manager or agent for another, keep or be concerned in keeping any
hotel, roominghouse, tourist court or place renting rooms for the accommodation
of the public, upon the discovery of fire burning any part of the establishment
or the furniture or household fittings of any type, to immediately transmit an
alarm of fire to the Fire Department of the city, reporting the location of the
establishment by telephone or any other practicable means.
(1998 Code, § 54-8)  Penalty, see §
32.999
§ 32.121  GASOLINE CONTAINERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver or to accept delivery
of gasoline in any container other than an approved container equipped with a
cap or similar device reasonably sufficient to prevent the escape of vapors.
   (B)   Signs marked “DELIVERY OR ACCEPTANCE OF GASOLINE IN ANY CONTAINER
OTHER THAN AN APPROVED CONTAINER WITH A CAP TO PREVENT ESCAPE OF VAPORS IS
PROHIBITED BY LAW” shall be displayed prominently at all places where gasoline
is sold by any person who engages in the business of selling gasoline.
(1998 Code, § 54-9)  Penalty, see §
32.999
§ 32.122  DISPENSING MOTOR FUELS FROM MOBILE DEVICES.
   The operation of vehicles, tank trucks or other mobile devices from which
flammable liquids used as motor fuels may, as an act of retail sale, be
dispensed into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles parked on off-street facilities
is hereby prohibited within the city.
(1998 Code, § 54-10)  Penalty, see §
32.999
§ 32.123  TANK TRUCKS TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE, CORROSIVE OR TOXIC MATERIALS;
ROUTE MAP; USE OF DESIGNATED ROUTES; CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS; REQUIRED SIGNS
AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Tank trucks transporting flammable, corrosive or toxic materials;
route map.
      (1)   Every tank truck, whether a common carrier or not, transporting
liquefied petroleum gases, natural gasoline or corrosive or toxic chemicals,
flammable liquids, combustible liquids, poisons, oxidizers, radioactive
material or liquefied natural gas in bulk within the corporate limits of the
city shall be confined in movement to the streets, avenues and highways
designated for such use as shown on the route map, prepared by the Planning
Department of the city and on file in the Director of Transportation and
Planning. Such map, hereby designated as “Tank Trucks Route Map”, and all of
the notations and references and information shown thereon, are hereby made as
much a part of this subchapter as if set forth in full in this subchapter.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the Director of Transportation and Planning
to keep the route map on file in his or her office, and a duplicate copy shall
be kept on file in the office of the City Traffic Engineer. These routes shall
be adequately marked with appropriate signs. Empty trucks containing vapors of
liquefied petroleum gases, natural gasoline, corrosive or toxic chemicals,
flammable liquids, combustible liquids, poisons, oxidizers, radioactive
material or liquefied natural gas shall be confined to the same routes.
(1998 Code, § 54-12)
   (B)   Use of designated routes. It shall be unlawful for any person to haul
or transport liquefied petroleum gases, natural gasoline or flammable,
corrosive or toxic chemicals, flammable liquids, combustible liquids, poisons,
oxidizers, radioactive material or liquefied natural gas in bulk over any other
routes than those prescribed on the tank truck route map; provided, however,
that, in case of emergency, movement of such vehicles over other routes may be
authorized by the Chief of the Fire Department or the Fire Marshal.
(1998 Code, § 54-13)
   (C)   Construction requirements. All trucks transporting liquefied petroleum
gases, natural gasoline or flammable, corrosive or toxic chemicals in bulk
within the corporate limits of the city shall meet the construction
requirements of the State Railroad Commission for the commodity transported. If
the State Railroad Commission does not prescribe construction requirements for
tank trucks hauling one of these commodities in bulk, then the construction
requirements of FERC No. 436 for that commodity shall apply.
(1998 Code, § 54-14)
   (D)   Required signs and equipment. All trucks transporting liquefied
petroleum gases, natural gasoline or corrosive or toxic chemicals, flammable
liquids, combustible liquids, poisons, oxidizers, radioactive material or
liquefied natural gas shall have a conspicuous sign on each side and on the
rear conforming to U.S. Department of Transportation standards. All trucks
shall be equipped with drag chains or other approved devices long enough to
reach the ground when the container is partially loaded. Each truck shall be
provided with at least two hand fire extinguishers of a suitable type of not
less than five-pound capacity. Each truck shall be kept in good mechanical
condition.
(1998 Code, § 54-15)
Penalty, see §
32.999
FIRE MARSHAL
§ 32.135  POSITION ESTABLISHED.
   The position of Fire Marshal is hereby created as a position of the Fire
Department reporting to the Fire Chief or his or her designee.
(1998 Code, § 54-31)  (Ord. 00-74, passed 11-1-2000; Ord. 04-15, passed 5-19-
2004)
§ 32.136  APPOINTMENT, REMOVAL AND COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The Fire Marshal shall be an appointed position within the Fire
Department, and shall be assigned and appointed by the Fire Chief. The Fire
Marshal may be assigned and appointed from any classification within the Fire
Department.
   (B)   The following shall be minimum requirements for the appointment of
Fire Marshal:
      (1)   Must be a certified basic inspector, as certified by the State
Commission on Fire Protection;
      (2)   Must have passed each section of the examination (Inspector 1,
Inspector 2 and Plans Examiner 1) with a minimum score of 70%;
      (3)   Must have obtained the certified basic fire investigator
certification from the State Commission on Fire Protection; and
      (4)   Must have obtained the certified intermediate structural
firefighter certification from the State Commission on Fire Protection or have
obtained the educational requirements and are waiting on time-in-grade only.
(1998 Code, § 54-32)  (Ord. 00-74, passed 11-1-2000; Ord. 04-15, passed 5-19-
2004; Ord. 08-22, passed 5-21-2008)
§ 32.137  RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Fire Marshal or designee shall have the authority, at all times of the
day or night, when necessary in the performance of the duties imposed upon him
or her by the provisions of this subchapter, to enter upon and examine any
building or premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and
premises adjoining or near the fire, which authority shall be exercised only
with reason and good discretion.
(1998 Code, § 54-33)  (Ord. 04-15, passed 5-19-2004)
§ 32.138  INVESTIGATION OF FIRES.
   The Fire Marshal or designee shall investigate the cause, origin and
circumstances of every fire occurring within the city by which property has
been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to
whether the fire was the result of carelessness or design. The investigation
shall be commenced as soon as practicable.
(1998 Code, § 54-34)  (Ord. 04-15, passed 5-19-2004)
§ 32.139  DUTY WHEN EVIDENCE INDICATES ARSON.
   If the Fire Marshal or designee shall be of the opinion that there is
evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the
attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud or criminal
conduct in connection with any fire, he or she shall cause the person to be
lawfully arrested and charged with the offense, and shall furnish to the proper
prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses
and all the information obtained by him or her, including a copy of all
pertinent and material testimony taken in the case.
(1998 Code, § 54-35)  (Ord. 04-15, passed 5-19-2004)
§ 32.140  TAKING OF TESTIMONY GENERALLY.
   The Fire Marshal or designee, when, in his or her opinion, further
investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on
oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to be
knowledgeable of the matter under investigation, and shall cause the testimony
to be reduced to writing.
(1998 Code, § 54-36)  (Ord. 04-15, passed 5-19-2004)
§ 32.141  AUTHORITY TO SUMMON WITNESSES, REQUIRE PRODUCTION OF EVIDENCE AND
ADMINISTER OATHS.
   (A)   The Fire Marshal or designee shall have the power to summon witnesses
before him or her to testify in relation to any matter which is, by the
provisions of this subchapter, a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may
require the production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent to the
investigation.
   (B)   The Fire Marshal or designee is hereby authorized and empowered to
administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing before him or her as
witnesses.
(1998 Code, § 54-37)  (Ord. 04-15, passed 5-19-2004)
§ 32.142  INVESTIGATIONS MAY BE PRIVATE; SEPARATION OF WITNESSES.
   All investigations held by or under the direction of the Fire Marshal or
designee may, in his or her discretion, be private, and persons other than
those required to be present may be excluded from the place where the
investigation is held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each
other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been
examined.
(1998 Code, § 54-38)  (Ord. 04-15, passed 5-19-2004)
§ 32.143  MISCONDUCT OF WITNESSES SUMMONED BY FIRE MARSHAL OR DESIGNEE.
   Any witness who refuses to be sworn or who refuses to appear or testify or
who disobeys any lawful order of the Fire Marshal or designee or who fails or
refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under
examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the
proceedings of the Fire Marshal or designee in the matter of the investigation
or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter
under investigation, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and it shall be
the duty of the Fire Marshal or designee to cause all such offenders to be
prosecuted.
(1998 Code, § 54-39)  (Ord. 04-15, passed 5-19-2004)
§ 32.144  INSPECTION OF PREMISES; ORDER TO CORRECT DANGEROUS CONDITIONS.
   (A)   The Fire Marshal or designee, upon the complaint of any person having
an interest in any building or adjacent property, or without any complaint,
shall have the right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination,
to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the city. It shall be
his or her duty monthly or more often to enter upon and make or cause to be
entered upon and made a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing
and public buildings, together with the adjacent premises.
   (B)   Whenever he or she shall find any building or other structure which,
for want of repair or by reason of age or dilapidated conditions or for any
cause, is especially liable to fire and which is situated so as to endanger
other buildings or property or so occupied that the fire would endanger persons
or property within, and whenever he or she shall find an improper or dangerous
arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind
whatsoever, including chimneys, flues and pipes with which the appliances may
be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or electrical
wiring or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum,
gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes,
combustibles, inflammable refuse materials, wastepaper, rags or other
conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote
fire or create conditions dangerous to firefighters combating a fire or to
occupants, he or she shall order such conditions to be removed or remedied, and
the order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of the
building or premises.
(1998 Code, § 54-40)  (Ord. 04-15, passed 5-19-2004)  Penalty, see §
32.999
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to provide for condemnation and removal of structures
constituting fire hazards, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 342.012
§ 32.145  RECORD OF FIRES.
   The Fire Marshal or designee shall keep in his or her office a record of all
fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the
origin of the fires and the amounts of the loss, which may be determined by the
investigation required by this subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 54-41)  (Ord. 04-15, passed 5-19-2004)
§ 32.146  REPORTS TO STATE FIRE MARSHAL.
   The Fire Marshal or designee shall send reports to the State Fire Official
or designee as required by the State Fire Official or designee.
(1998 Code, § 54-42)  (Ord. 04-15, passed 5-19-2004)
§ 32.999  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   The chief executive of the city or any other official of the
city who willfully attempts to obstruct the operation and enforcement of §§
32.025 through
32.029 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not
less than $100 and not more than $200 for each offense.
      (2)   Any employee of the classified service who shall violate any of the
provisions of §§
32.025 through
32.029 of this chapter or the Civil Service Law, being Tex. Local Gov’t Code §§
143.001 et seq., shall be subject to the penalty provided in division (B)(1)
above.
(1998 Code, § 90-33)
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or
terms of §§
32.115 through
32.123 of this chapter or the International Fire Code adopted in §
96.01 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in
the Municipal Court, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000 for each
offense, and each and every day any such violation shall continue shall be
deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(1998 Code, § 54-11)
   (D)   Any owner or occupant who fails to comply with the order within the
time prescribed by the Fire Marshal or designee in §
32.144 of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation, subject to punishment as
described in §
10.99.
(1998 Code, § 54-40)
(Ord. 04-15, passed 5-19-2004; Ord. 09-36, passed 11-18-2009)
CHAPTER 33:  COURTS
Section
   
33.01   Established
   
33.02   Jurisdiction
   
33.03   Municipal Judge; appointment, removal, vacancy
   
33.04   Oath of Judge
   
33.05   Clerk of Municipal Court and Court Administrator
   
33.06   Municipal Judge; continuance of term
   
33.07   Court reporter
   
33.08   Clerk of Municipal Court; duties
   
33.09   Municipal Judge; authority
   
33.10   Municipal Judge; writs and search warrants
   
33.11   Appeal; transcripts
   
33.12   Right of appeal; requirements
   
33.13   Warrant of arrest; service, expenses
§ 33.01  ESTABLISHED.
   The City of Texas City Municipal Court is hereby established by the City
Commission as a Municipal Court of Record, pursuant to the authority granted in
Tex. Gov’t Code Ch. 30, Subch. A, and known as the Uniform Municipal Courts of
Record Act, and the terms set forth therein governing the operation of said
court terms are hereby adopted.
(Ord. 13-54, passed 12-18-2013)
§ 33.02  JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The Court has the jurisdiction provided by general law for municipal
courts.
   (B)   The Court has jurisdiction over criminal cases arising under
ordinances authorized by Tex. Local Gov’t Code §§ 215.072, 217.042, 341.903 and
551.002.
   (C)   The Court has concurrent jurisdiction with any justice court in any
precinct in which the city is located in criminal cases that arise within the
city and are punishable only by fine.
   (D)   The Court has civil jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing
ordinances enacted under Tex. Local Gov’t Code Ch. 214, Subch. A, or Tex.
Transportation Code Ch. 683, Subch. E.
   (E)   The Court has concurrent jurisdiction with a district court at law
under the  Tex. Local Gov’t Code Ch. 54, Subch. B, within the city's
territorial limits and property owned by the city in the city's
extraterritorial jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing health and safety
and nuisance abatement ordinances.
   (F)   The Court has the authority to issue:
      (1)   Search warrants for the purpose of investigating a health and
safety or nuisance abatement ordinance violation; and
      (2)   Seizure warrants for the purpose of securing, removing or
demolishing the offending property and removing debris from the premises.
   (G)   The Court has the authority to establish procedures and local rules
for the purpose of promoting the speedy resolution of disputes involving the
enforcement of the health and safety and nuisance abatement ordinances of the
city.
(Ord. 13-54, passed 12-18-2013)
§ 33.03  MUNICIPAL JUDGE; APPOINTMENT, REMOVAL, VACANCY.
   The Municipal Judged shall preside over the Municipal Court of Record and
shall be appointed by the City Commission for a term as established in the city
charter for municipal judges, and shall meet all the qualifications established
in said charter. A Judge of a Municipal Court of Record may be removed from
office by the City Commission for the reasons stated and by the procedures
provided for the removal of officials provided by Texas Constitution Article V,
§ 1-a. In the event a vacancy occurs of a Municipal Judge, the City Commission
shall appoint a qualified person to fill the office for the remainder of the
unexpired term. An individual may not serve as a Municipal Judge if that person
is otherwise employed by the city. A Municipal Judge who accepts other
employment with the city vacates the judicial office. Any Municipal Judge
appointed by the City Commission must comply with the policy adopted by the
City of Commission concerning consanguinity.
(Ord. 13-54, passed 12-18-2013)
§ 33.04  OATH OF JUDGE.
   The Judge of the Municipal Court, prior to taking office, shall take the
requisite oath of office required by the Constitution and state law to be taken
by the Mayor.
(1998 Code, § 38-4)
§ 33.05  CLERK OF MUNICIPAL COURT AND COURT ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall be appointed by the City Commission,
who shall perform duties in accordance with state law, and the City Charter and
city ordinances. The current Court Administrator shall continue in office
through the expiration of his or her current term as Clerk of the Municipal
Court for the Court of Record.
(Ord. 13-54, passed 12-18-2013)
§ 33.06  MUNICIPAL JUDGE; CONTINUANCE OF TERM.
   The current Municipal Judge(s) shall continue in office through the
expiration of their current term.
(Ord. 13-54, passed 12-18-2013)
§ 33.07  COURT REPORTER.
   The Municipal Judge(s), or their designee, shall appoint a court reporter,
who must meet the qualifications provided by law for official court reporters.
The court reporter or court staff may use written notes, transcribing
equipment, video or audio recording equipment, or a combination of these
methods to record the proceedings of the Court. The court reporter or court
staff shall not be required to record testimony in any proceeding, unless the
Judge, or one of the parties to any proceeding, requests a record in writing,
and files such request with the Court before such proceeding begins. If a
record is made, it shall be kept for a period of 20 days beginning from the day
after the last day of any such court proceeding or trial or the denial of a
motion for new trial, whichever occurs last. The court reporter shall not be
required to be present during proceedings of the Municipal Court of Record;
provided, however, when a request has been submitted for a copy of the record
in any proceeding, such record may be recorded by a quality electronic
recording device.
(Ord. 13-54, passed 12-18-2013)
§ 33.08  CLERK OF MUNICIPAL COURT; DUTIES.
   The Clerk of the Municipal Court shall supervise and control the operations
and clerical functions of the administrative department of the Municipal Court
of Record, including court personnel, during any proceedings or docket of said
Court.
   (A)   The Municipal Court Clerk, or their deputy, shall keep the records of
Municipal Courts of Record, issue process, and generally perform the duties of
the court that a clerk of the county court exercising criminal jurisdiction is
required by law to perform for that court. The Municipal Court Clerk shall also
maintain an index of all court judgments in the same manner as county clerks
are required by law to prepare for criminal cases arising in county courts. The
Municipal Court Clerk shall perform the duties in accordance with state law,
city charter and city ordinances.
   (B)   The Municipal Court Clerk shall:
      (1)   Prepare and maintain accurate dockets and minutes for each
municipal court of record created under this section:
      (2)   Have custody of all documents and papers relating to the business
of the municipal court of records;
      (3)   Supervise the collections of fines imposed by the municipal court
of records;
      (4)   Maintain complaints for all cases in the municipal court of record
for which a complaint is required by law;
      (5)   Have all other powers and duties assigned to the Municipal Court
Clerk by the city charter, other city ordinances. Tex. Gov’t Code Ch. 30, or
other state law;
      (6)   Be responsible for full and proper accounting of all fines
collected and issue receipt to a person who pays a fine with cash money;
      (7)   Preserve the records of the municipal court of record in accordance
with the city records retention schedule; and
   (C)   The Municipal Court Clerk shall acquire and maintain a seal. The
seal's appearance and use shall substantially conform to the Tex. C.C.P. Art.
45.02. The seal shall include the following phrase: “Municipal Court of Record
in the City of Texas City, Texas.”
   (D)   The Municipal Court Clerk shall supervise the selection of persons for
jury service in the Municipal Court of Record.
(Ord. 13-54, passed 12-18-2013)
§ 33.09  MUNICIPAL JUDGE; AUTHORITY.
   The Municipal Judge(s) shall have authority to preside over any municipal
court of record of the city, and may exchange benches with other judges.
(Ord. 13-54, passed 12-18-2013)
§ 33.10  MUNICIPAL JUDGE; WRITS AND SEARCH WARRANTS.
   The Municipal Judge(s) may grant writs of mandamus, attachment or other
writs necessary to the enforcement of a jurisdiction of the Court and may issue
writs of habeas corpus in cases in which the offense charged is within the
jurisdiction of the Court. A Municipal Judge is a magistrate and may issue
administrative search warrants.
(Ord. 13-54, passed 12-18-2013)
§ 33.11  APPEAL; TRANSCRIPTS.
   In the event of an appeal, appellant shall pay a transcript preparation fee
in the amount of $25. This transcript preparation fee does not include the fee
for the actual transcript of the proceedings. The Municipal Court Clerk shall
note the payment of the fee on the docket of the Court. If the case is reversed
on appeal, the fee shall be refunded to appellant. In addition to the
transcript preparation fee, the fee for the actual transcript of the
proceedings and statement of facts must be paid by appellant, pursuant to the
Tex. Gov’t Code §§ 30.00014 and 30.00019.
(Ord. 13-54, passed 12-18-2013)
§ 33.12  RIGHT OF APPEAL; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A defendant has the right of appeal from a judgment or conviction in
the Municipal Court of Record. The state has the right to an appeal as provided
by Tex. C.C.P. Art. 44.01, as amended.
   (B)   The appellate court shall determine each appeal from the Court on the
basis of the errors that are set forth in the applicant's motion and that are
presented in the clerk's record and reporter's record, if any, prepared from
the proceedings leading to the appeal. An appeal from the Court shall not be by
trial de novo.
   (C)   To perfect an appeal, the defendant must file a motion for new trial
not later than ten days after the date on which the judgment and sentence are
rendered. The motion must set forth the points of error of which the appellant
complains. The motion or an amended motion may be amended by leave of court at
any time before action on the motion is taken, but not later than the twentieth
day after the date on which the original or amended motion is filed. The Court
may for good cause extend the time for filing or amending, but the extension
may not exceed 90 days from the original deadline. If the Court does not act on
the motion before the expiration of the 30 days allowed for determination of
the motion, the original or amended motion is overruled by operation of law.
   (D)   To perfect an appeal, the appellant must also give notice of the
appeal. If the appellant requests a hearing on the motion for new trial, the
appellant may give the notice of appeal orally in open court on the overruling
of the motion. If there is no hearing, the appellant must give a written notice
of appeal and must file the notice with the court not later than the tenth day
after the date on which the motion is overruled. The court may for good cause
extend that time period, but the extension may not exceed 90 days from the
original filing date.
   (E)   If the defendant is not in custody, the defendant may not take an
appeal until the defendant files an appeal bond with the Municipal Court of
Record. The bond must be approved by the Court and must be filed not later than
the tenth day after the date on which the motion for new trial is overruled. If
the defendant is in custody, the defendant shall be committed to jail unless
the defendant posts the appeal bond.
   (F)   The appeal bond must be in the amount of $100 or double the amount of
the fines and costs adjudged against the defendant, whichever is greater.
   (G)   The bond must:
      (1)   State that the defendant was convicted in the case and has
appealed; and
      (2)   Be conditioned on the defendant's immediate and daily personal
appearance in the Court to which the appeal is taken.
   (H)   After an order overruling a motion for new trial, the defendant shall
give written notice of appeal and pay a fee for the preparation of the clerk's
record of $25 not later than ten days after the date on which the motion is
overruled. The Court shall note the payment of the fee on the docket of the
Court. If the case is reversed on appeal, the fee shall be refunded to the
defendant. The defendant shall pay the fee for the preparation of the clerk's
record and the fee for an actual transcription of the proceedings.
   (I)   The appellant shall pay for any reporter's record containing a
transcription of the proceedings unless the Court finds, after a hearing in
response to an affidavit by the defendant, that the defendant is unable to pay
or provide security for the reporter's record. If the court so finds, the Court
shall order the reporter to prepare the record without charge to the defendant.
Before the recorded proceedings are transcribed, the defendant shall unless
found by the Court to be unable to pay for the reporter's record, post a cash
deposit with the Municipal Court for the estimated cost of the record. The cash
deposit shall be based on an estimate provided by the court reporter or the
length of proceedings as indicated by the amount of tape used to electronically
record the proceedings, if any, the cost of the court reporter, typing, and
other incidental services. The Municipal Court may post a current schedule of
the charges for transcription fees, including deposits. If the cash deposit
exceeds the actual cost of the reporter's record, the court reporter shall
refund the difference to the defendant. If the cash deposit is insufficient to
cover the actual cost of the transcription, the defendant must pay the
additional amount to the Court reporter before the transcription may be
submitted. If a case is reversed on appeal, the Court shall promptly refund to
the defendant any amounts paid for the reporter's record.
   (J)   The record on appeal must substantially conform to the provisions
relating to the preparation of a record on appeal in the Texas Rules of
Appellate Procedure and the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended.
(Ord. 13-54, passed 12-18-2013)
§ 33.13  WARRANT OF ARREST; SERVICE, EXPENSES.
   A special expense of $25 for the issuance and service of each warrant of
arrest under Tex. Penal Code § 38.11 or under Tex. Transportation Code §
543.009 or Tex. C.C.P. Art. 17.04 is hereby authorized, which special expense
shall be paid into the city treasury. The Municipal Court shall collect a
special expense for services performed in cases in which the laws of this state
require that the case be dismissed because of actions by or on behalf of the
defendant which were subsequent to the date of the alleged offense. Such
actions are limited to compliance with the provisions of Tex. Transportation
Code §§ 543.102 through 543.104. Such special expense shall not exceed the
actual expenses incurred for the services or $10, whichever is less.
(Ord. 13-54, passed 12-18-2013)
CHAPTER 34:  PERSONNEL POLICIES
Section
State Retirement Program
   
34.01   Election to participate
   
34.02   Employees included
   
34.03   Addition or discontinuance of participants
   
34.04   Municipal contributions to current service annuity reserve
   
34.05   Remittance of funds to Board of Trustees; reports and certificates
   
34.06   Basis for calculation of deposits and contributions
   
34.07   Rate of employee deposits
   
34.08   Eligibility for retirement
   
34.09   Deferment of income taxes for firefighters
   
34.10   Additional participation effective November 1979
   
34.11   Additional rights, credits and benefits
   
34.12   Credit for active military service
Drug and Alcohol Abuse Policy
   
34.25   Definitions
   
34.26   Findings; intent
   
34.27   Purpose
   
34.28   Scope
   
34.29   Education and training
   
34.30   Prohibited activities
   
34.31   Discipline
   
34.32   Drug and alcohol testing of job applicants
   
34.33   Drug and alcohol testing of employees
   
34.34   Appeal of drug or alcohol test result
   
34.35   Rehabilitation and employee assistance
   
34.36   Inspections and searches
   
34.37   Confidentiality of information
STATE RETIREMENT PROGRAM
§ 34.01  ELECTION TO PARTICIPATE.
   On behalf of the city, the City Commission hereby exercises its option and
elects to have the city and all full-time and part-time employees of all
departments participate in the State Municipal Retirement System as provided in
Tex. Gov’t Code §§ 851.001 et seq., and all of the benefits and obligations of
the System are hereby accepted.
(1998 Code, § 90-221)
§ 34.02  EMPLOYEES INCLUDED.
   Each person who becomes a full-time and/or a part-time employee of any
participating department on or after the effective date of participation of the
department shall be included within and subject to the provisions of the State
Municipal Retirement System beginning upon the date the person becomes an
employee, as defined in Tex. Gov’t Code § 851.001(8).
(1998 Code, § 90-222)
§ 34.03  ADDITION OR DISCONTINUANCE OF PARTICIPANTS.
   The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new employees to
the State Municipal Retirement System, but shall never discontinue as to any
participants.
(1998 Code, § 90-223)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Gov’t Code § 852.006(a)
§ 34.04  MUNICIPAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO CURRENT SERVICE ANNUITY RESERVE.
   For each month of current service rendered by each of its employees who are
members of the State Municipal Retirement System, the city will contribute to
the current service annuity reserve of each such member at the time of his or
her retirement, a sum that is 200% of the member’s accumulated deposits for
such month of employment; and this sum shall be contributed from the city’s
account in the Municipality Current Service Accumulation Fund.
(1998 Code, § 90-224)
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see Tex. Gov’t Code § 855.501(b)
§ 34.05  REMITTANCE OF FUNDS TO BOARD OF TRUSTEES; REPORTS AND CERTIFICATES.
   The Director of Finance or other proper official is hereby directed to remit
to the Board of Trustees of the State Municipal Retirement System, at its
office in Austin, Texas, the city’s proper contributions to the System and the
amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees,
all as required by such Board under the provisions of Tex. Gov’t Code §§
855.402 et seq., and the Director of Finance is hereby authorized and directed
to ascertain and certify officially, on behalf of the city, the prior service
rendered to the city by each of the employees of the participating departments,
and the average prior service compensation received by each, and to make and
execute all other reports and certificates which may be required by the city
under the provisions of Tex. Gov’t Code §§ 845.401 through 845.406 or the rules
and regulations of the Board of Trustees of the State Municipal Retirement
System.
(1998 Code, § 90-225)
§ 34.06  BASIS FOR CALCULATION OF DEPOSITS AND CONTRIBUTIONS.
   The total annual earnings which may be paid by the city to any of its
employees who are members of the State Municipal Retirement System shall be
considered in calculating the amount to be withheld and the deposits and
contributions to be made to the State Municipal Retirement System by reason of
current service rendered by the employee to the city.
(1998 Code, § 90-226)
§ 34.07  RATE OF EMPLOYEE DEPOSITS.
   All employees of the city who are members of the State Municipal Retirement
System shall make deposits to the system at the rate of 7% of their individual
earnings. However, this rate shall not be applied to earnings in excess of the
maximum earnings subject to retirement deductions as fixed by ordinance.
(1998 Code, § 90-227)
§ 34.08  ELIGIBILITY FOR RETIREMENT.
   Any employee of the city who has attained the age of 60 years with five
years vesting, or has completed 20 or more years of creditable service for
which he or she is entitled to credit in the State Municipal Retirement System,
shall be eligible for service retirement as provided in Tex. Gov’t Code §
854.102(b). Any such employee who shall have completed 20 years or more of
creditable service or attains the age of 60 years and has five years vesting as
an employee of the city shall continue as a member of the State Municipal
Retirement System despite subsequent absence from service for a period in
excess of 60 months; provided, he or she does not withdraw his or her deposits
during the absence, and shall be eligible for retirement upon and after
attainment of the minimum age prescribed by Tex. Gov’t Code § 854.102(b).
(1998 Code, § 90-228)
§ 34.09  DEFERMENT OF INCOME TAXES FOR FIREFIGHTERS.
   Firefighters may defer federal income taxes under the terms of the State
Local Firefighters Retirement Act, Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Art. 6243e, subject to
a favorable determination by the Internal Revenue Service that the
firefighters’ pension plan is a qualified retirement plan.
(1998 Code, § 90-229)
§ 34.10  ADDITIONAL PARTICIPATION EFFECTIVE NOVEMBER 1979.
   (A)   The city adopts the following plan provisions affecting participation
of its employees in the state municipal retirement system.
      (1)   Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department
of the city and who is not already a member of the State Municipal Retirement
System shall become a member of the system as a condition of employment;
provided, such person is then under 60 years of age.
      (2)   Any member, shall be eligible for service retirement who has
completed 20 years of creditable service with the city or who has attained the
age of 60 years and has completed at least five years of creditable service
with participating municipalities which have adopted the plan provisions of
this section, or who has become eligible for service retirement under any other
applicable provision of Tex. Gov’t Code §§ 851.001 et seq.
      (3)   The membership of any member who has completed at least five years
of creditable service with the city and other participating municipalities
which have adopted the plan provisions shall not terminate because of absence
from service.
      (4)   Any person who was an employee of a participating department of the
city at the effective date of Ord. 79-18, but who at the date of his or her
employment was under 60 years of age, but did not become a member of the State
Municipal Retirement System because he or she was then above the maximum age
then prescribed by law for initial membership in the system, shall become a
member of the system at the effective date of Ord. 79-18, unless he or she has
already become a member under other provisions of the governing act, and shall
be allowed prior service credit for each month of creditable service performed
for the city subsequent to the date such person was precluded from membership
and prior to the effective date of his or her membership. Such prior service
credit shall be calculated using the same percentage of the base prior service
credit as was most recently used in calculating prior service credits or
updated service credits in such system for current member employees of the
city.
   (B)   The rights, credits and benefits authorized in this section shall be
in addition to the plan provisions adopted before 11-7-1979, and in force at
the effective date of Ord. 79-18 pursuant to the act governing such system.
(1998 Code, § 90-230)
§ 34.11  ADDITIONAL RIGHTS, CREDITS AND BENEFITS.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Tex. Gov’t Code §§ 854.202(f), 854.405,
854.406 and 854.410, as amended, the city adopts the following provisions
affecting participation of its employees in the State Municipal Retirement
System (which retirement system shall be referred to in this section as the
“System”).
   (A)   Any employee of the city who is a member of the System is eligible to
retire and receive a service retirement annuity if the member has at least 20
years of credited service in that System performed for one or more
municipalities that have participation dates after 9-1-1987, or have adopted a
like provision under Tex. Gov’t Code § 854.202(f).
   (B)   If a “vested member”, as that term is defined in Tex. Gov’t Code §
851.001, shall die before becoming eligible for service retirement and leaves
surviving a lawful spouse whom the member has designated as beneficiary
entitled to payment of the member’s accumulated contributions in event of the
member’s death before retirement, the surviving spouse may, by written notice
filed with the system, elect to leave the accumulated deposits on deposit with
the system. If the accumulated deposits have not been withdrawn before such
time as the member, if living, would have become entitled to service
retirement, the surviving spouse may elect to receive, in lieu of the
accumulated deposits, an annuity payable monthly thereafter during the lifetime
of the surviving spouse in such amount as would have been payable had the
member lived and retired at that date under a joint and survivor annuity
(Option 1) payable during the lifetime of the member and continuing thereafter
during the lifetime of the surviving spouse.
   (C)   At any time before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity,
a surviving spouse to whom division (B) above applies may, upon written
application filed with the system, receive payment of the accumulated
contributions standing to the account of the member in lieu of any benefits
otherwise payable under this section. If such a surviving spouse shall die
before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity allowed under this
section, the accumulated contributions credited to the account of the member
shall be paid to the estate of such spouse.
   (D)   The rights, credits and benefits authorized in divisions (A) through
(C) above shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in
force at the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived
pursuant to Tex. Gov’t Code §§ 851.001 et seq.
   (E)   Any employee of the city who is a member of the System is eligible to
retire and receive a standard disability annuity under Tex. Gov’t Code §
854.408 or an optional occupation disability retirement annuity under Tex.
Gov’t Code § 854.410, upon making application therefor upon such form and in
such manner as may be prescribed by the Board of Trustees of the System;
provided that, the System’s Medical Board has certified to the Board of
Trustees that the member is physically or mentally disabled for further
performance of the duties of the member’s employment, that the disability is
likely to be permanent, and that the member should be retired. Any annuity
granted under this division (E) shall be subject to the provisions of Tex.
Gov’t Code § 854.409.
   (F)   The provisions relating to the occupational disability program as set
forth in division (E) above are in lieu of the disability program heretofore
provided for under Tex. Gov’t Code §§ 854.301 through 854.308.
(1998 Code, § 90-231)
§ 34.12  CREDIT FOR ACTIVE MILITARY SERVICE.
   (A)   Pursuant to Tex. Gov’t Code § 853.502, as amended, the city hereby
elects to allow eligible members in its employment to establish credit in the
State Municipal Retirement System for active military service performed as a
member of the armed forces or armed forces reserves of the United States or an
auxiliary of the armed forces or armed forces reserves. Eligible members, for
purposes of this section, shall be those employees meeting the criteria set
forth in Tex. Gov’t Code § 853.502(b), and the amount and use of creditable
military service shall be as further set forth in Tex. Gov’t Code § 853.505.
   (B)   In order to establish credit for military service under this section,
a member must deposit with the State Municipal Retirement System (in that
member’s individual account in the Employees Saving Fund) an amount equal to
the number of months for which credit is sought, multiplied by $15. The city
agrees that its account in the Municipality Accumulation Fund is to be charged
at the time of the member’s retirement with an amount equal to the accumulated
amount paid by the member for military service credit, multiplied by the city’s
current service matching ratio in effect at the date the member applies for
such military service credit.
(1998 Code, § 90-232)
DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE POLICY
§ 34.25  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. Any beverage that contains ethyl alcohol (ethanol), including, but
not limited to, beer, wine and distilled spirits.
   CITY PREMISES and CITY FACILITIES. When an employee is on duty, all property
of the city, including, but not limited to, the offices, facilities and
surrounding areas on city-owned or city-leased property, parking lots and
storage areas. The term also includes city-owned or city-leased vehicles and
equipment wherever located.
   DRUG TESTING. The scientific analysis of urine, blood, breath, saliva, hair,
tissue and other specimens of the human body for the purpose of detecting a
drug or alcohol.
   ILLEGAL DRUG. Any drug which is not legally obtainable, any drug which is
legally obtainable but has not been legally obtained, any prescribed drug not
legally obtained, any prescribed drug not being used for the prescribed
purpose, and any drug being used for a purpose not in accordance with bonafide
medical therapy. Examples of ILLEGAL DRUGS are cannabis substances, such as
marijuana and hashish, cocaine, heroin, phencyclidine (PCP) and so-called
designer drugs and look-alike drugs.
   LEGAL DRUG. Any prescribed drug which has been legally obtained and is being
used for the purpose for which prescribed or manufactured.
   POLICY. The drug and alcohol abuse policy set out in this subchapter.
   REASONABLE BELIEF. A belief based on objective facts sufficient to lead a
prudent person to conclude that a particular employee is unable to
satisfactorily perform his job duties due to drug or alcohol impairment. Such
inability to perform may include, but is not limited to, decreases in the
quality or quantity of the employee’s productivity, judgment, reasoning,
concentration and psychomotor control, and marked changes in behavior.
Accidents, deviations from safe working practices and erratic conduct
indicative of impairment are examples of REASONABLE BELIEF situations.
   SAFETY SENSITIVE POSITION. A position having any duty, the performance of
which could cause injury to the incumbent or others or could cause serious
damage to property.
   UNDER THE INFLUENCE. A condition in which a person is affected by a drug or
alcohol in any detectable manner. The symptoms of INFLUENCE are not confined to
those consistent with misbehavior, or to obvious impairment of physical or
mental ability, such as slurred speech or difficulty in maintaining balance. A
determination of being UNDER THE INFLUENCE can be established by a professional
opinion, by a scientifically valid test, and in some cases by the opinion of a
lay person.
(1998 Code, § 2-101)
§ 34.26  FINDINGS; INTENT.
   (A)   The city has a vital interest in maintaining a safe, healthful and
efficient working environment. Being under the influence of a drug or alcohol
on the job poses serious safety and health risks to the user and to all those
who work with the user. The use, sale, purchase, transfer or possession of an
illegal drug in the workplace and the use, possession or being under the
influence of alcohol also poses unacceptable risks for safe, healthful and
efficient operations.
   (B)   The city believes it has the right and obligation to maintain a safe,
healthful and efficient workplace for all its employees and to protect the
city’s property, information, equipment, operations and reputation.
   (C)   The city recognizes its obligations to its citizens for the provision
of services that are free of the influence of illegal drugs and alcohol and
will endeavor through this policy to provide drug- and alcohol-free services.
   (D)   The city further expresses its intent through this policy to comply
with federal and state rules, regulations or laws that relate to the
maintenance of a workplace free from illegal drugs and alcohol.
(1998 Code, § 2-102)
§ 34.27  PURPOSE.
   This policy outlines the goals and objectives of the city’s drug and alcohol
testing program and provides guidance to supervisors and employees concerning
their responsibilities for carrying out the program.
(1998 Code, § 2-103)
§ 34.28  SCOPE.
   This policy applies to all departments, all employees and all job
applicants; except that, sworn employees of the Police and Fire Departments may
be governed by more restrictive policies which may be required by departmental
rules and regulations.
(1998 Code, § 2-104)
§ 34.29  EDUCATION AND TRAINING.
   (A)   Supervisors and other management personnel are to be trained in:
      (1)   Detecting the signs and behavior of employees who may be using
drugs or alcohol in violation of this policy;
      (2)   Intervening in situations that may involve violations of this
policy; and
      (3)   Recognizing the above activities as a direct job responsibility.
   (B)   Employees are to be informed of:
      (1)   The health and safety dangers associated with drug and alcohol use;
and
      (2)   The provisions of this policy.
(1998 Code, § 2-105)
§ 34.30  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Legal drugs.
      (1)   The undisclosed use of any legal drug by any employee while
performing city business or while on city premises is prohibited. However, an
employee may continue to work, even though using a legal drug, if city
management has determined, after consulting with the employee’s physician, that
such use does not pose a threat to safety and that the using employee’s job
performance will not be significantly affected. Otherwise, the employee may be
required to take leave of absence or comply with other appropriate action as
determined by city management.
      (2)   An employee whose medical therapy requires the use of a legal drug
must report such use to his or her supervisor prior to the performance of city
business. The supervisor who is so informed will contact the employee’s
physician for guidance, if necessary.
      (3)   The city at all times reserves the right to judge the effect that a
legal drug may have upon work performance and to restrict the using employee’s
work activity or presence at the workplace accordingly.
   (B)   Illegal drugs and alcohol. The use, sale, purchase, transfer or
possession of an illegal drug or alcohol by any employee while on city premises
or while performing city business is prohibited.
(1998 Code, § 2-106)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 34.31  DISCIPLINE.
   (A)   Any employee who possesses, distributes, sells, attempts to sell or
transfers illegal drugs on city premises or while on city business will be
discharged.
   (B)   Any employee who is found to be in possession of or under the
influence of alcohol in violation of this policy will be subject to discipline
up to and including discharge.
   (C)   Any employee who is found, through drug or alcohol testing, to have in
his or her body system a detectable amount of illegal drugs or alcohol will be
subject to discipline up to and including discharge; except that, depending on
the circumstances of the case, the employee may be offered a one-time
opportunity to enter and successfully complete a rehabilitation program that
has been approved by the city. Upon return to work from rehabilitation, the
employee will be subject to unannounced drug or alcohol testing for a period of
30 months. Any test that is confirmed as positive during or following
rehabilitation will result in discharge.
(1998 Code, § 2-107)
§ 34.32  DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING OF JOB APPLICANTS.
   (A)   All applicants for employment, including applicants for part-time and
seasonal positions and applicants who are former employees, are subject to drug
and alcohol testing.
   (B)   An applicant must pass the drug test to be considered for employment.
   (C)   An applicant will be notified of the city’s drug and alcohol testing
policy prior to being tested, will be informed in writing of his or her right
to refuse to undergo such testing, and will be informed that the consequence of
refusal is termination of the preemployment process.
   (D)   An applicant will be provided written notice of this policy and by
signature will be required to acknowledge receipt and understanding of the
policy.
   (E)   If an applicant refuses to take a drug or alcohol test, or if evidence
of the use of illegal drugs or alcohol by an applicant is discovered, either
through testing or other means, the preemployment process will be terminated.
(1998 Code, § 2-108)
§ 34.33  DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING OF EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The city will notify employees of this policy by:
      (1)   Providing to each employee a copy of the policy and obtaining a
written acknowledgement from each employee that the policy has been received
and read; and
      (2)   Announcing the policy in various written communications and making
presentations at employee meetings.
   (B)   The city may perform drug or alcohol testing as follows.
      (1)   The city may perform testing of any employee who manifests
reasonable belief behavior.
      (2)   Any employee who has been involved in an accident involving a city
vehicle or equipment should be reported immediately to the employee’s immediate
supervisor or department head and the Personnel Department. Incident forms must
be completed by the employee as soon as possible, but in no event to exceed a
72-hour period. The employee shall submit to drug and alcohol testing
immediately after the incident.
      (3)   The city may perform testing on a random basis of any employee who
performs duties in a safety sensitive position.
      (4)   The city may perform testing of any employee who is subject to drug
or alcohol testing pursuant to federal or state rules, regulations or laws
including, but not limited to, the Department of Transportation Federal Transit
Administration Anti-Drug Plan, as it relates to the city’s passenger van
drivers.
   (C)   The city will conduct random drug and alcohol testing of a designated
percentage of the workforce at a frequency of once per month. Random selection
will be performed through an unbiased off-site computer-generated process.
   (D)   Any employee’s consent to submit to drug or alcohol testing is
required as a condition of employment, and the employee’s refusal to consent
may result in disciplinary action, including discharge, for a first refusal or
any subsequent refusal.
   (E)   An employee who is tested in a reasonable belief situation may be
suspended pending receipt of written test results and whatever inquiries may be
required.
(1998 Code, § 2-109)  (Ord. 98-6, passed 2-11-1998; Ord. 04-50, passed 10-20-
2004)
§ 34.34  APPEAL OF DRUG OR ALCOHOL TEST RESULT.
   (A)   An applicant or employee whose drug or alcohol test is reported
positive will be offered the opportunity of a meeting to offer an explanation.
The purpose of the meeting will be to determine if there is any reason that a
positive finding could have resulted from some cause other than drug or alcohol
use. The city, through its health and/or human resources officials, will judge
whether an offered explanation merits further inquiry.
   (B)   An employee whose drug or alcohol test is reported positive will be
offered the opportunity to:
      (1)   Obtain and independently test, at the employee’s expense, the
remaining portion of the urine specimen that yielded the positive result; and
      (2)   Obtain the written test result and present it to an independent
medical review at the employee’s expense.
   (C)   The employee may use the city’s medical benefits, to the extent that
coverage may apply, for meeting the costs described in division (B) above.
   (D)   During the period of an appeal and any resulting inquiries, the
preemployment selection process for an applicant will be placed on hold, and
the employment status of an employee may be suspended. An employee who is
suspended pending appeal will be permitted to use any available annual leave in
order to remain in an active pay status. If the employee has no annual leave or
chooses not to use it, the suspension will be without pay.
(1998 Code, § 2-110)
§ 34.35  REHABILITATION AND EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE.
   (A)   Rehabilitation assistance in lieu of discharge may be offered to:
      (1)   Any employee who has requested rehabilitation assistance; provided
that, the request is unrelated to an identification of the employee as a
violator of this policy; and/or
      (2)   Any employee who has violated this policy; provided that, the
violation does not involve selling or transferring illegal drugs or serious
misconduct.
   (B)   An employee who is in rehabilitation will be suspended; except that,
when indicated by the circumstances of the case and the written recommendation
of a licensed physician or recognized rehabilitation professional, an employee
may be permitted to work while undergoing rehabilitation on an outside-of-work
basis. The written recommendation must include a statement to the effect that
the employee’s presence in the workplace will not constitute a safety hazard to
the employee, co-workers or others. An employee who is suspended while
undergoing rehabilitation and who is not permitted to work will be permitted to
use any available leave in order to remain in an active pay status. If the
employee has no annual leave or chooses not to use it, the suspension will be
without pay.
   (C)   An employee whose rehabilitation therapy involves drug maintenance,
hospitalization or detoxification will not be considered for the exception from
suspension described in division (B) above. An employee who is suspended under
this section will be permitted to use any available leave in order to remain in
an active pay status. If the employee has no annual leave or chooses not to use
it, the suspension will be without pay.
   (D)   An employee who is in rehabilitation or who has completed
rehabilitation will be allowed to return to work upon presentation of a written
release signed by a licensed physician or recognized rehabilitation
professional. The release must include a statement to the effect that the
employee’s presence in the workplace will not constitute a safety hazard to the
employee, co-workers or others.
   (E)   Rehabilitation assistance given by the city will be:
      (1)   Limited to those medical benefits that may be available in the
employee’s medical benefits plan;
      (2)   Obtained through a rehabilitation program that has been approved by
the city; and
      (3)   Obtained by the employee during times that will not conflict with
the employee’s work time; except that, the employee may use any available sick
leave or annual leave to be absent from the job with pay.
   (F)   The city will provide to any employee, upon request and at no cost to
the employee, information concerning local resources that are available for the
treatment of drug and alcohol related problems.
(1998 Code, § 2-111)
§ 34.36  INSPECTIONS AND SEARCHES.
   (A)   The city may conduct unannounced general inspections and searches for
drugs or alcohol on city premises or in city vehicles or equipment wherever
located. Employees are expected to cooperate.
   (B)   An employee’s consent to a search is required as a condition of
employment, and the employee’s refusal to consent may result in disciplinary
action, including discharge, even for a first refusal.
   (C)   Illegal drugs, drugs believed to be illegal and drug paraphernalia
found on city property will be turned over to the appropriate law enforcement
agency and full cooperation given to any subsequent investigation. A substance
which cannot be identified as an illegal drug by a layman’s examination will be
turned over to a forensic laboratory for scientific analysis.
   (D)   If an employee is the subject of a drug-related investigation by the
city or by a law enforcement agency, the employee may be suspended pending
completion of the investigation.
(1998 Code, § 2-112)
§ 34.37  CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION.
   All information relating to drug or alcohol testing or the identification of
persons as users of drugs and alcohol will be protected by the city as
confidential unless otherwise required by law or by overriding public health
and safety concerns, or authorized in writing by the person in question.
(1998 Code, § 2-113)
CHAPTER 35:  EMERGENCIES AND EMERGENCY SERVICES
Section
Emergency and Non-Emergency Ambulance Services
   
35.01   Scope
   
35.02   Definitions
   
35.03   Persons and agencies authorized to furnish ambulance service
   
35.04   Operation of vehicles; response requirements
   
35.05   Special requirements for transfer ambulances
   
35.06   Use of transfer ambulance rotation list
   
34.07   Insurance
   
35.08   Rates and charges
   
35.09   Reports; audits
   
35.10   Duties of permit officer
   
35.11   Ambulance service permit
   
35.12   Ambulance vehicle permit
   
35.13   Issuance and renewal of permits
   
35.14   Permit fees
   
35.15   Transfer of permits
   
35.16   Duration of permits
   
35.17   Suspension or revocation of permits
   
35.18   Suspension or revocation procedures
Emergency Management
   
35.30   Local agency established; powers and duties
   
35.31   Office of Director established; Coordinator; Emergency Management
Organization
   
35.32   Powers and duties of Director
   
35.33   Emergency management plan and annexes
   
35.34   Interjurisdictional program
   
35.35   Effect of emergency orders and regulations
   
35.36   Exemption from liability
   
35.37   Restrictions on expenditure of funds
 
   
35.99   Penalty
EMERGENCY AND NON-EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICES
§ 35.01  SCOPE.
   This subchapter shall govern and apply to the operation of ambulance
service, ambulances and ambulance personnel within the city.
(1998 Code, § 46-31)
§ 35.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT (ALS). Emergency pre-hospital care that uses invasive
medical acts. The provision of ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT shall be under the medical
supervision and control of a licensed physician.
   AMBULANCE. Any privately- or publicly-owned motor vehicle constructed,
reconstructed, arranged, equipped, used or otherwise intended to be used for
transportation of sick, injured or otherwise incapacitated persons from one
place to another. The term shall be construed to mean either EMERGENCY
AMBULANCES or TRANSFER AMBULANCES.
   AMBULANCE SERVICE. The providing or making available to the public or to any
person of a motor vehicle and any personnel required by this subchapter for
transportation of and/or the provision of pre-hospital emergency medical
services to an individual who is sick, injured or incapacitated, whether in
emergency circumstances or in a transfer situation.
   BASIC LIFE SUPPORT. Emergency pre-hospital care that uses non-invasive
medical acts. The provision of BASIC LIFE SUPPORT may be under the medical
supervision and control of a licensed physician.
   EMERGENCY. Any combination of events or circumstances which results in life-
or body-threatening injury or illness requiring immediate emergency medical
services.
   EMERGENCY AMBULANCE OR RESCUE VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle constructed or
designed for transporting the sick or injured, and which meets all of the
existing requirements established by the State Department of Transportation,
GSA Bulletin KKK-A-1822, as referenced by State Department of Health, and the
provisions of this subchapter.
   EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE. Any organization or operation which utilizes an
emergency ambulance to respond to the scene of an emergency for the purpose of
rendering emergency
medical services and/or providing transportation of the sick and injured to a
hospital or other place for medical attention.
   EMERGENCY CALL. Any request for ambulance service that is made in
circumstances which are, or have been represented to be, an emergency and
require immediate pre-hospital emergency medical service.
   EMERGENCY CARE ATTENDANT (ECA). Any person who has met all the minimum
requirements established by this subchapter, and who has completed all of the
training requirements established by the State Department of Transportation’s
Emergency Care Attendant Outline and who has met all of the requirements
established by the State Emergency Care Attendant Registry.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE (EMS). The emergency medical service system
established for the purpose of providing to the citizens of the city an
emergency medical service utilizing emergency medical technicians (EMTs) and
emergency vehicles in compliance with the regulations outlined in this
subchapter.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN (EMT). Any person who has met all the minimum
requirements established by this subchapter, and who has completed all of the
training requirements established by the State Department of Transportation’s
Emergency Medical Technician Outline and who has met all of the requirements
established by the State Emergency Medical Technician Registry.
   EMERGENCY TRANSFER. Any transportation provided for a patient by an
emergency vehicle from one hospital or other place of treatment, after initial
stabilization, to another hospital or other place of treatment for definitive
care, under emergency circumstances.
   INDUSTRIAL AMBULANCE. Any vehicle owned and operated by an industrial
facility at industrial sites used for the initial transport or transfer of the
unstable urgently sick persons at those sites who become sick, injured, wounded
or otherwise incapacitated in the course of their employment from the job site
to an appropriate medical facility; provided, however, that, the vehicle is not
available for hire or use by the general public, except when assisting the
local community in disaster situations or related emergencies.
   MEDICAL SUPERVISION. Direction given to emergency medical services personnel
by a licensed physician under the terms of the Medical Practice Act (Tex.
Occupations Code § 151.001) and rules promulgated by the State Board of Medical
Examiners pursuant to the terms of the Medical Practice Act.
   NON-EMERGENCY. Any situation not classified as an emergency.
   PATIENT. Any person who is sick, injured or incapacitated and who becomes
subject to transportation or care by an emergency medical technician (EMT)
attendant, driver or attendant-driver pursuant to the terms of this subchapter.
   PERMIT OFFICER. The Fire Chief or his or her duly authorized representative.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, group of individuals acting together for a common purpose, or
organization of any kind. The term shall not include any governmental agency.
   STORE FRONT. Building used to house office, personnel, and provide parking
area for ambulances.
   TRANSFER. Movement, in a transfer vehicle, of pre-scheduled non-emergency
patients from place to place.
   TRANSFER AMBULANCE. Any motor vehicle constructed, arranged and equipped for
transporting non-emergency patients from place to place, and which meets the
requirements of Texas Revised Civil Statutes, the requirements of the State
Department of Health and the provisions of this subchapter.
   TRANSFER AMBULANCE SERVICE. Any organization or operation utilizing a
transfer vehicle for the purpose of transporting non-emergency patients from
one place to another.
(1998 Code, § 46-32) (Ord. 14-11, passed 5-21-2014)
§ 35.03  PERSONS AND AGENCIES AUTHORIZED TO FURNISH AMBULANCE SERVICE.
   (A)   Except as may otherwise be provided for in this subchapter, it shall
be unlawful for any person to operate, conduct, maintain or otherwise engage in
the furnishing of an emergency ambulance service or non-emergency ambulance
service within the limits of the city.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) above shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   The United States government and its agencies, the state, the
county or the city;
      (2)   Persons who operate an ambulance service, including their ambulance
vehicles and personnel, from a location or headquarters outside the limits of
the city and who are transporting patients from a location outside the limits
of the city to a location within the city, or through the city to some other
location;
      (3)   Persons furnishing, at the city’s request, a permitted emergency or
non-emergency ambulance service;
      (4)   Non-emergency vehicles used to provide or make available, on a
volunteer or non-profit basis, transportation for routine non-emergency medical
examination or treatment; and/or
      (5)   Any vehicle owned and operated by an industrial facility at
industrial sites used for the initial transport or transfer of the unstable
urgently sick or injured and ground vehicles at industrial sites used to
transport persons at those sites who become sick, injured, wounded or otherwise
incapacitated
in the course of their employment from the job site to an appropriate medical
facility; provided, however, that, the vehicle is not available for hire or
used by the general public except when assisting the local community in
disaster situations or like emergencies.
      (6)   Persons transporting sick or injured during a mass casualty
incident that exceeds the capacity of the city’s emergency medical services.
   (C)   The City Commission may contract for the provision of sole provider of
ambulance services for emergency medical services and/or non-emergency
transport services. If a sole provider of ambulance services is granted, it
shall be unlawful for any person, firm or organization to provide ambulance
service within the city or to provide point-to-point transport services to and
from health care facilities, except as hereinabove provided in division (B)
above.
(1998 Code, § 46-33)  (Ord. 98-64, passed 12-16-1998; Ord. 14-11, passed 5-21-
2014)  Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.04  OPERATION OF VEHICLES; RESPONSE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Operation of emergency ambulances. The driver of an emergency
ambulance, when responding to an authorized emergency call or transporting an
emergency patient, shall comply with all applicable state laws and city
ordinances pertaining to operation of emergency vehicles.
   (B)   Use of emergency signals by transfer ambulances. It shall be unlawful
for any operator of a transfer ambulance to utilize audible and visual
emergency signals, except where circumstances reasonably dictate that the
transfer of a non-emergency patient has suddenly without warning become an
emergency, in which situation such driver may exercise all of the privileges
set forth in division (A) above.
   (C)   Response requirements. The holder of a non-emergency transfer permit
shall not deny timely response, treatment or transportation to an appropriate
medical facility to anyone in the city due to age, sex, race, religion,
ethnicity, medical condition or the patient’s actual or perceived ability or
inability to pay for services rendered pursuant to the permit. In addition, the
holder of a non-emergency transfer permit shall make available to the city,
upon the city’s request, ambulances and personnel necessary for standby and
assistance during emergencies occurring in the city, and
      (1)   Maintain 24-hour transfer service.
      (2)   Own or lease, and operate a store front within the city limits,
available for storage of permitted ambulance(s). Only one business per store
front shall be allowed.
      (3)   No permittees shall store any vehicle or ambulance on public
streets or public rights-of-way in the city or operate its main place of
business or storage facility in a private residence.
   (D)   Firearms prohibited on transfer ambulances. Firearms are prohibited
aboard all transfer ambulance vehicles, except when in the possession of a
certified law enforcement officer who is not an employee of the permitted
company and who may be required to accompany a patient to a medical facility.
   (E)   Staffing of emergency ambulances. Each permitted emergency ambulance
vehicle shall be staffed on every call by at least two persons having EMT
certification, one of whom shall be certified at the EMT-paramedic level.
(1998 Code, § 46-34) (Ord. 14-11, passed 5-21-2014)  Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.05  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR TRANSFER AMBULANCES.
   (A)   Staffing. No transfer ambulance vehicle shall ever be operated upon
the streets, highways or other public places of the city unless such vehicle is
operated by at least two ambulance attendants, one of whom must possess a
current emergency care attendant certificate as required by the state, and the
other attendant must be certified by the state as at least an EMT-basic.
   (B)   Identification on vehicles. Transfer ambulance vehicles shall have
lettering, six inches in height, attached to each side of the vehicle,
indicating that the vehicle is in fact a transfer ambulance.
   (C)   Posting of fee schedule. All transfer ambulance vehicles shall have a
current fee schedule conspicuously posted in the patient’s compartment.
   (D)   Applicability. The requirements listed in this section are not
applicable to permitted emergency ambulance vehicles.
(1998 Code, § 46-35) (Ord. 14-11, passed 5-21-2014)  Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.06  USE OF TRANSFER AMBULANCE ROTATION LIST.
   (A)   On receiving the first communication that the patient has specifically
designated no preference, the telecommunications operator receiving the
communication shall call the first transfer company on the rotation list. If
the transfer company does not timely respond within 30 minutes (absent exigent
circumstances), the next transfer company on the rotation list will be called.
   (B)    On each succeeding communication that the patient has specifically
designated no preference, the next company on the rotation list shall be
called, and so on, calling each transfer company on the list in rotation, and
proper notation of each call shall be made on the master list.
   (C)   The city reserves the right to cancel the “next-out” transfer unit as
warranted by the situation on scene. If the city cancels the “next-out” for any
reason other than the company’s failure to arrive within the allocated time
limit, or the equipment does not meet the requirements of the situation, the
company shall be placed on top of the rotation list and shall receive the
subsequent “next-out” call.
   (D)   The transfer ambulance rotation list shall be limited to four slots
and the total number of ambulance service permits issued by the city at any one
time shall therefore be limited to four.
(Ord. 14-11, passed 5-21-2014)
§ 35.07  INSURANCE.
   (A)   Each holder of an ambulance service permit shall maintain in effect at
all times a policy for:
      (1)   Public liability;
      (2)   Property damage;
      (3)   Automobile liability insurance; and
      (4)   Professional liability insurance, identifying the city and its
agents as additional insured parties, with a company authorized to do business
in the state and approved by the City Attorney, in amounts not less than
$500,000 on account of injury to or death of one or more persons, and $100,000
for damage to or destruction of property.
   (B)   Each permittee shall furnish the permit officer a valid certificate of
insurance showing compliance with this section and any such policy shall
contain the usual non-cancellation clause, except upon 30-days’ advance written
notice to the city.
(1998 Code, § 46-36) (Ord. 14-11, passed 5-21-2014)
§ 35.08  RATES AND CHARGES.
   The City Commission shall determine the fees to be charged by all permitted
agencies pursuant to this section and adoption of such fees by the City
Commission shall be prima facie evidence of their reasonableness.
(1998 Code, § 46-37) (Ord. 14-11, passed 5-21-2014)
§ 35.09  REPORTS; AUDITS.
   (A)   The holder of a transfer ambulance service permit shall submit to the
permit officer, on such forms as may be prescribed for the purpose, a report
setting forth the fact of the occurrence of either of
the following events and fully setting forth all circumstances surrounding the
event, such report to be submitted within 24 hours following the event:
      (1)   A non-emergency transfer became an emergency situation suddenly and
without warning;
      (2)   A death occurred during the course of a non-emergency transfer;
and/or
      (3)   A permitted vehicle became involved in a traffic accident.
   (B)   The holder of a non-emergency ambulance permit shall submit a response
summary for all activities in the city to the city annually at the close of
each permitted year. In addition, the permittee shall be subject to operational
and medical audits conducted by the city.
   (C)   The holder of an emergency ambulance permit shall submit to the permit
officer, on such forms as may be prescribed for the purpose, a copy of all
response reports setting forth all circumstances surrounding the event and
applicable patient information and pre-hospital care rendered.
(1998 Code, § 46-38) (Ord. 14-11, passed 5-21-2014)
§ 35.10  DUTIES OF PERMIT OFFICER.
   The permit officer shall have the following duties:
   (A)   Receive applications for permits issued pursuant to this subchapter,
cause such investigation as he or she deems necessary to be made of the
applicant and approve or deny issuance of any permit;
   (B)   Issue permits authorized under this subchapter upon his or her making
the findings required in this subchapter;
   (C)   Examine or cause to be examined all applications for renewal permits
so as to determine that each such applicant is in full compliance with all
requirements of this subchapter and the State Department of Health;
   (D)   Reinspect and reexamine all applications for renewal permits so as to
determine that each such applicant is in full compliance with all requirements
of this subchapter and the State Department of Health;
   (E)   Conduct or cause to be conducted an inspection of the ambulance,
equipment and business records and the premises from which such ambulance
service operates;
   (F)   When a permit is issued or renewed under provisions of this
subchapter, affix one permit to the back window, passenger side, and one to the
front window, passenger side, which indicates the vehicle meets all
requirements established by this subchapter.
   (G)   Subject to appeals provided for in this subchapter, revoke or suspend
any permit issued pursuant to this subchapter; and
   (H)   Develop such reasonable regulations subject to the approval of the
City Commission as may be necessary for the proper enforcement and
implementation of the provisions of this subchapter, and to maintain the
highest standard of pre-hospital emergency medical services and delivery
thereof.
(1998 Code, § 46-39) (Ord. 14-11, passed 5-21-2014)
§ 35.11  AMBULANCE SERVICE PERMIT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish, operate, conduct,
maintain, advertise or otherwise engage in or profess to be engaged in an
ambulance service or the business or service of transporting emergency or non-
emergency patients upon the streets, alleys or public ways of the city unless
such person holds a valid ambulance service permit issued pursuant to the terms
of this subchapter.
   (B)   Each applicant for an ambulance service permit shall submit
application therefor upon such forms as may be prescribed by the permit
officer, and in addition shall furnish the following:
      (1)   Acceptable proof, in binder or other suitable form, that all
insurance requirements of this subchapter have been met or will be met upon
issuance of the permit; and
      (2)   A complete listing of the names of personnel who will be employed,
together with satisfactory proof that all of such personnel meet the standards
of qualifications set forth in the permit and training requirements for
ambulance attendants pursuant to the terms of this subchapter and State
Department of Health.
      (3)   Acceptable proof that provider is licensed with the State
Department of Health as an EMS provider.
(1998 Code, § 46-40) (Ord. 14-11, passed 5-21-2014)  Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.12  AMBULANCE VEHICLE PERMIT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any ambulance
vehicle upon the public streets, alleys or other public ways of the city unless
such vehicle shall have lawfully affixed thereto a valid ambulance vehicle
permit issued pursuant to the terms of this subchapter for all vehicles
utilized, deployed, housed or stationed in the city.
   (B)   Each applicant for an ambulance vehicle permit shall submit
application therefor upon such forms as may be prescribed by the permit
officer, together with satisfactory proof of compliance with the requisites of
Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Art. 4590b, and all other applicable state statutes.
(1998 Code, § 46-41) (Ord. 14-11, passed 5-21-2014)  Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.13  ISSUANCE AND RENEWAL OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Upon payment of the fee prescribed therefor, and after the applicant
has complied with all provisions of this subchapter, the permit officer shall
be authorized to issue the permit applicant a permit under this subchapter upon
finding to his or her satisfaction and ascertaining that:
      (1)   The public convenience and necessity require the proposed ambulance
service;
      (2)   Each ambulance and its required equipment meet acceptable standards
set forth by applicable state statutes and this subchapter;
      (3)   The applicant demonstrates an acceptable standard of responsibility
for conducting or for being employed in furnishing ambulance service; and
      (4)   Operating a service with an expired permit constitutes a violation
of this subchapter.
   (B)   Permits issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be renewable on an
annual basis upon the applicant’s compliance with all requirements of this
subchapter, including payment of the fees required in this subchapter.
      (1)   Annual renewal applications may be submitted to the Department
between December 1 and January 31 of each year.
      (2)   A company that fails to renew their permit before January 31 of
each year shall have their permit declared vacant and the company removed from
the transfer service rotation master list.
      (3)   Should more companies apply for a vacant service permit than
available a lottery drawing shall be implemented.
(1998 Code, § 46-43) (Ord. 14-11, passed 5-21-2014)
§ 35.14  PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   The fees for permits required by this subchapter shall be as follows:
      (1)   Ambulance vehicle permit: $100 per vehicle; and
      (2)   Ambulance service permit: $500.
   (B)   Such fees are not refundable and shall not be prorated as to time.
(1998 Code, § 46-44) (Ord. 14-11, passed 5-21-2014)
§ 35.15  TRANSFER OF PERMITS.
   No sale, assignment or other transfer of any permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter shall be valid for any purpose.
(1998 Code, § 46-45) (Ord. 14-11, passed 5-21-2014)
§ 35.16  DURATION OF PERMITS.
   All permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall
expire annually at midnight on January 31, regardless of the date of issue,
unless sooner revoked or terminated.
(1998 Code, § 46-46) (Ord. 14-11, passed 5-21-2014)
§ 35.17  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   Grounds for suspension or revocation of a permit may include the following:
   (A)   Failure at any time to meet or keep any of the requirements of this
subchapter, including conduct of ambulance attendant/emergency medical
technicians and interfering with police or fire;
   (B)   Operating an ambulance in such a manner as to endanger any person or
property;
   (C)   Failure to adhere to the Fire Department’s rules and regulations;
   (D)   Violation of any federal or state law, or any rules or regulations
promulgated pursuant to federal or state law, or any other city ordinances
related to the operation of an ambulance; and/or
   (E)   Failure to arrive within the specified response time limit three or
more times within the permit period.
(1998 Code, § 46-47) (Ord. 14-11, passed 5-21-2014)
§ 35.18  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any provision of this subchapter, the Fire Chief or
his or her designee shall be authorized to suspend or revoke any permit for a
violation of any of those items listed as grounds for suspension or revocation.
The Fire Chief or his or her designee may immediately suspend a permit for up
to 15 calendar days if there is substantial evidence of a violation which
constitutes an imminent danger to the public and the permit holder is unable or
unwilling to correct the violation. Otherwise, before any permit may be
suspended or revoked, the Fire Chief or his or her designee shall hold a
hearing at which evidence of such violation may be presented and rebutted. A
hearing may be scheduled by the Fire Chief or his or her designee after
receiving a complaint charging a violation or, at his or her discretion, upon
his or her investigation and review. Notice of the hearing, the administrative
action proposed to be taken and the grounds therefor shall be given to the
permit holder at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing. Mailing such
notice by certified mail to the last known business address of the permit
holder not less than ten calendar days prior to the hearing shall constitute
adequate notice. If the Fire Chief or his or her designee suspends or revokes a
permit, he or she shall notify the permit holder in writing of the reasons for
the suspension or revocation, the effective date of the suspension or
revocation, the date of reinstatement, if any, and the conditions which must be
satisfied for reinstatement, and such notification shall advise the permit
holder that he or she may appeal such decision to the Mayor. Mailing such
notification by certified mail to the last known business address of the permit
holder within ten calendar days of the hearing shall be deemed sufficient. No
person whose permit has been revoked shall be eligible to apply for a new
permit for at least six months from the date the revocation became effective.
The Fire Chief or his or her designee, in determining whether to suspend or
revoke a permit, may consider prior suspensions.
   (B)   (1)   After a permit holder “passes” seven times during a permit year,
their permit will be automatically suspended for the remainder of the year,
without appeal.
      (2)   If a permit holder has only one vehicle and that vehicle has a
mechanical failure and that owner notifies both the Fire Department permit
officer and dispatch center of that mechanical failure, the permit holder will
be removed from the city rotation list for the reasonable amount of time
necessary for the permit holder to perform the repairs.
      (3)   The owner must show proof of such mechanical failure in writing
(repair bill) to the Fire Department permit officer before they are placed back
on rotation.
      (4)   This must be presented between Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m.
      (5)   Once placed back on rotation, the permit holder will be placed at
the bottom of the list.
(1998 Code, § 46-47) (Ord. 14-11, passed 5-21-2014)
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 35.30  LOCAL AGENCY ESTABLISHED; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   A local emergency management agency for the city is hereby established. The
powers and duties of such agency shall be as provided by the Texas Disaster Act
of 1975, Tex. Gov’t Code §§ 418.01 et seq.
(1998 Code, § 34-31)  (Ord. 93-73, passed 11-17-1993)
§ 35.31  OFFICE OF DIRECTOR ESTABLISHED; COORDINATOR; EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   There exists the Office of Emergency Management Director of the city,
which shall be held by the Mayor in accordance with state law. An Emergency
Management Coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the
Director.
   (B)   The Director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive
emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and
responsibilities set forth in this subchapter. He or she may delegate authority
for execution of these duties to the Coordinator, but ultimate responsibility
for such execution shall remain with the Director.
   (C)   The Operational Emergency Management Organization of the city shall
consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the Director
in the Emergency Management Plan and Annexes, as well as organized volunteer
groups. The functions and duties of this Organization shall be distributed
among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the Emergency
Management Plan.
(1998 Code, § 34-32)
§ 35.32  POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Emergency Management Director shall
include the following:
   (A)   Conduct of an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which
threaten life and property within the city and an ongoing program of
identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which
would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a
disaster did occur;
   (B)   Supervision of the development and approval of an Emergency Management
Plan  and Annexes for the city and recommendation for adoption by the City
Commission all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation
of such plan;
   (C)   Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may
not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days, except by or
with the consent of the City Commission. Any order or proclamation declaring,
continuing or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and
general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the City Secretary;
   (D)   Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which
are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this subchapter. Such
proclamations, regulations or directives shall be disseminated promptly by
means calculated to bring their contents to the attention of the general public
and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly
filed with the City Secretary;
   (E)   Direction and control of the operations of the City Emergency
Management Organization, as well as the training of emergency management
personnel;
   (F)   Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that
may arise within the Emergency Management Organization of the city;
   (G)   Maintenance of a liaison with other municipal, county, district,
state, regional or federal emergency management organizations;
   (H)   Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any
department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the
Emergency Management Plan and Annexes;
   (I)   Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements in
cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political
subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable,
of an agreement with the county and with other municipalities within the county
for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts;
   (J)   Supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all
necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions
which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within
the city;
   (K)   Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the City Attorney, for
use of private property for public shelters and other purposes;
   (L)   Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies
and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for in this
subchapter; and
   (M)   Other requirements as specified in Texas Disaster Act of 1975 (Tex.
Gov’t Code §§ 418.01 et seq.).
(1998 Code, § 34-33)  (Ord. 93-73, passed 11-17-1973)
§ 35.33  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN AND ANNEXES.
   A Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan and Annexes shall be developed and
maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the
organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties and powers, and designate officers and
employees to carry out the provisions of this subchapter. As provided by state
law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the
Division of Emergency Management of the state. Insofar as possible, the form of
organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of
the State Division of Emergency Management. When approved, it shall be the duty
of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan
and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at
all times. The Emergency Management Plan and Annexes shall be considered
supplementary to this subchapter and have the effect of law during the time of
a disaster.
(1998 Code, § 34-34)
Editor’s note:
   The emergency management plan and annexes was adopted by Ord. 97-41 on 1-21-
1998. The emergency  management plan  and annexes is not included herein, but
is saved from repeal and is on file and available for inspection in the city
offices.
§ 35.34  INTERJURISDICTIONAL PROGRAM.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized to join with the County Judge and the Mayors
of the other cities in the county in the formation of an Emergency Management
Council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the
preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a
Joint Emergency Management Coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to
participate in a county-wide program of emergency management insofar as such
program may affect the city.
(1998 Code, § 34-35)
§ 35.35  EFFECT OF EMERGENCY ORDERS AND REGULATIONS.
   At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated
pursuant to this subchapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede and
override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations, insofar as the
latter may be inconsistent therewith.
(1998 Code, § 34-36)
§ 35.36  EXEMPTION FROM LIABILITY.
   (A)   This subchapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental
functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety, and
neither the city or the agents and representatives of the city, nor any
individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee,
or any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or
attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to
the provisions of this subchapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to
persons as the result of such activity.
   (B)   Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who
voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or privilege
or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any
part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons
during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or natural or human-made
disaster shall, together with his or her successors in interest, if any, not be
civilly liable for the death of or injury to any person on or about such real
estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for
loss of or damage to the property of such person.
(1998 Code, § 34-37)
§ 35.37  RESTRICTIONS ON EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS.
   No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in
carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this subchapter
without prior approval by the City Commission, nor shall any person have any
right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior
declaration of disaster. During a declared disaster, the Mayor may expend and/
or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the
protection of health, life or property.
(1998 Code, § 34-38)
§ 35.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct,
hinder or delay any member of the Emergency Management Organization in the
enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to §§
35.30 through
35.37 of this chapter or to do any act forbidden by rule or regulation issued
pursuant to the authority contained in §§
35.30 through
35.37 of this chapter.
      (2)   It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or
display any emblem, insignia or other means of identification as a member of
the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so
has been granted to such person by the proper officials.
      (3)   Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device
so as to simulate a warning signal or the termination of a warning shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of §§
35.30 through
35.37 of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by §§
35.30 through
35.37 of this chapter.
      (4)   Convictions for violations of the provisions of §§
35.30 through
35.37 of this chapter shall be subject to punishment not exceeding the limits
established by Tex. Gov’t Code § 418.173.
(1998 Code, § 34-39)  (Ord. 93-73, passed 11-17-1993)
CHAPTER 36:  FINANCE AND REVENUE; TAXATION
Section
General Provisions
   
36.01   State law regarding competitive bidding for contracts and contractors’
surety bonds
   
36.02   Purchasing manual adopted
City Depository
   
36.15   Selection generally; term
   
36.16   Specifications
   
36.17   Bids
   
36.18   Security
Payment of Fees and Other Costs by Credit Card or Electronic Means
   
36.30   Definitions
   
36.31   Payment of fees or costs by credit card or electronic means
   
36.32   Processing or handling fee
   
36.33   Service charge
Taxation
   
36.45   Ad valorem taxes to be paid before certain permits and licenses issued
   
36.46   Homestead and disability exemptions
   
36.47   Sales and use tax
   
36.48   Hotel occupancy tax
 
   
36.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Business Regulations, see Title XI
   Land Usage, see Title XV
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 36.01  STATE LAW REGARDING COMPETITIVE BIDDING FOR CONTRACTS AND CONTRACTOR’S
SURETY BONDS.
   As authorized by Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 252.021, the provisions of Tex.
Local Gov’t Code §§ 252.001 et seq., relating to competitive bidding for
contracts, and Tex. Gov’t Code §§ 2253.001 et seq., relating to the furnishing
of surety bonds by contractors, are hereby adopted in their entirety.
(1998 Code, § 2-141)
§ 36.02  PURCHASING MANUAL ADOPTED.
   The current purchasing policy of the city, as adopted by the City
Commission, is hereby adopted in its entirety, and made a part of this section
by reference.  A copy of the purchasing policy shall be kept on file by the
City Secretary and Purchasing Coordinator.
(1998 Code, § 2-181)  (Ord. 96-20, passed 6-19-1996; Ord. 03-55, passed 12-17-
2003; Ord. 07-29, passed 8-15-2007; Ord. 11-43, passed 12-7-2011; Ord. 19-09,
passed 4-17-2019)
CITY DEPOSITORY
§ 36.15  SELECTION GENERALLY; TERM.
   A depository for city funds shall be selected by the City Commission
biennially.
(1998 Code, § 2-161)
Statutory reference:
   City depositories, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 105.001
§ 36.16  SPECIFICATIONS.
   Specifications for the appointment of a city depository shall be prepared by
the City Secretary and approved by the City Commission. Competitive bidding
requirements shall include among others the amount or rate of interest the
applicant is willing to pay on the various types of deposits used by the city.
These specifications shall be made available to all interested parties. The
City Commission shall have the unqualified right, at its discretion, to reject
any and all bids or to award the appointment to the bidder it shall deem to be
in the best interest of the city.
(1998 Code, § 2-162)
§ 36.17  BIDS.
   During the two-month period prior to the commencement of the appointment of
a city depository, the City Commission shall take sealed bids from those
banking corporations or others qualified, having their principal place of
business in the city and desiring to be selected as city depository. Notice of
the time, date and place of the opening of bids shall be published one time in
the official newspaper of the city not less than one and not more than four
weeks in advance of the opening.
(1998 Code, § 2-163)
§ 36.18  SECURITY.
   The successful firm selected as the city depository shall be required to
pledge securities with the City Commission for the purpose of securing city
funds in an amount equal to the amount of the city funds on deposit with it.
Securities of the following kind shall be acceptable: United States bonds,
certificates of indebtedness of the United States, treasury notes of the United
States and other evidence of indebtedness of the United States which are
guaranteed as to both principal and interest by the United States government,
bonds of the state or of any county, independent school district, common school
district or other school districts in the state, notes or bonds issued by
mortgagees insured and debentures issued by the Federal Housing Administrator
of the United States government, and bonds issued by municipal corporations of
the state. Securities so pledged shall be approved as to kind and value by the
City Commission. When the securities so pledged shall be in excess of the
amount required under the provisions of this section, the City Commission shall
permit the release of such excess. The right of substitution of securities
shall be granted to the depository; providing, the securities substituted meet
the requirements of this subchapter and are approved by the City Commission.
(1998 Code, § 2-164)
PAYMENT OF FEES AND OTHER COSTS BY CREDIT CARD OR ELECTRONIC MEANS
§ 36.30  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CREDIT CARD. A card, plate or similar device used to make purchases on
credit or to borrow money.
   PAYMENT BY ELECTRONIC MEANS. Payment by telephone or computer, but does not
include payment in person or by mail.
(1998 Code, § 2-185)  (Ord. 99-38, passed 7-21-1999)
§ 36.31  PAYMENT OF FEES OR COSTS BY CREDIT CARD OR ELECTRONIC MEANS.
   (A)   The Director of Finance is authorized to collect fees, fines, court
costs or other charges by:
      (1)   Accepting payment by credit card or electronic means of a fee,
fine, court cost or other charge; and
      (2)   Collecting a fee for processing the payment by credit card or
electronic means.
   (B)   The Director of Finance may contract with a company that issues credit
cards for processing the payment of a fee, fine, court cost or other charge by
credit card or electronic means.
(1998 Code, § 2-186)  (Ord. 99-38, passed 7-21-1999)
§ 36.32  PROCESSING OR HANDLING FEE.
   The Director of Finance shall set a processing fee in an amount that is
reasonably related to the expense incurred in processing the payment by credit
card. The processing fee shall not exceed 5% of the amount of the fee, court
cost or other charge being paid.
(1998 Code, § 2-187)  (Ord. 99-38, passed 7-21-1999)
§ 36.33  SERVICE CHARGE.
   If, for any reason, a payment by credit card is not honored by the credit
card company on which the funds are drawn, the Director of Finance may collect
a service charge from the person who owes the fee, fine, court cost or other
charge. The service charge is in addition to the original fee, fine, court cost
or other charge and is for the collection of the original amount. The amount of
the service charge shall be $25.
(1998 Code, § 2-188)  (Ord. 99-38, passed 7-21-1999)
TAXATION
§ 36.45  AD VALOREM TAXES TO BE PAID BEFORE CERTAIN PERMITS AND LICENSES
ISSUED.
   In addition to all other requirements established by this code or city
ordinance, before the granting of any permit or license for the sale of
alcoholic beverages or for the operation of taxicabs, restaurants, trailer
camps, dancehalls or any other business which is licensed by the city under
this code or city ordinances or bylaws of the state, whether named in this
section or not, including, but not limited to, licenses or permits for all
occupations, professions, trades, vocations or businesses upon which a state
license tax or occupation tax is levied by the state, it shall be a condition
precedent to the granting thereof that the applicant shall have up to that time
paid all ad valorem taxes and penalty and interest, if any, due by the
applicant to the city.
(1998 Code, § 114-1)
§ 36.46  HOMESTEAD AND DISABILITY EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Homestead and disability exemptions will be provided by the City
Commission (under Tex. Tax Code Ch. 11) as follows:
      (1)   Residence homestead exemption. Tex. Tax Code § 11.13, family or
single adult is entitled to an exemption from taxation for the county purposes
authorized in Article VIII, § 1-a, of the Texas Constitution of $3,000 of the
assessed value of his or her residence homestead;
      (2)   Over 65 homestead exemption. Tex. Tax Code § 11.13, $20,000 of the
appraised value; and
      (3)   Disability homestead exemption. Tex. Tax Code § 11.13, a disabled
person exemption of $10,000 is allowed in addition to the residence homestead
exemption. This exemption will be granted to persons who meet the definition of
“disabled” as set out by the County Central Appraisal District. An eligible
disabled person who is 65 years of age or older may not receive both a disabled
and an elderly residence homestead exemption, but may choose either. The
homestead exemption for the disabled shall become effective for the tax year
1991.
   (B)   Individuals claiming any of the exemptions provided for in this
section must timely file with the Chief Appraiser of the County Central
Appraisal District.
(1998 Code, § 114-2)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Tax Code § 11.13(m)
§ 36.47  SALES AND USE TAX.
   The majority of the qualified voters having voted for the adoption of a
local sales and use tax, such tax is hereby imposed in the city and shall
become effective as provided by law.
(1998 Code, § 114-31)
Editor’s note:
   On 12-12-1975, at an election held pursuant to Ord. 75-26, enacted 10-15-
1975, the proposition “For adoption of a one per cent (1%) local sales and use
tax within the city” was approved by the voters. On 1-16-1993, at a duly-held
election, enacted 10-1-1993, the proposition to increase the sales tax by
$0.005 for economic development and $0.005 for property tax reduction was
approved by the voters.
Statutory reference:
   Authorized, see Tex. Tax Code § 321.101
§ 36.48  HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX.
   (A)   Definitions. Words and terms defined in Tex. Tax Code § 351.001 shall
have those same definitions when used in this subchapter.
   (B)   Levy and collection. A tax equivalent to 7% of the consideration paid
by the occupant is imposed on each person who, under a lease, concession,
permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement, pays for the use or
possession or for the right to the use or possession of a room that is in a
hotel, that costs $2 or more each day and that is ordinarily used for sleeping.
   (C)   Disposition of revenue.  Revenue from the hotel occupancy tax may be
used only as allowed by Tex. Tax Code.
   (D)   Collection. Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling
any hotel shall collect the tax imposed by this section for the city.
(1998 Code, § 114-54)
   (E)   Reports.
      (1)   Every person required in division (B) to collect a hotel occupancy
tax shall file a report with the Director of Finance for the city showing the
amount paid for all rooms during each calendar quarter, the amount of tax
collected and any other information the city may reasonably require.  Reports
shall be filed and the full amount of taxes due shall be paid by the last day
of the month following the end of each calendar quarter.
      (2)   A late charge may be assessed of 15% of the total amount of tax
owed if the tax has been delinquent for at least one complete municipal fiscal
quarter.
      (3)   The city may audit a hotel for failure to file a hotel tax report,
upon 30-days’ written notice to the hotel of an upcoming audit.  The city may
contract with a third party to conduct the audit.  The city may bring suit
against delinquent hotels.
   (F)   Late report or payment penalties; interest on delinquent taxes. If any
person shall fail to file a report as required under the provisions of this
section or shall fail to pay to the Director of Finance the tax as imposed
under the provisions of this section when the report or payment is due, he or
she shall forfeit 5% of the amount due as a penalty and, after the first 30
days, he or she shall forfeit an additional 5% of the tax; provided, however,
that, the penalty shall never be less than $1. Delinquent taxes shall draw
interest at the rate of 9% per annum beginning 60 days from the date due.
(1998 Code, § 114-56)  Penalty, see §
36.99
Statutory reference:
   Hotel occupancy tax, see Tex. Tax Code §§ 351.001 et seq.
§ 36.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   If any person required by the provisions of §
36.48 of this chapter to collect the tax imposed by §
36.48 of this chapter, make reports as required by §
36.48 of this chapter and pay to the City Secretary the tax imposed shall fail
to collect such tax, file such report or pay such tax, or if such person shall
file a false report, such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(1998 Code, § 114-57)
CHAPTER 37:  RECORDS AND INFORMATION MANAGEMENT
Section
   
37.01   Title of chapter; policy; purpose
   
37.02   Applicability
   
37.03   Definitions
   
37.04   City records declared public property
   
37.05   Records Management Committee
   
37.06   Records Management Plan
   
37.07   Records Management Officer designated; duties
   
37.08   Duties of department heads
   
37.09   Designation of Records Liaison Officers; duties
   
37.10   Development and approval of records control schedules; filing with
state library
   
37.11   Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records
under schedule
   
37.12   Destruction of records not listed on records control schedule
   
37.13   Records center
   
37.14   Micrographics/electronic storage of records
   
37.15   Time limits for responding to certain requests
§ 37.01  TITLE OF CHAPTER; POLICY; PURPOSE.
   This chapter shall be known and be cited as the Records and Information
Management Program for the city. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the
city to develop a records and information management program that provides for
efficient, economical and effective control over the creation, distribution,
organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all city records through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records
from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the
requirements of Tex. Local Gov’t Code §§ 201.001 et seq. and accepted records
management practice.
(1998 Code, § 2-201)
§ 37.02  APPLICABILITY.
   All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video
recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media or other information
recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless
of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the
state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees
pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business, are hereby declared
to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained and disposed of
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or procedures authorized by
it, and in no other manner.
(1998 Code, § 2-202)
§ 37.03  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT HEAD. The officer who, by the Charter or by ordinance, order or
administrative policy, is in charge of a department of the city that creates or
receives records.
   ESSENTIAL RECORD. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or
continuation of operations of the city in an emergency or disaster, to the re-
creation of the legal and financial status of the city or the protection and
fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
   PERMANENT RECORD. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a
records control schedule is given as permanent.
   RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULE. A document prepared by or under the authority of
the Records Management Officer listing the records maintained by the city,
their retention periods and other records disposition information that the
Records Management Program may require.
   RECORDS LIAISON OFFICERS. The persons designated under §
37.09(A) of this chapter.
   RECORDS MANAGEMENT. The application of management techniques to the
creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation and disposal of records for
the purpose of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of
recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules,
the management of filing and information retrieval systems, space-effective
storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of
forms, reports and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and
electronic and other records storage systems.
   RECORDS MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE. The Committee established in §
37.05 of this chapter.
   RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER. The person designated in §
37.07(A) of this chapter.
   RECORDS MANAGEMENT PLAN. The plan developed under §
37.06 of this chapter.
   RETENTION PERIOD. The minimum time that must pass after the creation,
recording or receipt of a record or the fulfillment of certain actions
associated with a record before it is eligible for destruction.
(1998 Code, § 2-203)
§ 37.04  CITY RECORDS DECLARED PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   All city records, as defined in §
37.02 of this chapter, are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No
city official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal
or property right to such records, even though he or she may have developed or
compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files or use of such
records is prohibited.
(1998 Code, § 2-204)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 201.005
§ 37.05  RECORDS MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE.
   (A)   A Records Management Committee consisting of four people shall be
appointed by the Mayor. One Committee member shall be the City Attorney.
   (B)   The Committee shall:
      (1)   Assist the Records Management Officer in the development of
policies and procedures governing the Records Management Program;
      (2)   Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and
propose changes and improvements if needed;
      (3)   Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the
Records Management Officer;
      (4)   Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance
with approved records control schedules; and
      (5)   Actively support and promote the Records Management Program
throughout the city.
(1998 Code, § 2-205)
§ 37.06  RECORDS MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   The Records Management Officer and the Records Management Committee
shall develop a Records Management Plan for the city for submission to the
Mayor and City Commission. The plan must contain policies and procedures
designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to
adequately protect the essential records of the city, and to properly preserve
those records of the city that are of historical value. The plan must be
designed to enable the Records Management Officer to effectively carry out his
or her duties prescribed by state law and this chapter.
   (B)   Once approved by the city, the Records Management Plan shall be
binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus,
boards, committees or similar entities of the city, and records shall be
created, maintained, stored, microfilmed or disposed of in accordance with the
plan.
   (C)   State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities or
recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department
head or the records in the department head’s care from the application of this
chapter and the Records Management Plan adopted under it and may not be used by
the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the Records
Management Program of the city.
(1998 Code, § 2-206)
§ 37.07  RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER DESIGNATED; DUTIES.
   (A)   The City Commission shall appoint, upon recommendation by the Mayor,
the Records Management Officer for the city.
(1998 Code, § 2-207)
   (B)   In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, the Records
Management Officer shall:
      (1)   Administer the Records Management Program and provide assistance to
department heads in its implementation;
      (2)   Plan, formulate and prescribe records disposition policies,
systems, standards and procedures;
      (3)   In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records
and establish a disaster plan for each city office and department to ensure
maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish operations quickly
and with minimum disruption and expense;
      (4)   Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the
historically valuable records of the city;
      (5)   Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for
recordkeeping supplies;
      (6)   Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform
filing system and a forms design and control system for the city;
      (7)   Provide records management advice and assistance to all city
departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and
by on-site consultation;
      (8)   Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued
by the State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the Records
Management Program and the city’s records control schedules are in compliance
with state regulations;
      (9)   Disseminate to the Mayor and City Commission and department heads
information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local
government records;
      (10)   Instruct records liaison officers or other personnel in policies
and procedures of the Records Management Plan and their duties in the Records
Management Program;
      (11)   Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct
of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control
schedules as required by state law and this chapter;
      (12)   Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming,
destruction or other disposition of the city records is carried out in
accordance with the policies and procedures of the Records Management Program
and the requirements of state law;
      (13)   Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved
records control schedules, and the volume of records microfilmed or stored
electronically; and
      (15)   Bring to the attention of the Mayor and City Commission non-
compliance by department heads or other city personnel with the policies and
procedures of the Records Management Program or Tex. Local Gov’t Code §§
201.001 et seq.
(1998 Code, § 2-208)
(Ord. 99-49, passed 7-21-1999)
§ 37.08  DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT HEADS.
   In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, department heads
shall:
   (A)   Cooperate with the Records Management Officer in carrying out the
policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and
economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this
chapter;
   (B)   Adequately document the transaction of government business and the
services, programs and duties for which the department head and his or her
staff are responsible; and
   (C)   Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their
preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition only in accordance
with the policies and procedures of the Records Management Program of the city
and the requirements of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 2-209)
§ 37.09  DESIGNATION OF RECORDS LIAISON OFFICERS; DUTIES.
   (A)   Each department head shall designate a member of his or her staff to
serve as Records Liaison Officer for the implementation of the Records
Management Program in the department. If the Records Management Officer
determines that, in the best interests of the Records Management Program, more
than one Records Liaison Officer shall be designated for a department, the
department head shall designate the number of Records Liaison Officers
specified by the Records Management Officer. Persons designated as Records
Liaison Officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and
maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the
city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement,
dismissal or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as
a Records Liaison Officer, the department head shall promptly designate another
person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as Records Liaison
Officer for his or her department.
(1998 Code, § 2-210)
   (B)   In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, Records Liaison
Officers shall:
      (1)   Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of
the department in preparation for the development of records control schedules;
      (2)   In cooperation with the Records Management Officer, coordinate and
implement the policies and procedures of the Records Management Program in
their departments; and
      (3)   Disseminate information to department staff concerning the Records
Management Program.
(1998 Code, § 2-211)
§ 37.10  DEVELOPMENT AND APPROVAL OF RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULES; FILING WITH
STATE LIBRARY.
   (A)   The Records Management Officer, in cooperation with department heads
and Records Liaison Officers, shall prepare records control schedules on a
department-by-department basis listing all records created or received by the
department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules
shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of city
records as the Records Management Plan may require.
   (B)   Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed
by the Records Management Officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in
compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it
continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the departments
and the Records Management Program of the city.
   (C)   Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule
for a department must be approved by the department head and the members of the
Records Management Committee.
   (D)   Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to
and accepted for filing by the Director and Librarian of the State Library as
provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule
shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The Records Management
Officer shall submit the records control schedules to the Director and
Librarian.
(1998 Code, § 2-212)
§ 37.11  IMPLEMENTATION OF RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULES; DESTRUCTION OF RECORDS
UNDER SCHEDULE.
   (A)   A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and
adopted under §
37.10 of this chapter shall be implemented by department heads and Records
Liaison Officers according to the policies and procedures of the Records
Management Plan.
   (B)   A record whose retention period has expired on a records control
schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the
record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit, or
the department head requests in writing to the Records Management Committee
that the record be retained for an additional period.
   (C)   Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control
schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the Records
Management Officer from the Records Management Committee.
(1998 Code, § 2-213)
§ 37.12  DESTRUCTION OF RECORDS NOT LISTED ON RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULE.
   A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control
schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same
manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the Records
Management Officer has submitted to and received back from the Director and
Librarian of the State Library an approved destruction authorization request.
(1998 Code, § 2-214)
§ 37.13  RECORDS CENTER.
   A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by §
37.06 of this chapter, shall be under the direct control and supervision of the
Records Management Officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operation
and use of the records center shall be contained in the Records Management Plan
developed under §
37.06 of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 2-215)
§ 37.14  MICROGRAPHICS/ELECTRONIC STORAGE OF RECORDS.
   Unless a micrographics/electronic storage program in a department is
specifically exempted by order of the city, all microfilming/electronic storage
of records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the Records
Management Officer. The Records Management Plan will establish policies and
procedures for the microfilming/electronic storage of city records, including
policies to ensure that all microfilming/electronic storage is done in
accordance with standards and procedures for the microfilming/electronic
storage of local government records established in rules of the State Library
and Archives Commission. The plan will also establish criteria for determining
the eligibility of records for microfilming/electronic storage and protocols
for ensuring that a microfilming/electronic storage program that is exempted
from the centralized operations is, nevertheless, subject to periodic review by
the Records Management Officer as to cost effectiveness, administrative
efficiency and compliance with Commission rules.
(1998 Code, § 2-216)
§ 37.15  TIME LIMITS FOR RESPONDING TO CERTAIN REQUESTS.
   (A)   Annual time limit.  Pursuant to Tex. Gov’t Code § 552.275(a) and (b),
36 hours is the reasonable limit on the amount of time that personnel of the
city are required to spend producing public information for inspection or
duplication by a requestor or provided copies of public information to a
requestor in any given 12-month period commencing on October 1 of each year,
without recovering the city’s costs attributable to that personnel time.
   (B)   Monthly time limit.  Pursuant to Tex. Gov’t Code § 552.275(a) and (b),
15 hours is the reasonable limit on the amount of time that personnel of the
city are required to spend producing public information for inspection or
duplication by a requestor or provided copies of public information to a
requestor in any given monthly period without recovering the city’s costs
attributable to that personnel time.
   (C)   Records of time spent fulfilling requests.  The City Secretary and/or
designee shall be responsible for maintaining records of the cumulative amount
of personnel time complying with requests for public information from each
individual requestor.
   (D)   Charges for personnel time spent in excess of time limits.  Not
withstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, any requestor of
public information will be charged personnel costs in accordance with Tex.
Gov’t Code § 552.275 for all time in excess of 36 hours in any given 12-month
period commencing on October 1 of each year or 15 hours in a given monthly
period commencing on the first date of each month, spent by personnel of the
city in producing public information for inspection or duplication by a
requestor, or providing copies of public information to a requestor. The City
Secretary or designee shall be responsible for providing all notices to the
requestor as required by law, including written statements of accrued time
required by Tex. Gov’t Code § 552.275(d) and written estimates of charges
required by Tex. Gov’t Code § 552.275(e).
   (E)   “Requestor” defined.  For purposes of this section, REQUESTOR shall
have the meaning set forth in Tex. Gov’t Code § 552.003(6)
(Ord. 19-11, passed 6-5-2019)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES GENERALLY
      
51.   SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
      
52.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS
      
53.   SOLID WASTE
CHAPTER 50:  UTILITIES GENERALLY
Section
General Provisions
   
50.001   Liability of city for damage to property of consumers
   
50.002   Turning water service on or off without authorization
   
50.003   Unauthorized connections to water or sewer system
Rates, Charges and Special Considerations Generally
   
50.015   Definition
   
50.016   Application for service
   
50.017   Meters required
   
50.018   Installation and maintenance of meters
   
50.019   Ownership of meters
   
50.020   Tampering with meters
   
50.021   Water and sewer deposit required; amount
   
50.022   Refund of deposit
Sewer Rates, Water Rates and Fees
   
50.035   Tapping charge for sewer service
   
50.036   Sewer rates
   
50.037   Tapping charge for water service
   
50.038   Water rates
   
50.039   Due date for payment of charges
   
50.040   Disconnection of service for non-payment
   
50.041   Resumption of service after disconnection for non-payment
   
50.042   Discontinuance of service by customer
   
50.043   Rates and charges of public utilities to be fixed by City Commission
   
50.044   Transfer of service
   
50.045   Service charge on returned checks
Backflow Prevention
   
50.060   Backflow prevention
   
50.061   Definitions
   
50.062   Backflow prevention assembly installation, testing and maintenance
   
50.063   Customer service inspections
   
50.064   Emergency suspension of water service
   
50.065   Non-emergency suspension of water utility service
   
50.066   Thermal expansion
   
50.067   Fire hydrant protection
Water and Sewer Extensions
   
50.080   Scope of subchapter
   
50.081   Deposit of cost; agreement between property owner and city
   
50.082   Location and grade of pipe; easements and rights-of-way
   
50.083   Construction
   
50.084   Recovery of costs
 
   
50.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.001  LIABILITY OF CITY FOR DAMAGE TO PROPERTY OF CONSUMERS.
   The city shall not be liable for any damage to the property of any consumer
of any utility service furnished by the city due to backflow of the sewerage
system, temporary interruption of service or any other cause outside the direct
control of the city.
(1998 Code, § 122-2)
§ 50.002  TURNING WATER SERVICE ON OR OFF WITHOUT AUTHORIZATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to turn on city-furnished water service
after the service has been cut off by the city, or to turn the service off
after the service has been cut on by the city.
(1998 Code, § 122-3)  Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.003  UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS TO WATER OR SEWER SYSTEM.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to tap, open or make a connection with
any main or lateral of the city water or sewer system unless authorized to do
so by the city.
(1998 Code, § 122-4)  Penalty, see §
50.999
RATES, CHARGES AND SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS GENERALLY
§ 50.015  DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   UTILITY SERVICE. Water, sewer, garbage collection and any other utility
service furnished by the city to customers or consumers within the city.
(1998 Code, § 122-111)  (Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008)
§ 50.016  APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   Written application shall be made for any utility service that may be
furnished by the city, to the city, upon forms furnished therefore. The
application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the type of
utility service desired, the purposes for which the application is made and
such other information as the city may request.
(1998 Code, § 122-112)  (Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008)
§ 50.017  METERS REQUIRED.
   Meters shall be required to measure the consumption of each utility service
furnished by the city, except garbage collection and sewerage service. A
separate water meter is required for each residential, commercial or industrial
connection to which drinking water is supplied from the system (30 TAC § 290.38
et seq.).
(1998 Code, § 122-113)  (Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008)
§ 50.018  INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF METERS.
   All meters required by this chapter and used to measure the consumption of
utility services provided by the city shall be furnished at the expense of the
customer and installed at customer’s expense by a licensed professional plumber
and in accordance with Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ)
standards, city standards and National Plumbing Code standards upon acceptance
of meter, meter appurtenances and meter installation configuration by city; the
meter and meter appurtenances become the property of the city as delineated in
§
50.019 of this chapter, ownership of meters, below. After acceptance by the
city, the city becomes responsible for maintenance of the meter and meter
appurtenances within the meter box and to the easement line. The customer is
responsible for maintenance of his or her water line and sewer lines from the
easement line to their point of connection at customer’s buildings.
(1998 Code, § 122-114)  (Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008)
§ 50.019  OWNERSHIP OF METERS.
   Prior to initiation of water/sewer service at any location within the city,
the customer must request and obtain written city acceptance of meter, meter
appurtenances and meter installation configuration compliance with city and
national standards. Upon such written acceptance of such meter, meter
appurtenances and meter installation configuration by city; the meter and meter
appurtenances become the property of city. Such written acceptance must be
documented by a properly executed customer service inspection form. All meters
used for the measurement of the consumption of any utility service furnished by
the city shall be the property of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person
to install or maintain any meter for such purposes anywhere within the city
which is not owned by the city.
(1998 Code, § 122-115)  (Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008)  Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.020  TAMPERING WITH METERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized employee
of the city, to tamper with any meter or to in any manner injure any meter or
to manipulate or attempt to manipulate any meter in any manner so as to affect
its registration or measurement of the metered utility service.
(1998 Code, § 122-116)  (Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008)  Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.021  WATER AND SEWER DEPOSIT REQUIRED; AMOUNT.
   The applicant shall pay to the city a deposit in the sum of $150 at the time
he or she applies for water and sewer service; provided, however, that, if
charges for service increase to a point where the deposit is not equal to the
charges for an average two-month period, the required deposit may be increased
to conform thereto.
(1998 Code, § 122-117)  (Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008; Ord. 10-25, passed 11-
3-2010)
§ 50.022  REFUND OF DEPOSIT.
   Any deposit made to the city by any applicant shall be held by the city
until such applicant’s utility service for which the deposit was made shall be
terminated. Upon termination of the service, the applicant shall be entitled to
a refund of the deposit, less any amount which is due and owing to the city.
(1998 Code, § 122-118)  (Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008)
SEWER RATES, WATER RATES AND FEES
§ 50.035  TAPPING CHARGE FOR SEWER SERVICE.
   The customer shall pay the entire cost of connection for sewer service,
including, but not limited to, tapping the sewer main, installing sewer service
line or any other required appurtenance and the like, but such facilities shall
become the property of the city to the easement line. All such installations
shall be performed by a licensed plumber and the installation and completed
configuration is to be inspected by city and approved by city prior to
initiation of water and sewer service.
(1998 Code, § 122-119)  (Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008)
§ 50.036  SEWER RATES.
   (A)   The schedule of monthly rates and charges for sanitary sewer service
furnished by the city shall be as follows:
      (1)   One commode, urinal, bathtub, shower, bath, sink or other drain:
$0.60; and
      (2)   For each additional commode, urinal, bathtub, sink, shower, bath or
other drain: $0.60; minimum monthly charge: $1.20.
   (B)   The provisions of §
51.07 of this code of ordinances requiring a separate house sewer for each
house or building shall not apply to an apartment house containing at least six
dwelling units or to a group of six or more houses or buildings located on the
same lot or abutting lots used as residential rent houses or apartments, if all
of the lots, houses and buildings are owned by the same person.
   (C)   In assessing rates for sewer service, an apartment house and a group
of houses or buildings, as described in division (B) above, shall be considered
as a unit or as one house or building.
   (D)   In addition to the charges to be collected pursuant to divisions (A)
(1) and (A)(2) above, the following charges shall be collected and shall apply
only to water consumption measured by any city water meter serving a building
located within the city limits:
      (1)   One thousand gallons or less water usage: $4.00; and
      (2)   For each additional 1,000 gallons of water usage: $4.00.
   (E)   Sewer rates will be reviewed not less than every three years.
(1998 Code, § 122-120)  (Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008; Ord. 17-19, passed 6-
21-2017)
§ 50.037  TAPPING CHARGE FOR WATER SERVICE.
   (A)   General. The customer shall pay the entire cost of connection,
including, but not limited to, tapping the main, installing any required valve,
meter or any other required appurtenance and the like, but such facilities
shall become the property of the city to the easement line. All such
installations shall be performed by a licensed plumber in accordance with city
standards and in accordance with national plumbing standards. The installation
and completed configuration is to be inspected by city and approved by city
prior to initiation of water and sewer service.
   (B)   Developed subdivisions. In developed subdivisions where the cost of
constructing water lines shall have been paid by the developer, the developer
shall also pay the entire cost of connection, including, but not limited to,
tapping the main, installing any required valve, meter or any other required
appurtenance and the like, but such facilities shall become the property of the
city to the easement line. The developer will also be required to pay for the
procurement and installation of water meters and appurtenances as required by
city. All such water meter installations in developed subdivisions shall
include automated water meter (AMR) equipment, as required, which is in
accordance with city AMR guidelines and which is completely compatible with
city’s automated water meter reading and billing system.
   (C)   Commercial and industrial customer accounts. For all water/sewer
accounts which require a water meter larger than three-quarter inch, the
customer is responsible for the entire cost of connection, including, but not
limited to, tapping the main, installing any required valve, meter or any other
required appurtenance and the like, but such facilities shall become the
property of the city to the easement line. Such water customers will also be
required to pay for the procurement and installation of water meters and
appurtenance as required by city. All such water meter installations for meters
larger than three-quarter inch shall include automated water meter (AMR)
equipment, as required, which is in accordance with city AMR guidelines and
which is completely compatible with city’s automated water meter reading and
billing system.
(1998 Code, § 122-121)  (Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008)
§ 50.038  WATER RATES.
   The schedule of monthly rates and charges for water services furnished by
the city to its water customers is hereby established as follows:
   (A)   Domestic, commercial and industrial schedule. For the first increment
of water usage up to and including 3,000 gallons of water, the minimum rate
will be as follows:
 
Minimum Monthly Billing
5/8-inch meter                                                         $8.75
3/4-inch meter                                                         $9.43
1-inch meter                                                           $10.08
1-1/2-inch meter                                                       $15.28
2-inch meter                                                           $28.28
3-inch meter                                                           $49.08
4-inch meter                                                           $95.88
6-inch meter                                                           $189.48
8-inch meter                                                           $280.48
10-inch meter                                                          $370.18
For the additional incremental water usage in excess of 3,000 gallons,  
per 1,000 gallons:
Pasture and residential
   4,000 - 9,000 gallons                                            $4.00
   10,000 - 24,000 gallons                                          $6.00
   25,000 gallons or more                                           $8.00
All other account types
   4,0000 - 24,000                                                  $6.00
   25,000 - 49,000                                                  $8.00
   50,000 gallons or more                                           $10.00
 
   (B)   Automatic sprinkler connections.
      (1)   This division (B) is applicable for fire protection where automatic
sprinklers are installed and protected by automatic sprinkler control. No use
of water shall be allowed under the provisions of this division (B), except for
fire protection when automatic sprinklers are operated. A rate of $1.33 per
inch of diameter of line serving the customer will be charged.
      (2)   The customer shall pay the entire cost of connection, including
tapping the main, installing the valve and the like, but such facilities shall
become the property of the city.
   (C)   Water rates will be reviewed not less than every three years.
(1998 Code, § 122-122)  (Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008; Ord. 10-25, passed 11-
3-2010; Ord. 14-12, passed 6-4-2014; Ord. 17-19, passed 6-21-2017)
§ 50.039  DUE DATE FOR PAYMENT OF CHARGES.
   Payment of the rates and charges fixed and prescribed by this chapter must
be received in the Utilities Department of the city within 15 days of the
billing date stated on the bill.
(1998 Code, § 122-123)  (Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008)
§ 50.040  DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE FOR NON-PAYMENT.
   If any consumer of utility services furnished by the city does not pay the
rates and charges, the city shall take action, up to and including
disconnection, in accordance with the city's billing and fees procedure, posted
at the City's Utility Customer Service Department.
§ 50.041  RESUMPTION OF SERVICE AFTER DISCONNECTION FOR NON-PAYMENT.
   Any consumer of the utility services furnished by the city whose utility
services have been disconnected or terminated for the non-payment of the rates
and charges due, in accordance with the city's billing and fees procedure,
posted at the City's Utility Service Department, shall pay, in addition to all
rates and charges due, pay a reconnection fee of $25.
§ 50.042  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE BY CUSTOMER.
   Any customer of utilities furnished by the city no longer desiring any
utility service shall request disconnection and termination thereof. 
Thereafter, the Utility Customer Service Supervisor, shall cause the meter to
be removed or, in lieu thereof, the services to be terminated.
§ 50.043  RATES AND CHARGES OF PUBLIC UTILITIES TO BE FIXED BY CITY COMMISSION.
   (A)   The City Commission shall fix and approve the rates charged by any
private public utility company doing business within the city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any such public utility company or any
officer or employee thereof to assess or charge for services rendered any rate
other than the rate so fixed or approved.
(1998 Code, § 122-127)  (Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008)  Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.044  TRANSFER OF SERVICE.
   If any consumer of utilities furnished by the city shall move from one
location within the city to another location within the city, his or her
utility services may be transferred thereto without the necessity of a new
application or deposit, upon the payment of a transfer fee $25.
(1998 Code, § 122-128)  (Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008)
§ 50.045  SERVICE CHARGE ON RETURNED CHECKS.
   There shall be a service charge of $25 for all returned checks.
(1998 Code, § 122-130)  (Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008)
BACKFLOW PREVENTION
§ 50.060  BACKFLOW PREVENTION.
   No water service connection shall be made to any plumbing system where a
potential or actual contamination hazard exists unless the water supply is
protected in accordance with the commission rules and this section. The city
shall discontinue water service if a required backflow prevention assembly is
not installed, maintained and tested in accordance with the Commission rules
and with city backflow prevention program guidelines.
(1998 Code, § 122-139)  (Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008)
§ 50.061  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES. Assemblies or devices designed to provide
protection against health hazards (e.g., air gap, reduced pressure zone, double
check valve and the like).
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY TESTER. A licensed backflow prevention assembly
tester who holds a current license issued by the Commission.
   CLOSED SYSTEM. To water, once it has passed through a properly functioning
backflow prevention device, that cannot re-enter the distribution system.
   COMMISSION. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), it
predecessor agency and any successor agencies.
   COMMISSION RULES. Those rules governing public water systems and found in
Title 30 of the Tex. Administrative Code Ch. 290, Subch. D.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any actual or potential connection or structural
arrangement between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or
any tank, receptacle, equipment or device, through which it may be possible for
any non-potable, used unclean, polluted and/or contaminated water or other
contaminant, to enter into any part of such potable water system under any
condition or set of conditions.
   MANUAL M14. The American Water Works Association’s Recommended Practice for
Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control, second edition or current.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, associations, corporation, firms,
clubs, trustees, receivers and bodies politic and corporate.
   THERMAL EXPANSION. Heated water that does not have the space to properly
expand.
(1998 Code, § 122-140)  (Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008)
§ 50.062  BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY INSTALLATION, TESTING AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested upon installation
by a backflow prevention tester and certified to be operating within
specification enumerated in the Manual M14 or the University of Southern
California Manual of Cross-Connection Control, ninth edition or current
edition. Backflow prevention assemblies which are installed to provide
protection against health and non-health hazards must be tested and certified
to be operating within specification at least annually by a backflow prevention
assembly tester.
   (B)   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed and tested in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, Manual M14 or the University
of Southern California Manual of Cross-Connection Control, ninth edition or
current edition. Test results shall be recorded on a backflow prevention
assembly test report form and submitted to the City Plumbing Inspector within
five days of the test. When applicable with the requirements above, all
backflow prevention assemblies must be located underground in a vault. The
assembly shall be readily accessible with adequate room for testing and
maintenance. All vaults shall be well drained, constructed of suitable material
and sized for appropriate clearances.
   (C)   Assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of
the owner whenever said assemblies are found to be defective by a backflow
prevention assembly tester. Original forms of such test, repairs and overhaul
shall be submitted to the City Plumbing Inspector within five working days of
the test, repair or overhaul of each backflow prevention assembly.
   (D)   No backflow prevention assembly or device shall be removed from use,
relocated or other assembly or device substituted without the approval of the
City Plumbing Inspector. Whenever the existing assembly or device needs to be
removed from the present location, the backflow assembly or device shall be
replaced with a backflow prevention assembly or device that complies with this
section, Manual M14 or the pertinent Plumbing Code, whichever is most
stringent.
(1998 Code, § 122-141)  (Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008; Ord. 11-42, passed 11-
16-2011)
§ 50.063  CUSTOMER SERVICE INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   A customer service inspection shall be completed prior to providing
continuous water service to all new construction, on any existing service when
the City Plumbing Inspector has reason to believe that cross-connections or
other contaminant hazards exist, or after any material improvement, correction
or addition to the private water distribution facilities.
   (B)   Only individuals with the following credentials shall be recognized as
capable of conducting a customer service inspection:
      (1)   Plumbing inspectors and water supply protection specialists that
are licensed by the State Board of Plumbing Examiners; or
      (2)   Customer service inspectors that are licensed by the Commission of
its designated agent, and hold a current license issued by the Commission.
   (C)   The customer service inspection must be documented with an approved
inspection form and such form must be submitted to the City Plumbing Inspector.
(1998 Code, § 122-142)  (Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008)
§ 50.064  EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF WATER SERVICE.
   (A)   The Water Utilities Department may, without prior notice, suspend
water service to any premises when such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or potential backflow which:
      (1)   Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment or to the health or welfare of persons; or
      (2)   Presents or may present imminent and/or substantial danger to the
city’ public water supply.
   (B)   As soon as practical after the suspension of service, the Water
Utilities Department shall notify the owner or person in charge of premises of
the suspension, in person or by certified mail, and shall order such person to
correct the cross-connection which allowed the backflow or potential backflow
to occur. When time permits, the Water Utilities Department should also notify
the owner or person in charge prior to the suspending of water service.
   (C)   The Water Utilities Department shall not reinstate suspended services
until:
      (1)   The person presents proof, satisfactory to the Water Utilities
Department, that the hazard or potential hazard has been eliminated and its
cause determined and corrected;
      (2)   The person pays the city for all costs the city incurred in
responding to the backflow or threatened potential backflow; and
      (3)   The person pays the city for all costs the city will incur in
reinstating service.
(1998 Code, § 122-143)  (Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008)
§ 50.065  NON-EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF WATER UTILITY SERVICE.
   (A)   The Water Utilities Department may suspend the city-provided water
supply of any user who violates the following conditions:
      (1)   Refusing the Water Utilities Department reasonable access to the
water user’s premises for the purpose of inspection;
      (2)   Hindering or denying the Water Utilities Department access to
backflow prevention assemblies;
      (3)   Failing to install, maintain or test backflow prevention assemblies
as required by the Water Utilities Department; or
      (4)   Failing to install, maintain and operate their piping and plumbing
systems in accordance with the city’s Plumbing Code.
   (B)   The Water Utilities Department will notify a water user in writing of
the proposed termination of its water supply by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The water user may petition the Water Utilities Department for a
reconsideration of the decision.
   (C)   The Water Utilities Department shall not reinstate suspended services
until:
      (1)   The person presents proof, satisfactory to the Water Utilities
Department, that the condition has been eliminated and its cause determined and
corrected;
      (2)   The person pays the city for all costs the city incurred in
responding to the backflow or threatened potential backflow; and
      (3)   The person pays the city for all costs the city will incur in
reinstating service.
   (D)   A person commits an offense if the person reinstates water service to
the premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior written
approval of the Water Utilities Department.
(1998 Code, § 122-144)  (Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008)  Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.066  THERMAL EXPANSION.
   It is the sole responsibility of any user who owns or controls property to
eliminate the possibility of thermal expansion, if a closed system has been
created by the installation of a backflow prevention assembly.
(1998 Code, § 122-145)  (Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008)
§ 50.067  FIRE HYDRANT PROTECTION.
   An approved double check valve backflow prevention assembly or reduced
pressure zone backflow prevention assembly shall be the minimum protection for
fire hydrant water meters which are being used for a temporary water supply
during any construction or other uses which would pose a potential hazard to
the city’s public water supply.
(1998 Code, § 122-146)  (Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008)
WATER AND SEWER EXTENSIONS
§ 50.080  SCOPE OF SUBCHAPTER.
   All water and sewer extensions beyond the existing water and sewer lines
will be extended at the customer’s expense.
(1998 Code, § 122-151)  (Ord. 97-9, passed 4-2-1997)
§ 50.081  DEPOSIT OF COST; AGREEMENT BETWEEN PROPERTY OWNER AND CITY.
   (A)   The property owner or agent shall deposit with the Water and Sewer
Department an amount of money sufficient to cover the cost of the desired water
and sewer extension. This cost shall be as determined by the city from time to
time.
   (B)   At the time of this deposit, the owner and the city shall execute an
extension agreement, which shall cover such subjects as ownership of the line
and the method of refund, if any.
(1998 Code, § 122-152)
§ 50.082  LOCATION AND GRADE OF PIPE; EASEMENTS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   The location and size of pipe to be used in any water and sewer
extension, as well as the grade thereof, shall be determined by the city.
   (B)   Any easements or rights-of-way shall be furnished at the owner’s
expense.
(1998 Code, § 122-153)
§ 50.083  CONSTRUCTION.
   The city reserves the right to do and perform all the work and construction
required in water and sewer extensions. However, the city may allow each
individual property owner or realtor to have the work and construction
performed under private contract. In such event, the city reserves the right to
inspect the construction. All material used and work performed shall be
approved and in conformity with city standards and specifications.
(1998 Code, § 122-154)
§ 50.084  RECOVERY OF COSTS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CUSTOMER and USER. The owner or his or her agent in charge of the
development.
      DEVELOPMENT. Subdivisions, either residential, business or combinations
thereof. It shall also mean apartment houses, townhouses, garden houses and
business complexes as well as other multi-use structures. In no event shall the
term DEVELOPMENT include one or more lots or tracts owned by one or more
individuals within a subdivision.
   (B)   Calculation of user’s share of cost. Upon the extension of water and
sewer utilities to each customer to be served, the city shall recover from the
customer a part of the cost of the extension through the application of the
following formula:
      (1)   Formula. The formula for determining a user’s share of water and
sewer extension cost is as follows:
         User’s Fee = (Use3 × Acres4 × Distance8 × $0.70) + (Use7 × $4.00)
      Use   =   Average expected water consumption in gallons per day.
      Acres   =   Total area in acres of the customer’s development.
      Distance   =   Total distance in feet from the nearest available water
and sewer line in existence prior to October 15, 1982, to the new customer’s
property line.
      (2)   Usage chart. Use as an element in the formula shown in division (B)
(1) above is annual average use developed from city records of various
customers. Consumption by consumers is shown in the following chart:
 
 Average Water Consumption
Apartment                            140 gpd per unit
Apartment development*               4,200 gpd per acre
Car dealership                       1,743 gpd per each
Convenience store                    117 gpd per each
Gas station                          806 gpd per each
Grocery                              1,500 gpd per each
House                                303 gpd per house
Office                               48 gpd per 1,000 s.f. floor space
Residential development*             1,364 gpd per acre
Restaurant                           1,205 gpd per 1,000 s.f. floor space
Retail                               21 gpd per 1,000 s.f. floor space
Shopping mall*                       140 gpd per 1,000 s.f. floor space
Townhouse                            147 gpd per unit
Unspecified combination development* 1,500 gpd per acre
Washateria                           2,537 gpd per 1,000 s.f. floor space
NOTES TO TABLE:
*Lines will be constructed by the city to the nearest exterior property line
of a development.
 
      (3)   Illustration.
         (a)   To illustrate the formula, assume a 20-acre, 300-unit apartment
development located 2,000 feet from the nearest water and sewer line.
         (b)   The developer’s share of the cost of the extension is calculated
as follows:
   Use   =   Apartments at 140 gpd per apartment = 42,000 gallons per day
   User’s fee   =   (42,000 gpd)3 × (20 acres)4 × (2,000 feet)8 × $0.70 +
(42,000 gpd7 × $4.00)
   User’s fee   =   $24.38 × 3.31 × 437.34 × $0.70 + (1,722.96 × $4.00)
   User’s fee   =   $31,596.50
   (C)   Payment required prior to tap. It shall be unlawful for any person to
tap onto any water or sewer line so extended without paying the required fee as
calculated from the formula.
(1998 Code, § 122-155)  Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.999  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Criminal penalty. A person who violates a provision of §§
50.060 through
50.067 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine
not to exceed $2,000, in accordance with Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 54.001.
      (2)   Civil penalty. The City Attorney is authorized to commence an
action for appropriate equitable or injunctive relief in a court of competent
jurisdiction, in accordance with Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 54.012. Such relief
may include:
         (a)   A civil penalty not to exceed $1,000 per violation per day;
         (b)   Recovery for expenses incurred by the city in responding to a
violation of §§
50.060 through
50.067 of this chapter;
         (c)   Injunction to prevent a violation of §§
50.060 through
50.067 of this chapter; and
         (d)   All other damages, costs and remedies to which the city may be
entitled.
(1998 Code, § 122-147)
   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the penalty for a
violation of §
50.020 (tampering with a water meter) is up to $500.
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of §
50.084 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be subject to the penalty set out in §
10.99.
(Ord. 08-47, passed 11-19-2008; Ord. 14-30, passed 11-5-2014; Ord. 17-21,
passed 6-21-2017)
CHAPTER 51:  SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Right of entry for purpose of inspection
   
51.02   Fixtures included in city system; distinction between main and lateral
sewers and house  sewers
   
51.03   Connection required where property is within 175 feet of public sewer
   
51.04   Regulations for property where public sewer is not available
   
51.05   Failure to connect to public sewer
   
51.06   Cesspools, septic tanks and privies
   
51.07   Specifications for house sewers
   
51.08   Connection of private garage with house sewer from dwelling
   
51.09   Placing garbage, refuse or similar matter in sewer system
   
51.10   Liability of owner of building for clogging sewer
   
51.11   Discharge of storm water or drainage water to sanitary sewers
Industrial Waste Discharge Standards
   
51.25   Definitions
   
51.26   Prohibited discharges
   
51.27   Chemical discharges
   
51.28   Heavy metals or toxic materials
   
51.29   Garbage
   
51.30   Storm water and other unpolluted drainage
   
51.31   Temperature
   
51.32   Radioactive wastes
   
51.33   Impairment of sewer facilities or treatment processes
   
51.34   Use of public sewer system required
   
51.35   Acceptance or rejection of discharge by approving authority
   
51.36   Pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities
   
51.37   Discharges requiring traps; standards for traps
   
51.38   Control manhole and sampling and measurement equipment
   
51.39   Sampling and testing methods
   
51.40   User charges; agreement between discharger and city
   
51.41   Existing dischargers
   
51.42   Discharge permit
   
51.43   Right of entry of enforcement officers
   
51.44   Authority to disconnect water and wastewater service
   
51.45   Notice of violation
   
51.46   Continuing prohibited discharge after notice
   
51.47   Failure to pay water or sewer bill
Grease Trap and Grease Interceptor Program
   
51.60   Definitions
   
51.61   Fats, oil and grease not covered under 40 C.F.R. part 403
   
51.62   Non-domestic and apartment users of the POTW
   
51.63   Facilities generating fats, oils or greases
   
51.64   Location of grease trap/interceptor for facilities
   
51.65   Intentional or unintentional allowance of discharge of fats, oils or
greases into the POTW system
   
51.66   Installation of grease trap/interceptors compliance
 
   
51.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01  RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR PURPOSE OF INSPECTION.
   Officers and employees of the city shall have the right and privilege of
entering any building or premises within the corporate limits of the city,
within reasonable hours, for the purpose of making inspection of plumbing or
house sewers connected with the city sewer system.
(1998 Code, § 122-31)
§ 51.02  FIXTURES INCLUDED IN CITY SYSTEM; DISTINCTION BETWEEN MAIN AND LATERAL
SEWERS AND HOUSE SEWERS.
   The city sewer system mentioned in this chapter, and to which this chapter
relates, embraces and includes not only the entire sewer system owned and
operated by the city, but also any and all other sewer lines and systems
located in or about the city owned or operated by any other person. The sewers
of the city sewer system are called main sewers and lateral sewers. The sewer
lines laid by property owners on their land, to connect buildings, structures
and fixtures with the city sewer system, are called house sewers.
(1998 Code, § 122-32)
§ 51.03  CONNECTION REQUIRED WHERE PROPERTY IS WITHIN 175 FEET OF PUBLIC SEWER.
   Every owner of a building or part thereof occupied by people for any
purpose, during any part of the day or night, where a main or lateral sewer of
the city sewer system is laid and maintained within 175 feet of the building
and in such part of a street or alley as lies immediately adjacent to the lot,
lots, parcel of land or premises on which such building or part of building is
located, shall put up within such building or part of building, or upon the
premises where the building or part of building is situated, a water closet or
a privy, and have the water closet or privy connected with the city sewer
system. Every such privy or closet shall be supplied with water and with a
flush tank adequate to properly flush such privy or closet.
(1998 Code, § 122-33)
§ 51.04  REGULATIONS FOR PROPERTY WHERE PUBLIC SEWER IS NOT AVAILABLE.
   (A)   In cases of undivided land, where there is no main or lateral sewer of
the city sewer system within the distance provided by §
51.03 of this chapter, no building shall be constructed thereon unless the
tract contains at least two acres of land and has a width of at least 200 feet
measured at the front building line.
   (B)   The City Commission may authorize a variance from the two-acre or 200-
foot width requirements for on-site sanitary sewer facilities when, its
opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In
granting a variance, the Commission shall prescribe only conditions that it
deems necessary or desirable in the public interest. In making the findings
required in this section, the Commission shall take into account the nature of
the proposed use of the land involved, existing uses of land in the vicinity,
the number of persons who will reside at the proposed location and the probable
effect of the variance upon the public health, safety, convenience and welfare
in the vicinity. The Planning Board shall first review the request for a
variance and make a written recommendation to the City Commission. No variance
shall be granted unless the Commission finds:
      (1)   There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land
involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter
would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his or her land;
      (2)   The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the applicant;
      (3)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area;
      (4)   The granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing
the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter;
      (5)   The County Health District approves the on-site sanitary sewer
facilities;
      (6)   Applicant agrees that, if platting is required by state law or city
ordinance, any granting of a variance is conditional on the property being
platted, approved by the city and recorded in the County Deed Records;
      (7)   Applicant has paid all property taxes;
      (8)   The property is in excess of one acre of undeveloped land area,
excluding water bodies (ponds, lakes, streams and the like); and
      (9)   One of the following guidelines applies:
         (a)   The subject property perimeter is bounded by undevelopable
property which if it were combined with the subject property would cause it to
exceed the ordinance requirement. Undevelopable property includes natural
bodies of water, highway, railway or other right-of-way, or other properties of
the land that substantially prevent the property from being developed by any
property owner; or
         (b)   Other factors (other than economic hardship) exist that would
prohibit the applicant from purchasing enough additional property to meet the
section requirements.
   (C)   (1)   The findings of the City Commission, together with the specific
facts upon which the findings are based, shall be incorporated into the
official minutes of the Commission meeting at which the variance is granted.
      (2)   Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of the city code, so that the public health, safety and
welfare may be secured and substantial justice done.
      (3)   Pecuniary hardship to the subdivider, standing alone, shall not be
deemed to constitute undue hardship.
(1998 Code, § 122-34)  (Ord. 01-08, passed 3-21-2001)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.05  FAILURE TO CONNECT TO PUBLIC SEWER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as owner, as agent of the
owner, or as a lessee, tenant, proprietor or occupant, of any building or part
of building coming within the provisions of §
51.03 of this chapter, to construct, use or maintain, or permit to be
constructed, used or maintained, upon the lot, parcel of land or premises upon
which the building or part of building is located, any privy, water closet,
urinal, slop drain, bathtub drain, shower/bath drain, wastewater drain or other
receptacle whatever, used or to be used for the purpose of receiving and
discharging sewage matter or slop of any kind, unless such receptacle shall be
connected with the city sewer system and be kept and maintained in proper
working condition.
(1998 Code, § 122-35)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.06  CESSPOOLS, SEPTIC TANKS AND PRIVIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, as owner, agent of the owner, lessee,
tenant, proprietor or occupant of any building, or part of building, or of any
lot, lots, parcel of land or premises coming within the provisions of this
chapter, to construct, use or maintain or permit to be constructed, used or
maintained on such lot, parcel of land or premises any cesspool, septic toilet,
septic tank or pit toilet. No cesspool, septic toilet, septic tank or privy
vault shall be connected with the city sewer system.
(1998 Code, § 122-36)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.07  SPECIFICATIONS FOR HOUSE SEWERS.
   Every house sewer from a point two feet outside the house to the street or
alley shall be of standard vitrified clay sewer pipe not less than four inches
in diameter unless laid less than 12 inches deep, in which event it shall be of
standard cast iron sewer pipe or PVC schedule 40 not less than four inches in
diameter. Each house or building must have a separate house sewer connecting
the house or building directly with the city sewer system. When a house or
building is constructed as a two- or more family unit, the sewer pipe shall be
not less than six inches in diameter.
(1998 Code, § 122-37)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.08  CONNECTION OF PRIVATE GARAGE WITH HOUSE SEWER FROM DWELLING.
   A private garage building, not used or occupied, and not constructed or
designed to be used or occupied wholly or partly as a dwelling house or place
of residence, may be connected with a house sewer draining a residence or
dwelling house owned by the same person and located on the same lot or premises
as the private garage building.
(1998 Code, § 122-38)
§ 51.09  PLACING GARBAGE, REFUSE OR SIMILAR MATTER IN SEWER SYSTEM.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit, or to cause to be
thrown or deposited, in any vessel or receptacle connected with the sanitary
sewer system of the city, any garbage, rags, cotton, newspaper, refuse or other
matter whatsoever except feces, urine, toilet paper, liquid slops and cleansing
or disinfecting powder or liquid.
(1998 Code, § 122-39)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.10  LIABILITY OF OWNER OF BUILDING FOR CLOGGING SEWER.
   The owner of every building connected with and drained by the sanitary sewer
system of the city shall be liable to the city for, and the city shall have the
right to collect from the owner, all expenses incurred by the city in opening,
cleaning out and repairing any sewer line of the city that may become clogged
or obstructed as a result of the violation of the provisions of this chapter by
the owner or occupant of the building.
(1998 Code, § 122-40)
§ 51.11  DISCHARGE OF STORM WATER OR DRAINAGE WATER TO SANITARY SEWERS.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any real property, or the tenant,
lessee or any other occupant of real property, to cause or allow the discharge
of storm water, ground water, roof runoff, foundation drainage and other
subsurface drainage into the sanitary sewerage system.
(1998 Code, § 122-41)  Penalty, see §
51.99
INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISCHARGE STANDARDS
§ 51.25  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The Mayor or his or her duly authorized representative.
   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed
in milligrams per liter, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of
20°C.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal. (Also called HOUSE LATERAL and HOUSE CONNECTION.)
   COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). A measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of
inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater, expressed in
milligrams per liter as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant
in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic
matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand.
   CONTROL MANHOLE. A manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point
before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public
sewer.
   CONTROL POINT. A point of access to a course of discharge before the
discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer.
   GARBAGE. Animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of
food products and produce.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Waste resulting from any process of industry,
manufacturing, trade or business or from the development of any natural
resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or
distinct from normal wastewater.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE CHARGE. The charge made on those persons who discharge
industrial wastes into the city’s sewerage system.
   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (mg/l). The same as parts per million and is a weight-
to-volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34
shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake or other body of
surface water or ground water.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER. Wastewater excluding industrial wastewater
discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and in which the average
concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 200 mg/l and BOD is
not more than 200 mg/l.
   OVERLOAD. The imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment
facility in excess of its engineered design capacity.
   pH. The measure of the relative acidity or alkalinity of water and is
defined as the negative logarithm (base 10) of the hydrogen ion concentration.
   PUBLIC SEWER. Pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in
which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject to control by
the city.
   SANITARY SEWER. A public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or
industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which storm water, surface
water, ground water and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent, or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration or flow during normal operation.
   STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, as prepared, approved and published
jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works
Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
   STORM SEWER. A public sewer which carries storm water and surface water and
drainage, and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not
intentionally passed.
   STORM WATER. Rainfall or any other form of precipitation.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Water and Wastewater Superintendent of the city, or his
or her duly authorized deputy, agent or representative.
   TO DISCHARGE. Includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow
to seep or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit or suffer any
of these acts or omissions.
   TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). Solids, measured in milligrams per liter, that
either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater or
other liquids, and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration
device.
   TRAP. A device designed to skim, settle or otherwise remove grease, oil,
sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances.
   UNPOLLUTED WASTEWATER. Water containing:
      (1)   No free or emulsified grease or oil;
      (2)   No acids or alkalis;
      (3)   No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving
water;
      (4)   No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or
solution;
      (5)   No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases;
      (6)   Not more than ten mg/l each of TSS and BOD; and
      (7)   Color not exceeding 50 units as measured by the platinum-cobalt
method of determination as specified in Standard Methods.
   WASTE. Rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous or
solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural or industrial activities.
   WASTEWATER. A combination of the water-carried waste from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
any ground water, surface water and storm water that may be present.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. All facilities for collection, pumping, treating and
disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes.
   WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE. The charge on all users of the public sewer
system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values
established as representative of normal wastewater.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT. Any city-owned facilities, devices and
structures used for receiving, processing and treating wastewater, industrial
waste and sludges from the sanitary sewers.
   WATERCOURSE. A natural or human-made channel in which a flow of water
occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(1998 Code, § 122-61)  (Ord. 08-46, passed 11-19-2008)
§ 51.26  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or
by interaction with other wastes may:
      (1)   Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or
facilities;
      (2)   Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or
      (3)   Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment
plant effluent.
   (B)   All discharges shall conform to requirements of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 122-62)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.27  CHEMICAL DISCHARGES.
   (A)   No discharge to public sewers may contain:
      (1)   Cyanide greater than one mg/l;
      (2)   Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply;
      (3)   Chlorides in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l;
      (4)   Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas; or
      (5)   Substances causing an excessive chemical oxygen demand (COD).
   (B)   No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain:
      (1)   Strong acid, iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating
solutions, whether neutralized or not;
      (2)   Fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of
100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (0° and 65°C);
      (3)   Objectionable or toxic substances exerting an excessive chlorine
requirement, to the degree that the material received in the composite
wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by
the approving authority for the materials; or
      (4)   Obnoxious, toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in
quantities sufficient to violate the provisions of §
51.26(A) of this chapter.
   (C)   No waste, wastewater or other substance may be discharged into public
sewers which has a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5, or any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and
personnel at the wastewater facilities.
   (D)   All waste, wastewater or other substances containing phenols, hydrogen
sulfide or other odor-producing substances shall conform to concentration
limits established by the approving authority. After treatment of the composite
wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by
state, federal or other agencies with jurisdiction over discharges to receiving
waters.
(1998 Code, § 122-63)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.28  HEAVY METALS OR TOXIC MATERIALS.
   (A)   No discharges may contain concentrations of heavy metals greater than
amounts specified in division (B) below.
   (B)   The maximum allowable concentrations of heavy metals, stated in terms
of milligrams per liter, determined on the basis of individual sampling in
accordance with Standard Methods are:
 
Metal mg/l
Arsenic          0.05
Barium           5.0
Boron            1.0
Cadmium          0.02
Chromium (total) 5.0
Copper           1.0
Lead             0.1
Manganese        1.0
Mercury          0.005
Nickel           1.0
Selenium         0.02
Silver           0.1
Zinc             5.0
 
   (C)   In determining the concentration parameters to be included in this
chapter, current state, federal and other appropriate agency rules, regulations
and orders should be consulted, including Order 70-0828-5 of the State Water
Quality Board regulating the discharge of hazardous metals into or adjacent to
state waters.
   (D)   No other heavy metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public
sewers without a permit from the approving authority specifying conditions of
pretreatment, concentrations, volumes and other applicable provisions.
   (E)   Prohibited heavy metals and toxic materials include, but are not
limited to:
      (1)   Antimony;
      (2)   Beryllium;
      (3)   Bismuth;
      (4)   Cobalt;
      (5)   Molybdenum;
      (6)   Tin;
      (7)   Uranyl ion;
      (8)   Rhenium;
      (9)   Strontium;
      (10)   Tellurium;
      (11)   Herbicides;
      (12)   Fungicides; and
      (13)   Pesticides.
(1998 Code, § 122-64)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.29  GARBAGE.
   (A)   No person may discharge garbage into public sewers unless it is
shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than one-
half inch in any dimension are prohibited.
   (B)   The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 1.33
horsepower or greater.
(1998 Code, § 122-65)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.30  STORM WATER AND OTHER UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE.
   (A)   No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers:
      (1)   Unpolluted storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff or
subsurface drainage;
      (2)   Unpolluted cooling water;
      (3)   Unpolluted industrial process waters; or
      (4)   Other unpolluted drainage.
   (B)   In compliance with the State Water Quality Act (Tex. Water Code §§
26.001 et seq.) and other statutes, the approving authority may designate storm
sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in
division (A) above may be discharged.
(1998 Code, § 122-66)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.31  TEMPERATURE.
   No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150°F (65°C), or any substance which causes the temperature of the total
wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of 10°F or more per
hour, or causes a combined total increase of plant influent temperature to
110°F.
(1998 Code, § 122-67)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.32  RADIOACTIVE WASTES.
   (A)   No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public
sewers without the permission of the approving authority.
   (B)   The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable
state and federal regulations, regulations for discharge of radioactive wastes
into public sewers.
(1998 Code, § 122-68)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.33  IMPAIRMENT OF SEWER FACILITIES OR TREATMENT PROCESSES.
   (A)   No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of
causing:
      (1)   Obstruction to the flow in sewers;
      (2)   Interference with the operation of treatment processes of
facilities; or
      (3)   Excessive loading of treatment facilities.
   (B)   Discharges prohibited by division (A) above include, but are not
limited to, materials which exert or cause concentrations of:
      (1)   Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l, including, but not
limited to:
         (a)   Fuller’s earth;
         (b)   Lime slurries; and
         (c)   Lime residues.
      (2)   Dissolved solids greater than 1,900 mg/l, including, but not
limited to:
         (a)   Sodium chloride; and
         (b)   Sodium sulfate.
      (3)   Excessive discoloration, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Dye wastes; and
         (b)   Vegetable tanning solutions.
      (4)   BOD, COD or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity.
   (C)   No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may:
      (1)   Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to
clog the sewers;
      (2)   Overload skimming and grease handling equipment;
      (3)   Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by
normal biological wastewater treatment processes due to the non-amenability of
the substance to bacterial action; or
      (4)   Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive
quantities.
   (D)   No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which:
      (1)   Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and
facilities employed; or
      (2)   Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment
plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
   (E)   The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of
slugs when they may:
      (1)   Impair the treatment process;
      (2)   Cause damage to collection facilities;
      (3)   Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; or
      (4)   Render the waste unfit for stream disposal or industrial use.
   (F)   No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances
which may violate division (A) above if present in sufficient quantity or size,
including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Ashes;
      (2)   Cinders;
      (3)   Sand;
      (4)   Mud;
      (5)   Straw;
      (6)   Shavings;
      (7)   Metal;
      (8)   Glass;
      (9)   Rags;
      (10)   Feathers;
      (11)   Tar;
      (12)   Plastics;
      (13)   Wood;
      (14)   Unground garbage;
      (15)   Whole blood;
      (16)   Paunch manure;
      (17)   Hair and fleshings;
      (18)   Entrails;
      (19)   Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders;
      (20)   Slops;
      (21)   Chemical residues;
      (22)   Paint residues; or
      (23)   Bulk solids.
(1998 Code, § 122-69)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.34  USE OF PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM REQUIRED.
   (A)   Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public
sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging:
      (1)   Wastewater;
      (2)   Permitted industrial waste;
      (3)   Polluted liquids; or
      (4)   Unpolluted waters or liquids.
   (B)   Unless authorized by the State Water Commission, no person may deposit
or discharge any waste included in division (A) above on public or private
property in or adjacent to any:
      (1)   Natural outlet;
      (2)   Watercourse;
      (3)   Storm sewer; or
      (4)   Other area within the jurisdiction of the city.
   (C)   The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that the
wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the
provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state
and local governments.
(1998 Code, § 122-70)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.35  ACCEPTANCE OR REJECTION OF DISCHARGE BY APPROVING AUTHORITY.
   (A)   If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may
deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving
waters, create a hazard to life or health, or create a public nuisance, the
approving authority shall require:
      (1)   Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public
sewers;
      (2)   Control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and
      (3)   Payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes.
   (B)   The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge
or proposed discharge is included under division (A) above.
   (C)   The approving authority shall reject wastes when:
      (1)   It determines that a discharge or proposed discharge is included
under division (A) above; and
      (2)   The discharger does not meet the requirements of division (A)
above.
(1998 Code, § 122-71)
§ 51.36  PRETREATMENT OR FLOW-EQUALIZING FACILITIES.
   (A)   If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall
review and approve design and installation of equipment and processes.
   (B)   The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to
all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other laws.
   (C)   Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow-
equalizing or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities in
effective operating condition at his or her own expense.
(1998 Code, § 122-72)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.37  DISCHARGES REQUIRING TRAPS; STANDARDS FOR TRAPS.
   (A)   Discharges requiring a trap include:
      (1)   Grease or waste containing grease in excessive amounts;
      (2)   Oil;
      (3)   Sand;
      (4)   Flammable wastes; and
      (5)   Other harmful ingredients.
   (B)   Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall, at his
or her own expense and as required by the approving authority:
      (1)   Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by
the approving authority;
      (2)   Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy
accessibility for cleaning and inspection; and
      (3)   Maintain the trap in effective operating condition.
(1998 Code, § 122-73)  (Ord. 08-46, passed 11-19-2008)
§ 51.38  CONTROL MANHOLE AND SAMPLING AND MEASUREMENT EQUIPMENT.
   Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall, at his or her own expense and as required by the
approving authority:
   (A)   Install an accessible and safely located control manhole;
   (B)   Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation,
sampling and measurement of the waste; and
   (C)   Maintain the equipment and facilities.
(1998 Code, § 122-74)
§ 51.39  SAMPLING AND TESTING METHODS.
   (A)   (1)   Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted
methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and
determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb and property. The
particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite sample
from outfalls of the premises is appropriate or whether grab samples should be
taken.
      (2)   Normally, but not always, BOD and TSS analyses are obtained from
24-hour composites of all outfalls.
      (3)   Where applicable, a 16-hour period, eight-hour period or some other
period may be required. Periodic grab samples are used to determine pH.
   (B)   Examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes
required by this subchapter shall be:
      (1)   Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of Standard
Methods; and
      (2)   Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole
provided or other control point authorized by the approving authority.
   (C)   BOD and TSS shall be determined from composite sampling.
   (D)   The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine
flow, BOD and suspended solids.
   (E)   The city is entitled to select the time of sampling at its sole
discretion so long as at least annual samples are taken.
(1998 Code, § 122-75)
§ 51.40  USER CHARGES; AGREEMENT BETWEEN DISCHARGER AND CITY.
   (A)   Persons making discharges of industrial waste shall pay a charge to
cover the cost of collection and treatment.
   (B)   When discharges of industrial waste are approved by the approving
authority, the city or its authorized representative shall enter into an
agreement or arrangement providing:
      (1)   Terms of acceptance by the city; and
      (2)   Payment by the person making the discharge.
(1998 Code, § 122-76)
§ 51.41  EXISTING DISCHARGERS.
   A person discharging industrial wastes into public sewers prior to the
effective date of Ord. 73-23 may continue without penalty so long as he or she:
   (A)   Does not increase the quantity or quality of discharge without
permission of the approving authority;
   (B)   Had discharged the industrial waste at least six months prior to the
effective date of the ordinance; and
   (C)   Applied for and was granted a permit no later than 150 days after the
effective date of the ordinance.
(1998 Code, § 122-77)
§ 51.42  DISCHARGE PERMIT.
   (A)   The city may grant a permit to discharge to persons meeting all
requirements of §
51.41 of this chapter; provided that, the person:
      (1)   Submitted an application within 120 days after the effective date
of Ord. 73-23 on forms supplied by the approving authority;
      (2)   Secured approval by the approving authority of plans and
specifications for pretreatment facilities when required;
      (3)   Complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements,
including, but not limited to, provisions for:
         (a)   Payment of charges;
         (b)   Installation and operation of pretreatment facilities; and
         (c)   Sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength.
      (4)   Provides a sampling point subject to the provisions of this
subchapter and approval of the approving authority.
   (B)   A person applying for a new discharge shall:
      (1)   Meet all conditions of division (A) above; and
      (2)   Secure a permit prior to discharging any waste.
(1998 Code, § 122-78)
§ 51.43  RIGHT OF ENTRY OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any public
or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this
subchapter.
   (B)   Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment’s
rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security and fire protection.
   (C)   Except when caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain
safe conditions, the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to
its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out
of the sampling operation.
   (D)   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter all private
properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement for the purposes
of:
      (1)   Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling or repair;
      (2)   Maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within the
easements; and
      (3)   Conducting any other authorized activity. All activities shall be
conducted in full accordance with the terms of the negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
   (E)   No person acting under authority of this section may inquire into any
processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or
other industry processes, beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind
and source of discharge to the public sewers.
(1998 Code, § 122-79)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.44  AUTHORITY TO DISCONNECT WATER AND WASTEWATER SERVICE.
   (A)   The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and
disconnect an industrial customer from the system when:
      (1)   Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or the treatment process
are released to the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or
interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater;
      (2)   A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the
wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to
a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to
the city’s system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment
that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or
      (3)   The industrial customer:
         (a)   Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation
of the permit issued by the approving authority;
         (b)   Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in
sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment system;
         (c)   Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services
when due; or
         (d)   Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers.
   (B)   If this service is disconnected pursuant to division (A)(2) above, the
city shall:
      (1)   Disconnect the customer;
      (2)   Supply the customer with the governmental agency’s report and
provide the customer with all pertinent information; and
      (3)   Continue disconnection until such time as the industrial customer
provides additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the
objectionable characteristics from his or her industrial wastes.
(1998 Code, § 122-80)
§ 51.45  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   The city shall serve persons discharging in violation of this subchapter
with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance.
(1998 Code, § 122-81)
§ 51.46  CONTINUING PROHIBITED DISCHARGE AFTER NOTICE.
   No person may continue discharging in violation of this subchapter beyond
the time limit provided in the notice.
(1998 Code, § 122-82)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.47  FAILURE TO PAY WATER OR SEWER BILL.
   In addition to sanctions provided for by this subchapter, the city is
entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by other ordinances of the city for
failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due.
(1998 Code, § 122-84)
GREASE TRAP AND GREASE INTERCEPTOR PROGRAM
§ 51.60  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act,
as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   FATS, OILS AND GREASES (FOG). Organic polar compounds derived from animal
and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules.
These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures
established in 40 C.F.R. part 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are
sometimes referred to as GREASE or GREASES.
   GENERATOR. Any person who owns or operates a grease trap/grease interceptor,
or whose act or process produces a grease trap waste.
   GREASE TRAP OR INTERCEPTOR. A device designed to use differences in specific
gravities to separate and retain light density liquids, waterborne fats, oils
and greases prior to the wastewater entering the sanitary sewer collection
system. These devices also serve to collect settable solids, generated by and
from food preparation activities, prior to water exiting the trap and entering
the sanitary sewer collection system. A GREASE INTERCEPTOR refers to a
separation device installed indoors at or near the kitchen fixtures with a
design flow of 50 gallons per minute (gpm) or less. A GREASE TRAP usually
refers to an outdoor separation device with a design flow greater than 50 gpm
and or a capacity of at least 750 gallons.
   GREASE TRAP WASTE. Material collected in and from a grease trap/interceptor
in the sanitary sewer service line of commercial (restaurants and apartments),
institutional or industrial food services or processing establishments,
including solids resulting from de-water processes.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants into the
POTW from any non-domestic source, except when referring to apartment housing.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal, or is a cause
of a violation of the city’s Texas Pollutants Discharge Elimination System
(TPDES) permit.
   POTW or PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS. A treatment works which a state or
municipality as defined by § 502(4) of the Clean Water Act owns. This
definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment,
recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid
nature. It also includes all sewers, pipes and other conveyances that convey
wastewater to a POTW. The term also means the municipality, as defined in § 502
(4) of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1362, which has jurisdiction over this
subchapter, the terms SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM and POTW may be used
interchangeably.
   TCEQ. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, and its predecessor and
successor agencies.
   TRANSPORTER. A person who is registered with and authorized by the TCEQ to
transport sewage sludge, water treatment sludge, domestic septage, chemical
toilet waste, grit trap waste or grease trap waste in accordance with 30 Tex.
Administration Code§ 312.142.
   USER. Any person, including those located outside the jurisdiction limits of
the city, which contributes, causes or permits the contribution or discharge of
wastewater into the POTW, including persons who contribute such wastewater from
mobile sources.
(1998 Code, § 122-85)  (Ord. 08-46, passed 11-19-2008)
§ 51.61  FATS, OIL AND GREASE NOT COVERED UNDER 40 C.F.R. PART 403.
   (A)   This subchapter pertains to fats, oil and grease which are not covered
under 40 C.F.R. part 403 federal pretreatment regulations which specifically
prohibit petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral
oil origin in amount that will cause interference or pass through at the
publicly owned treatment works (POTW).
   (B)   This subchapter specifically focuses on control of edible oil and
grease from food preparation establishments.
(1998 Code, § 122-86)  (Ord. 08-46, passed 11-19-2008)
§ 51.62  NON-DOMESTIC AND APARTMENT USERS OF THE POTW.
   This subchapter shall apply to all non-domestic and apartment users of the
publicly owned treatment works (POTW). Grease traps or grease interceptors
shall not be required for residential users, except apartment complexes.
(1998 Code, § 122-87)  (Ord. 08-46, passed 11-19-2008)
§ 51.63  FACILITIES GENERATING FATS, OILS OR GREASES.
   Facilities generating fats, oils or greases because of food manufacturing,
processing, preparation or food service shall install, use and maintain
appropriate grease traps or interceptors. These facilities include, but are not
limited to, restaurants, food manufacturers, food processors, hospitals, hotels
and motels, apartment complexes, prisons, nursing homes and any other facility
preparing, serving or otherwise making any foodstuff available for consumption.
(1998 Code, § 122-88)  (Ord. 08-46, passed 11-19-2008)
§ 51.64  LOCATION OF GREASE TRAP/INTERCEPTOR FOR FACILITIES.
   Facilities required to have a grease trap/interceptor shall not have them
located inside a building. Grease trap/interceptors shall be installed outside
located behind the establishment with adequate access for cleaning and
inspection. When limited space is available, an alternate location may be used
with prior approval of the POTW.
(1998 Code, § 122-89)  (Ord. 08-46, passed 11-19-2008)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.65  INTENTIONAL OR UNINTENTIONAL ALLOWANCE OF DISCHARGE OF FATS, OILS OR
GREASES INTO THE POTW SYSTEM.
   No user may intentionally or unintentionally allow the direct or indirect
discharge of any petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, mineral oil or
any fats, oils or greases of animal or vegetable origin into the POTW system in
such amounts as to cause interference with the collection and treatment system,
or as to cause pollutants to pass through the treatment works into the
environment.
(1998 Code, § 122-90)  (Ord. 08-46, passed 11-19-2008)  Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.66  INSTALLATION OF GREASE TRAP/INTERCEPTORS COMPLIANCE.
   All grease trap/interceptors shall be installed in compliance with any
pertinent County Health District Guidelines along with city guidelines, state
and federal codes.
   (A)   New or expanded facilities. Food processing facilities, food service
facilities or multi-dwelling units which are newly proposed or constructed, or
existing facilities which will be expanded or renovated to include a food
service facility, (where such facility did not previously exist), shall be
required to design, install, operate and maintain a grease trap/interceptor in
accordance with locally adopted plumbing codes or other applicable ordinances.
Grease traps/interceptors shall be installed and inspected by the POTW prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
   (B)   Existing facilities. Existing grease traps/interceptors must be
operated and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations
and in accordance with these model standards, unless specified in writing and
approved by the POTW.
   (C)   Sampling port. All new and renovated food preparation facilities shall
construct adequate sampling port at each grease trap. Ideally, the sampling
port shall be a specifically designed exterior structure, constructed on the
effluent pipe of the trap. This structure shall result in a free-falling
liquid, so that a sample bottle can be held under the flow to capture a sample.
FOG samples should represent the worst case scenario. The worst case scenario
(peak flow) is the point at which FOG removal equipment is most likely to fail,
and FOG loading of the collection system will occur. The goal of the equipment
is to remove FOG even at peak flow; therefore, sampling needs to occur at peak
flow to ensure that the equipment is adequate. Frequency of sampling is
determined by the need for data. When setting a monitoring schedule to ensure
that FOG or temperature limits are being met, and the compliance history of
each facility (the number of blockages or other problems caused by the
facility, how often the facility pumps out its grease trap or cleans its
interceptor). FOG sampling may be scheduled and sampled by the POTW as part of
compliance monitoring on an unannounced basis. The POTW will send samples to an
approved laboratory. Cost for all FOG testing ordered by the POTW shall be the
responsibility of the establishment. All test results shall be available to the
establishment.
(1998 Code, § 122-91)  (Ord. 08-46, passed 11-19-2008; Ord. 09-37, passed 12-2-
2009)
§ 51.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of §
51.04 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $200.
(1998 Code, § 122-34)
   (C)   Any person who shall violate any provision of §
51.11 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $200.
(1998 Code, § 122-41)
   (D)   (1)   A person who continues prohibited discharges, as per §
51.46 of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is
punishable as provided in §
10.99 of this code for each act of violation and for each day of violation.
      (2)   In addition to proceeding under authority of division (D)(1) above,
the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which
it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person
continuing prohibited discharges.
(1998 Code, § 122-83)
   (E)   (1)   If the POTW determines that a generator is responsible for a
blockage of a collection system line, as per §§
51.60 through
51.66 of this chapter, the generator shall owe a civil penalty of $1,000 for
the violation, $1,500 for a second violation and $2,000 for the third violation
within a two-year period. Continuous violations shall result in an increase in
penalty by $500 and may result in termination of services.
      (2)   Any person or user violating any of the provisions of §§
51.60 through
51.66 of this chapter shall be subject to a written warning for the first
violation, a $1,000 civil penalty for the second violation, a $1,500 civil
penalty for the third violation and a $2,000 civil penalty for the fourth
violation within a two-year period. Consistent violations will result in a $500
increase in civil penalty and may result in termination of service.
(1998 Code, § 122-92)
(Ord. 01-08, passed 3-21-2001; Ord. 08-46, passed 11-19-2008)
CHAPTER 52:  TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Section
   
52.01   Findings and purpose
   
52.02   Granting clause
   
52.03   Authority; scope
   
52.04   Definitions
   
52.05   Municipal consent required
   
52.06   Application for municipal consent
   
52.07   Municipal consent ordinance
   
52.08   Petition for reconsideration
   
52.09   Administration and enforcement
   
52.10   Applicability
   
52.11   Compensation to city
   
52.111   Network nodes fee schedule
   
52.12   City payment due dates
   
52.13   Audits
   
52.14   Transfer
   
52.15   Notices
   
52.16   Circumvention of fee prohibited
   
52.17   Construction obligations
   
52.18   Conditions of public rights-of-way occupancy
   
52.19   Insurance requirements
   
52.20   Indemnity
   
52.21   Renewal of municipal consent
   
52.22   Annexation; disannexation
   
52.23   Severability
   
52.24   Governing law
   
52.25   Termination
   
52.26   Unauthorized use of public rights-of-way
§ 52.01  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to:
      (1)   Assist in the management of the public rights-of-way in order to
minimize the congestion, inconvenience, visual impact and other adverse effects
and the costs to the citizens resulting from the placement of
telecommunications facilities within the public rights-of-way;
      (2)   Govern the provider’s use and occupancy of the public rights-of-
way;
      (3)   Compensate the city for the private, commercial use and occupancy
of the public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers in a non-
discriminatory and competitively neutral manner;
      (4)   Assist the city in its efforts to protect the public health, safety
and welfare;
      (5)   Facilitate competition among telecommunications service providers
and encourage the universal availability of advanced telecommunications
services to all residents and businesses of the city; and
      (6)   Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way
held in public trust by the city.
   (B)   This chapter may be referred to as the “Telecommunications Ordinance”.
(1998 Code, § 122-171)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.02  GRANTING CLAUSE.
   Subject to the restrictions set forth herein, the city may consent to the
non-exclusive right and privilege to use the public rights-of-way in the city
by a provider for the operation of access lines in a telecommunications system,
consisting of both telecommunications facilities and transmission media. The
terms of this chapter shall apply throughout the city and to all operations of
the provider within the city public rights-of-way, and in the public rights-of-
way in any newly annexed areas in accordance with §
52.22 of this chapter. The city does not exercise any authority under this
chapter or otherwise over any rights the provider may have to deliver
telecommunications services, as authorized by the Public Utility Commission of
the state or the Federal Communications Commission.
(1998 Code, § 122-172)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.03  AUTHORITY; SCOPE.
   (A)   (1)   This chapter applies to all telecommunications service providers
under Title 47, Ch. 5, Subch. II of the United States Code (47 U.S.C. §§ 201 et
seq.) (“Title 47") that place transmission media in, on or over public rights-
of-way, excluding services provided solely by means of a wireless transmission.
      (2)   No municipal consent granted under this chapter authorizes the
provision of any services not covered by Title 47.
      (3)   Cable service and open video systems as defined in Title VI of the
Communications Act of 1934 (Title 47, Ch. 5, Subch. V-A of the United States
Code (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.)) and any other content service are expressly
excluded.
   (B)   The right of a person to apply for or to use city utility
infrastructure shall be governed by other provisions of this code. The granting
of a municipal consent under this chapter does not grant attachment rights or
authorize the use of city utility infrastructure without separate written
agreement.
(1998 Code, § 122-173)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.04  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESS LINE. A unit of measurement representing:
      (1)   Each switched transmission path of the transmission media within
the public rights-of-way extended to the end-user customer’s network interface
within the city that allows delivery of telecommunications service;
      (2)   Each separate transmission path of the transmission media within
the city’s public rights-of-way that terminates at an end user customer’s
network interface of each loop provided as an unbundled network element to a
person pursuant to an agreement under § 252 of the Federal Telecommunications
Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. § 252); or
      (3)   Each termination point of a non-switched telephone or other circuit
consisting of transmission media connecting specific locations identified by,
and provided to, the end-user for the delivery of non-switched
telecommunications service within the city.
   ACCESS LINE FEE. The amount in §
52.11 of this chapter to be applied to each access line on a monthly basis for
the calculation of the total amount to be paid to the city by the provider and/
or by any other person using the facilities of provider for the creation of
telecommunications service to which this chapter applies.
   AFFILIATE. A person who controls, is controlled by or is under common
control with a provider. AFFILIATE does not include a person who serves end use
customers by means of a wireless transmission. There is a rebuttable
presumption of control if a provider owns 25% or more of the affiliate’s stock
or assets.
   CERTIFICATED TELECOMMUNICATIONS UTILITY. Any entity that has been granted or
applied for a certificate under Tex. Tax Utilities Code Ch. 54 or other
successor authorizing certificate to provide local exchange telephone service.
   CITY. The City of Texas City, Texas. As used throughout, the term CITY also
includes the designated agent of the city.
   DIRECTION OF THE CITY. All lawful ordinances, laws, rules, resolutions and
regulations of the city that are not inconsistent with this chapter and that
are now in force or may hereafter be passed and adopted.
   FACILITIES. Any and all of the provider’s duct spaces, manholes, poles,
conduits, underground and overhead passageways and other equipment, structures,
plant and appurtenances and all associated transmission media.
   MUNICIPAL CONSENT. The individual grant to use the public rights-of-way
issued by the city and accepted by the individual providers under this chapter
governing the provider’s use of the public rights-of-way and the payment of
compensation.
   PERSON. A natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association,
partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture, joint stock
company or association, and other such entity.
   PROVIDER. A person, including any certificated telecommunications utility,
that delivers telecommunications service within the city to person(s) by way of
a network, and that places facilities in, on or over the public rights-of-way.
A PROVIDER does not include persons who are authorized by the city to occupy
the public rights-of-way in specifically approved routes within the city,
unless they also have a municipal consent under this chapter. To the extent
allowed by law, PROVIDER also means a person that does not deliver
telecommunications service within the city, but who uses, constructs or
maintains facilities or transmission media within the public rights-of-way.
   PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY. All present and future public streets, highways,
lanes, paths, alleys, sidewalks, boulevards, drives, tunnels, easements or
similar property in the city limits in which the city holds a property interest
or exercises rights of management or control.
   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The mayor of the city or the City Manager, if
applicable.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK or NETWORK. All facilities placed in the public
rights-of-way and used to provide telecommunications service to the public.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The providing or offering to provide
transmissions between or among points identified by the user, of information of
the user’s choosing, including voice, video or data, without change in content
of the information as sent and received, if the transmissions are accomplished
through a telecommunications network. TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE includes
ancillary or adjunct switching services and signal conversions rendered as a
function of underlying transmission services, but excludes long distance
transmissions (inter-LATA (local access transport area) and intra-LATA toll
transmissions). TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE includes all communications services
capable of being provided over a telephone system and certificated to
telecommunications providers under the Tex. Utilities Code Title 2, Public
Utility Regulatory Act, as amended, and Title II of the Communications Act of
1934, as amended, expressly excluding cable services or open video systems, as
defined in Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended. Also
excluded are wireless services, as defined by law.
   TRANSMISSION MEDIA. Any and all of the provider’s cables, fibers, wires or
other physical devices used to transmit and/or receive communication signals,
whether analog, digital or of other characteristic, and whether for voice, data
or other purposes.
(1998 Code, § 122-174)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.05  MUNICIPAL CONSENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Prior to placing, reconstructing or altering facilities in, on or over
the public rights-of-way, a provider must obtain a municipal consent from the
city.
   (B)   The use of public rights-of-way for the delivery of any service not
covered by this chapter is subject to all other applicable city requirements.
   (C)   Any provider with a current, unexpired consent, franchise, agreement
or other authorization from the city (“grant”) to use the public rights-of-way
that is in effect at the time this chapter takes effect shall continue to
operate under and comply with that grant until the grant expires or until it is
terminated by mutual agreement of the city and the provider and a municipal
consent under this chapter is granted and in effect.
(1998 Code, § 122-175)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.06  APPLICATION FOR MUNICIPAL CONSENT.
   (A)   A person must submit an application to the Public Works Director or
his or her designee to initiate the process to obtain a municipal consent.
   (B)   The application must be on a form prescribed by the Public Works
Director or his or her designee, and it must include the following:
      (1)   The identity of the applicant, including all contact information
and designated responsible person, including all affiliates of the applicant
that may have physical control of the network, to the extent known at the time
of the application;
      (2)   A general description of the services to be provided initially;
      (3)   With respect to post-application construction a route map of the
applicant’s proposed network, if any; and
      (4)   A description of the effect on the public rights-of-way, of any
post-application construction, to the extent known, but not including routine
maintenance and construction for additions to existing networks, except as may
be required in §
52.17 of this chapter, including:
         (a)   The location and route required for applicant’s proposed
telecommunications network;
         (b)   The location of all overhead and underground public utility,
telecommunication, cable, water, sewer, drainage and other facilities in the
public rights-of-way along the proposed route; and
         (c)   The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and
obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently
remove or relocate.
      (5)   While not a requirement for the issuance of a municipal consent, if
applicable, the applicant shall provide:
         (a)   Evidence that the applicant holds or has applied for a Public
Utility Commission of the state certificate and information to establish that
the applicant will obtain all other governmental approvals and permits prior to
construction; and
         (b)   Certification or other documentation to evidence the Public
Utility Commission of the state or any other required governmental approval
showing compliance with E911 requirements of Tex. Health and Safety Code Ch.
771 and 772 on emergency communication, and the State Public Utility Council
Substantive Rules on interconnection, particularly 16 TAC § 23.97(a), (d) and
(e), as amended.
      (6)   Such other and further information as may be reasonably requested
by the Public Works Director or his or her designee as it relates to the use of
the public rights-of-way.
   (C)   Each applicant that shall submit a non-refundable application fee of
$850 with the application, with a credit in the amount of $850 on its first
quarterly payment due under §
52.12 of this chapter.
   (D)   (1)   The Public Works Director or his or her designee shall review an
application submitted under this chapter and shall recommend to the City
Commission that it grant or deny the application. The Public Works Director or
his or her designee shall make recommendation to the City Commission as soon as
practicable, but no later than the next generally scheduled City Commission
meeting after the fiftieth day after a completed application has been filed.
      (2)   Upon mutual written agreement between the city and the provider,
action on an application may be postponed for one or more periods not exceeding
30 days each.
   (E)   (1)   Except for delay caused by the applicant, the City Commission
must take an initial action on the Public Works Director or his or her
designee’s recommendation within 45 days after receipt by the commission of the
Public Works Director or his or her designee’s recommendation or the Public
Works Director or his or her designee’s recommendation to grant an application
shall be deemed approved.
      (2)   No City Commission action is required to confirm a denial
recommendation, except acknowledgment of receipt of the recommendation.
(1998 Code, § 122-176)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.07  MUNICIPAL CONSENT ORDINANCE.
   (A)   If the Public Works Director or his or her designee finds that the
application meets the requirements of this chapter, the Public Works Director
or his or her designee shall request the City Attorney or designee to prepare a
municipal consent ordinance for the City Commission’s consideration.
   (B)   A municipal consent ordinance submitted to the City Commission must
include the following provisions:
      (1)   A term of not more than five years for the municipal consent;
      (2)   A requirement that the provider substantially comply with this
chapter;
      (3)   A requirement that the provider’s municipal consent is subject to
termination by the City Commission, after notice and hearing, for the
provider’s failure to comply with this chapter or on a showing that the
provider has breached the terms of the municipal consent;
      (4)   A provision that incorporates the requirements of §
52.14 of this chapter; and
      (5)   A provision that incorporates the requirements of §§
52.17,
52.18 and
52.19 of this chapter, if applicable.
   (C)   Review and approval by the city does not constitute a guarantee of
sufficiency of the design of the telecommunications network. The applicant
retains full responsibility for the adequacy of the design of the
telecommunications network.
(1998 Code, § 122-177)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.08  PETITION FOR RECONSIDERATION.
   (A)   A person whose application for a municipal consent is denied, or whose
application is not considered by the City Commission within the time allowed in
§
52.16 of this chapter after the Public Works Director or his or her designee
submits a recommendation under §
52.17 of this chapter or whose municipal consent is terminated, may petition
the City Commission for consideration or reconsideration before seeking
judicial remedies, with a public hearing before City Commission, if requested
by the provider, such hearing being no more than 30 days from the date of the
request.
   (B)   A petition for consideration or reconsideration is considered denied
if the City Commission does not act within 60 days after the petition is filed
with the City Secretary or after the public hearing, if any, whichever is
later.
(1998 Code, § 122-178)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.09  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Public Works Director or his or her designee shall administer this
chapter and enforce compliance with a municipal consent conveyed under this
chapter.
   (B)   A provider shall report information related to the use of the public
rights-of-way that the Public Works Director or his or her designee requires.
   (C)   The Public Works Director or his or her designee shall report to the
City Commission upon the determination that a provider has failed to comply
with this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 122-179)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.10  APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Sections
52.17,
52.18 and
52.19 of this chapter apply only to a provider that constructs, operates,
maintains, owns or controls facilities in the public rights-of-way.
   (B)   Section
52.20 of this chapter applies to a provider that has a property interest in a
network.
(1998 Code, § 122-180)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.11  COMPENSATION TO CITY.
   A provider shall compensate the city by payment of the fees as provided
below.
   (A)   Access line fee calculation. To compensate the city for the use of the
rights-of-way, a provider whose telecommunications network is used to serve
persons in the city shall pay the city a monthly fee to be calculated as
provided below for each access line owned or used by the provider, as
calculated as of month-end, that is activated for use by an end user customer
of the provider or of another person as a certificated telecommunications
utility, by lease or otherwise, subject to division (F) below or of any other
person;
      (1)   Access line fee calculation amount.
         (a)   Following the effective date of the municipal consent, a
provider shall submit to the Public Works Director or his or her designee on a
quarterly basis, a certified statement by a duly authorized representative of
the provider, together with the access line fee payment under §
52.12 of this chapter, indicating the number of access lines used to provide
telecommunications service at month end, for each month of the quarter and for
each customer type identified herein. The statement shall be provided on a form
prescribed by the Public Works Director or his or her designee.
         (b)   For each month of the quarter following the effective date of
the municipal consent, a provider shall pay an access line fee which is based
upon its number of access lines calculated as follows:
 
Access Line Fee Calculation Amount   Monthly Amount Per Access Line From
                                     Effective Date
Type (1) or (2):
   Non-residential                $2.35 - May 1, 1999
   Residential                    $1.00 - May 1, 1999
Type (3):
   Private line termination point($2.35 - May 1, 1999
 
         (c)   The City Commission reserves the right to make reasonable
adjustments to the access line fee, but not to exceed 10% in any one year, to
be effective in no less than 180 days from date of the commission action.
         (d)   Amounts appearing above are used to calculate the total
compensation due the city and are not to be construed as the setting of a
charge for end-users.
         (e)   To the extent allowed by law, and not at the direction or
request of the city, pursuant to Tex. Utilities Code § 54.206, a provider has
the discretion to collect the access line fee imposed by the city pursuant to
this chapter through a pro rata charge to the customers in the boundaries of
the city, including from any other persons who are leasing, reselling,
rebundling or otherwise using the provider’s access lines to provide
telecommunications service.
         (f)   For purposes of this section only, lines terminating at
customers with “Lifeline”, “Tel-Assistance” or other service that is required
to be similarly discounted pursuant to state or federal law or regulation for
the purpose of advancing universal service to the economically disadvantaged
shall not be included in the lines upon which the fee is calculated, but
provider shall provide information on the number of such lines upon request by
the city.
      (2)   Number of access lines. Subject to city’s agreement not to disclose
this information unless required by law, the provider agrees to provide as
requested by the city, but no more than once annually, within a reasonable time
after receipt of the city’s written request, a report showing the number of
access lines being maintained or operated by provider that are serving premises
within the city. The city agrees that the report shall be used solely for the
purposes of verifying the number of provider’s access lines serving premises
within the city. Upon written request, provider shall verify the information in
the report and, upon reasonable advance notice, all non-customer specific
records and other documents required for such verification shall be subject to
inspection by the city expressly excluding any records, documents or other
writings the disclosure of which is prohibited by state or federal law,
including the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, 18 U.S.C. §§ 2510 to 2522.
   (B)   Minimum annual fee. Notwithstanding any other provision in this
chapter, for all new installations of facilities placed in, on or under the
public rights-of-way from the effective date of the municipal consent, and for
each calendar year period thereafter, the provider shall pay the city a minimum
annual fee of $250 (“minimum fee”), in the event the annual access line fee
does not exceed $250, with a credit against the minimum fee from any access
line fee paid to the city during the previous 12 months. Each municipal consent
shall provide that the minimum fee above may be adjusted once every three years
by the city, but such adjustment shall not exceed $100 in any one three-year
period.
   (C)   Confidential records. If the provider notifies the city by a
conspicuous written notation of the confidential nature of any information
(including, but not limited to, the information in division (A)(2) above,
reports, documents or writings, the city agrees to maintain the confidentiality
of the information, reports, documents and writings to the extent permitted by
law. Upon receipt by the city of requests for the provider’s confidential
information, reports, documents or writings, the city shall notify the provider
of the request in writing by facsimile transmission. The city shall furnish the
provider with copies of all requests for Attorney General opinions pertaining
to the provider’s confidential information, reports, documents or writings. The
city shall request an Attorney General’s opinion before disclosing any
confidential information, reports, documents or writings, and shall furnish the
provider with copies of Attorney General opinion requests as soon as
practicable that pertains to the provider’s confidential information, reports,
documents or writings. To the extent circumstances allow, the city will in good
faith attempt to provide reasonable prior notice to the provider before the
release of any such confidential information.
   (D)   No other fees. The payments due hereunder shall be in lieu of any
construction, building or other permit, approval, inspection or other similar
fees or charges, including, but not limited to, all general business permit
fees customarily assessed by the city for the use of the public rights-of-way
against persons operating businesses similar to that of a provider. Further,
such access line fee shall constitute full compensation to the city for all
provider’s facilities located within the public rights-of-way, including
interoffice-transport and other transmission media that do not terminate at an
end-user customer’s network interface device, even though those types of lines
are not used in the calculation of the public rights-of-way fee. The
compensation paid herein is not in lieu of any generally applicable ad valorem
taxes, sales taxes or other generally applicable taxes, fees, development
impact fees or charges, or other statutory charges or expenses recoverable
under the State Public Utility Regulatory Act, or successor statutes.
   (E)   Uncollectibles. Any other provision of this agreement notwithstanding,
provider shall not be obligated to pay the city for any access lines or private
line termination points the revenues for which remain uncollectible.
   (F)   Payments by or use of the network by other telecommunications carriers
and providers.
      (1)   Direct payment-facilities provided to other telecommunications
service providers. To the extent allowed by applicable state and federal law,
any telecommunications service providers who purchase unbundled network
elements or other facilities or services for the purpose of rebundling those
facilities and/or services to create telecommunications service for sale to
persons within the city (“rebundler”), must pay to the city the access line fee
that is calculated as of month-end by applying the appropriate access line fee,
as specified herein, to each access line created by rebundling
telecommunications service or facilities. Direct payment further ensures that
the access line fee imposed herein can be applied on a non-discriminatory basis
to all telecommunications service providers that sell telecommunications
service within the city. Other provisions of this chapter notwithstanding, the
provider shall not include in its monthly count of access lines any facilities
or services provided to other telecommunications service providers for
rebundling into telecommunications service, if the telecommunications service
provider who is rebundling those facilities for resale has provided a signed
statement to the provider that the telecommunications service provider is
paying the access line fees applicable to those rebundled services directly to
the city. If provider provides a copy of the signed statement to the city from
the rebundler which is acceptable to the city, then provider is absolved of all
responsibility for the access line fees payable on the services, unbundled
network facilities and other facilities rebundled for the creation of
telecommunications service for sale within the city by each such rebundler.
      (2)   Indirect payments public rights-of-way fee application to use of
network by others. With respect to any person leasing, reselling or otherwise
using a provider’s access lines, if a provider believes it does not have
sufficient information to determine the appropriate rate to apply, then the
higher access line fee may be applied until such time as the person using the
access lines provides to the provider sufficient written information to
determine the correct access line fee. If a person provides sufficient written
information for the application of the access line fee, the provider may, at
its discretion and not at the city’s request, bill the person on the basis of
the information provided. The provider shall provide to the city any
information regarding the locations to which it is providing service or
facilities for use by another person for the provision of telecommunications
service to end-user customers, so long as city first obtains written permission
of such other person for provider to provide the information to the city. Any
other provision of this chapter notwithstanding, however, a provider shall not
be liable for underpayment of access line fees resulting from the provider’s
reliance upon the written information provided by any person who uses
provider’s services or facilities for the provision of telecommunications
service to end-user customers.
   (G)   Restrictions. In no event shall the city be paid by more than one
provider for the same access line.
(1998 Code, § 122-181)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.111  NETWORK NODES FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Network node site fee.  Network providers shall pay the city annually
$250 per network node site in accordance with Tex. Local Gov’t Code Ch. 284, §
284.053(a) the network node public right-of-way rate for each location for
which network providers have obtained permit(s) regardless of whether or not a
network provider installs network nodes in the public right-of-way.
   (B)   Adoption of the design manual for the installation of network nodes
and node support poles.  The city’s Design Manual for the Installation of
Network Nodes and Node Support Poles pursuant to Tex. Local Gov’t Code, Ch.
284, is adopted to ensure that the city meets its fiduciary duty to the
citizens of the city, and to give assistance and guidance to wireless
telecommunications providers to assist such companies in the timely, efficient,
safe and aesthetically pleasing installation of technologically competitive
equipment.
(Ord. 19-12, passed 6-5-2019)
§ 52.12  CITY PAYMENT DUE DATES.
   (A)   Access line fee. A provider shall remit the access line fee on a
quarterly basis together with the certified statement required in §
52.11(A)(1)(a) of this chapter. Payment shall be made on or before the forty-
fifth day following the close of each calendar quarter for which the payment is
calculated and may be paid by wire transfer to an account designated by the
Public Works Director or his or her designee. The city may impose reasonable
late fees of up to $100 per day for each day late, and not more than 10% per
annum, pro rated on the amount past due.
   (B)   Minimum fee payment. This fee per §
52.11(B) of this chapter, if applicable, shall be due on January 31 of every
year of the consent agreement.
(1998 Code, § 122-182)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.13  AUDITS.
   (A)   On 45-days’ notice to a provider, the city may audit a provider for a
period of time to the fullest extent allowed by law to ascertain compliance
with the municipal consent and/or other provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   A provider shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts and
records of business and operations that cumulatively reflect the monthly count
of all access lines for a period of four years. The Public Works Director or
his or her designee may require the keeping of additional records or accounts,
but only that are reasonably necessary for purposes of identifying, accounting
for and reporting the number of access lines used to deliver telecommunication
services or for calculation of the payments due hereunder, and only in the
event the usual and customary records of the provider do not reasonably provide
this information. The city may examine the provider’s books and records
referred to above, expressly excluding any records, documents or other writings
the disclosure of which is prohibited by state or federal law, including the
Electronic Communications Privacy Act, 18 U.S.C. §§ 2510 to 2522, but only to
the extent such records reasonably relate to providing information to verify
compliance with this chapter and the municipal consent.
   (C)   A provider shall make available to the city or the city’s designated
agent (hereinafter “agent”), for the city or its agent to examine, audit,
review and copy, in the city, on the Public Works Director or his or her
designee’s written request, its books and records as referred to above that
pertain to municipal consent conditions and requirements obtained under this
chapter. A provider shall fully cooperate in making records available and
otherwise assist the city examiner. The city examiner shall not inspect or copy
or otherwise demand production of customer specific information or any records,
documents or other writings the disclosure of which is prohibited by state or
federal law, including the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, 18 U.S.C. §§
2510 to 2522.
   (D)   The Public Works Director or his or her designee may, at any time,
make inquiries pertaining to providers’ performance of the terms and conditions
of a municipal consent conveyed under this chapter. Providers shall respond to
such inquiries on a timely basis.
   (E)   Upon written request by the Public Works Director or his or her
designee, to the extent the documents are reasonably identified, providers
shall furnish to the city within 30 business days from the date of the written
request copies of all public petitions, applications, written communications
and reports submitted by providers, to the FCC and/or to the PUC or their
successor agencies, relating to any matters affecting the physical use of city
public rights-of-way.
   (F)   The provisions of this section shall be continuing and shall survive
the termination of a municipal consent granted under this chapter and shall
extend beyond the term of the municipal consent granted to the provider and the
city shall have all the rights described in this section for so long as
provider is providing any telecommunications service within the city.
(1998 Code, § 122-183)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.14  TRANSFER.
   (A)   No municipal consent nor any rights or privileges that a provider has
under a municipal consent, or the facilities held by a provider for use under
such municipal consent which are in the public rights-of-way, shall be sold,
resold, assigned, transferred or conveyed by the provider, either separately or
collectively, to any other person, without the prior written approval of the
city by ordinance or resolution. The city’s approval shall be based upon the
transferee providing adequate information to the city that it has the ability
to perform and comply with the obligations and requirements of the municipal
consent. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld should a provider
sell, assign, transfer, convey or otherwise dispose of any of its rights or
interests under its municipal consent, including such provider’s
telecommunications network, or attempt to do so, without the city’s prior
consent, the city may revoke the provider’s municipal consent for default, in
which event all rights and interest of the provider under the municipal consent
shall cease.
   (B)   Any transfer of the municipal consent in violation of this section
shall be null and void and unenforceable. Any change of control of a provider
shall constitute a transfer under this section. However, such a change in
control shall not void the municipal consent as to the transferee, unless and
until the city has given notice that such a change in control necessitates
compliance with this section. If the provider does not initiate compliance with
this section by a request for municipal consent within 30 days after the above
notice has been given by the city, the municipal consent shall be null and
unenforceable as to the transferee.
   (C)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption of a change of control of a
provider upon a change of 25% or greater in the ownership of such provider.
Such a change in control shall be deemed a transfer which requires consent of
the city.
   (D)   A mortgage or other pledge of assets to a bank or lending institution
in a bona fide lending transaction shall not be considered an assignment or
transfer.
   (E)   Every municipal consent granted under this section shall specify that
any transfer or other disposition of rights which has the effect of
circumventing payment of required access line fees or minimum fees and/or
evasion of payment of such fees by failure to accurately count or report the
number of access lines by a provider is prohibited.
   (F)   Notwithstanding anything else in this section, if the city has not
approved or denied a request to transfer under this section at the next
Commission meeting after the sixtieth day of written notice of such request
from the provider to the city, it shall be deemed approved. Such time frame may
be extended by mutual agreement of the parties.
   (G)   Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, a provider may
transfer, without city approval, the facilities in the public rights-of-way
under a municipal consent to another provider who has a municipal consent under
this chapter. The provider transferring the facilities remains subject to all
applicable obligations and provisions of the municipal consent unless the
provider to which the facilities are transferred is also subject to the same,
as applicable, obligations and provisions. The provider transferring the
facilities must give written notice of the transfer to the Public Works
Director or his or her designee.
(1998 Code, § 122-184)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.15  NOTICES.
   (A)   The parties shall notify each other, as is provided in the consent
agreement.
   (B)   A provider shall give written notice to the city not later than 15
days before a transfer or change in operations that may affect the
applicability of §§
52.18,
52.19,
52.20 and
52.21 of this chapter, to the provider.
   (C)   Prior to City Commission action on amendments to the
telecommunications ordinance, the city will provide 30-days’ written prior
notice to each provider with a municipal consent, with a general description of
such amendments, except as to amendments which addresses safety or emergency
circumstances, as reasonably determined by the city.
(1998 Code, § 122-185)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.16  CIRCUMVENTION OF FEE PROHIBITED.
   A person may not circumvent payment of access line fees or evade payment of
such fees by bartering, transfer of rights or by any other means that result in
undercounting a provider’s number of lines. Capacity or services may be
bartered if the imputed lines are reported in accordance with §
52.11 of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 122-186)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.17  CONSTRUCTION OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   A provider is subject to the reasonable regulation of the city to
manage its public rights-of-way pursuant to the city’s rights as a custodian of
public property under state and federal laws. A provider is subject to city
ordinances and requirements and federal and state laws and regulations in
connection with the construction, expansion, reconstruction, maintenance or
repair of facilities in the public rights-of-way.
   (B)   At the city’s request, a provider shall furnish the city accurate and
complete information relating to the construction, reconstruction, removal,
maintenance, operation and repair of facilities performed by the provider in
the public rights-of-way.
   (C)   The construction, expansion, reconstruction, excavation, use,
maintenance and operation of a provider’s facilities within the public rights-
of-way are subject to applicable city requirements.
      (1)   A provider may be required to place certain facilities within the
public rights-of-way underground according to applicable city requirements
absent a compelling demonstration by the provider that, in any specific
instance, this requirement is not reasonable or feasible nor is it equally
applicable to other similar users of the public rights-of-way.
      (2)   A provider shall perform operations, excavations and other
construction in the public rights-of-way in accordance with all applicable city
requirements, including the obligation to use trenchless technology whenever
commercially economical and practical and consistent with obligations on other
similar users of the public right-of-way. The city shall waive the requirement
of trenchless technology if it determines that the field conditions warrant the
waiver, based upon information provided to the city by the provider. All
excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way shall be
conducted so as to minimize interference with the use of public and private
property. A provider shall follow all reasonable construction directions given
by the city in order to minimize any such interference.
      (3)   A provider must obtain a permit prior to any excavation,
construction, installation, expansion, repair, removal, relocation or
maintenance of the provider’s facilities, as reasonably required by applicable
city codes. Once a permit is issued, the provider shall give to the city a
minimum of 48 hours’ notice (which could be at the time of the issuance of the
permit) prior to undertaking any of the above listed activities on its network
in, on or under the public rights-of-way. The failure of the provider to
request and obtain a permit from the city prior to performing any of the above
listed activities in, on or over any public right-of-way, except in an
emergency as provided for in division (C)(10) below, will subject the provider
to a stop-work order from the city and enforcement action pursuant to this
code. If the provider fails to act upon any permit within 90 calendar days of
issuance, the permit shall become invalid and the provider will be required to
obtain another permit.
      (4)   When a provider completes construction, expansion, reconstruction,
removal, excavation or other work, the provider shall promptly restore the
public rights-of-way in accordance with applicable city requirements. A
provider shall replace and properly relay and repair the surface, base,
irrigation system and landscape treatment of any public rights-of-way that may
be excavated or damaged by reason of the erection, construction, maintenance or
repair of the provider’s facilities within 30 calendar days after completion of
the work in accordance with existing standards of the city in effect at the
time of the work.
      (5)   Upon failure of a provider to perform any such repair or
replacement work, and five days after written notice has been given by the city
to the provider, the city may repair such portion of the public rights-of-way
as may have been disturbed by the provider, its contractors or agents. Upon
receipt of a invoice from the city, the provider will reimburse the city for
the costs so incurred within 30 calendar days from the date of the city
invoice.
      (6)   Should the city reasonably determine, within two years from the
date of the completion of the repair work, that the surface, base, irrigation
system or landscape treatment requires additional restoration work to meet the
standards of the city which existed at completion of the restoration work, a
provider shall perform such additional restoration work to the satisfaction of
the city, subject to all city remedies as provided herein.
      (7)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the city determines that the
failure of a provider to properly repair or restore the public rights-of-way
constitutes a safety hazard to the public and there is not adequate time to
notify the provider due to the nature of the safety hazard, as reasonably
determined by the city, the city may undertake emergency repairs and
restoration efforts. A provider shall promptly reimburse the city for all costs
incurred by the city within 30 calendar days from the date of the city invoice.
      (8)   A provider shall furnish the city with construction plans and maps
showing the location and proposed routing of new construction or reconstruction
at least 15 days (subject to divisions (C)(1) and (D) below), before beginning
construction or reconstruction that involves an alteration to the surface or
subsurface of the public rights-of-way. A provider may not begin construction
until the location of new facilities and proposed routing of the new
construction or reconstruction and all required plans and drawings have been
approved in writing by the city, which approval will not be unreasonably
withheld, taking due consideration of the surrounding area and alternative
locations for the facilities and routing.
      (9)   If the Public Works Director or his or her designee declares an
emergency with regard to the health and safety of the citizens and requests by
written notice the removal or abatement of facilities, a provider shall remove
or abate the provider’s facilities by the deadline provided in the Public Works
Director or his or her designee’s request. The provider and the city shall
cooperate to the extent possible to assure continuity of service. If the
provider, after notice, fails or refuses to act, the city may remove or abate
the facility, at the sole cost and expense of the provider, without paying
compensation to the provider and without the city incurring liability for
damages.
      (10)   Except in the case of customer service interruptions and imminent
harm to property or person (“emergency conditions”), a provider may not
excavate the pavement of a street or public rights-of-way without first
complying with city requirements. The Public Works Director or his or her
designee or designee shall be notified immediately regarding work performed
under such emergency conditions, and the provider shall comply with the
requirements of city standards for the restoration of the public rights-of-way.
      (11)   Within 60 days of completion of each new permitted section of a
provider’s facilities, the provider shall supply the city with a complete set
of “as built” drawings for the segment in a format used in the ordinary course
of the provider’s business and as reasonably prescribed by the city, and as
allowed by law.
      (12)   The city may require reasonable bonding requirements of a
provider, as are required of all other entities that place facilities in the
public rights-of-way.
   (D)   In determining whether any requirement under this section is
unreasonable or unfeasible, the Public Works Director or his or her designee or
his or her designee shall consider, among other things, whether the requirement
would subject the provider or providers to an unreasonable increase in risk of
service interruption, or to an unreasonable increase in liability for
accidents, or to an unreasonable delay in construction or in availability of
its services, or to any other unreasonable technical or economic burden.
(1998 Code, § 122-187)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.18  CONDITIONS OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   In the exercise of governmental functions, the city has first priority
over all other uses of the public rights-of-way. The city reserves the right to
lay sewer, gas, water and other pipe lines or cables and conduits, and to do
underground and overhead work, and attachments, restructuring or changes in
aerial facilities in, across, along, over or under a public street, alley or
public rights-of-way occupied by a provider, and to change the curb, sidewalks
or the grade of streets
   (B)   The city shall assign the location in or over the public rights-of-way
among competing users of the public rights-of-way with due consideration to the
public health and safety considerations of each user type, and to the extent
there is limited space available for additional users, may limit new users, as
allowed under state or federal law.
   (C)   If, during the term of a municipal consent, the city authorizes
abutting landowners to occupy space under the surface of any public street,
alley or public rights-of-way, the grant to an abutting landowner shall be
subject to the rights of the provider. If the city closes or abandons a public
right-of-way that contains a portion of a provider’s facilities, the city shall
close or abandon such public right-of-way subject to the rights conveyed in the
municipal consent.
   (D)   (1)   If the city gives written notice, a provider shall, at its own
expense, temporarily or permanently, remove, relocate, change or alter the
position of provider’s facilities that are in the public rights-of-way within
120 days, except in circumstances that require additional time as reasonably
determined by the city based upon information provided by the provider for
projects expected to take longer than 120 days to remove, change or relocate,
the city will confer with provider before determining the alterations to be
required and the timing thereof. The city shall give notice whenever the city
has determined that removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably
necessary for the construction, operation, repair, maintenance or installation
of a city or other governmental public improvement in the public rights-of-way.
This section shall not be construed to prevent a provider’s recovery of the
cost of relocation or removal from private third parties who initiate the
request for relocation or removal, nor shall it be required if improvements are
solely for beautification purposes without prior joint deliberation and
agreement with provider.
      (2)   If the provider fails to relocate facilities in the time allowed by
the city in this section, the provider may be subject to liability to the city
for such delay and as set forth in the city codes or ordinance, now or
hereafter enacted.
      (3)   Notwithstanding anything in this division (D), the Public Works
Director or his or her designee and a provider may agree in writing to
different time frames than those provided above if circumstances reasonably
warrant such a change.
   (E)   During the term of its municipal consent, a provider may trim trees in
or over the public rights-of-way for the safe and reliable operation, use and
maintenance of its network. All tree trimming shall be performed in accordance
with standards promulgated by the city. Should the provider, its contractor or
agent, fail to remove such trimmings within 24 hours, the city may remove the
trimmings or have them removed, and upon receipt of a bill from the city, the
provider shall promptly reimburse the city for all costs incurred within 30
working days.
   (F)   Providers shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its aerial
facilities to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures, if the
city gives written notice of no less than three business days. The expense of
these temporary rearrangements shall be paid by the party or parties requesting
and benefitting from the temporary rearrangements. The provider may require
prepayment or prior posting of a bond from the party requesting temporary move.
(1998 Code, § 122-188)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.19  INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A provider shall obtain and maintain insurance in the amounts
reasonably prescribed by the city with an insurance company licensed to do
business in the state acceptable to the city throughout the term of a municipal
consent conveyed under this chapter. A provider shall furnish the city with
proof of insurance at the time of filing the acceptance of a municipal consent.
The city reserves the right to review the insurance requirements during the
effective period of a municipal consent, and to reasonably adjust insurance
coverage and limits when the Public Works Director or his or her designee
determines that changes in statutory law, court decisions or the claims history
of the industry or the provider require adjustment of the coverage. For
purposes of this section, the city will accept certificates of self-insurance
issued by the state or letters written by the provider in those instances where
the state does not issue such letters, which provide the same coverage as
required herein. However, for the city to accept such letters the provider must
demonstrate by written information that it has adequate financial resources to
be a self-insured entity as reasonably determined by the city, based on
financial information requested by and furnished to the city. The city’s
current insurance requirements are described in Exhibit A, kept on file in the
office of the City Clerk.
   (B)   The provider shall furnish, at no cost to the city, copies of
certificates of insurance evidencing the coverage required by this section to
the city.
   (C)   An insurance certificate shall contain the following required
provisions:
      (1)   Name the city of and its officers, employees, board members and
elected representatives as additional insureds for all applicable coverage;
      (2)   Provide for 30-days’ notice to the city for cancellation, non-
renewal or material change;
      (3)   Provide that notice of claims shall be provided to the Public Works
Director or his or her designee by certified mail; and
      (4)   Provide that the terms of the municipal consent which impose
obligations on the provider concerning liability, duty and standard of care,
including the indemnity section, are included in the policy and that the risks
are insured within the policy terms and conditions.
   (D)   The provider shall file and maintain proof of insurance with the
Public Works Director or his or her designee during the term of a municipal
consent or an extension or renewal. An insurance certificate obtained in
compliance with this section is subject to city approval. The city may require
the certificate to be changed to reflect changing liability limits. A provider
shall immediately advise the City Attorney of actual or potential litigation
that may develop may affect an existing carrier’s obligation to defend and
indemnify.
   (E)   An insurer has no right of recovery against the city. The required
insurance policies shall protect the provider and the city. The insurance shall
be primary coverage for losses covered by the policies.
   (F)   The policy clause “other insurance” shall not apply to the city if the
city is an insured under the policy.
   (G)   The provider shall pay premiums and assessments. A company which
issues an insurance policy has no recourse against the city for payment of a
premium or assessment. Insurance policies obtained by a provider must provide
that the issuing company waives all right of recovery, by way of subrogation,
against the city in connection with damage covered by the policy.
(1998 Code, § 122-189)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.20  INDEMNITY.
   (A)   Each municipal consent granted under this chapter shall contain
provisions whereby the provider agrees to promptly defend, indemnify and hold
the city harmless from and against all damages, costs, losses or expenses:
      (1)   For the repair, replacement or restoration of city’s property,
equipment, materials, structures and facilities which are damaged, destroyed or
found to be defective solely as a result of the provider’s acts or omissions;
and
      (2)   From and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of
action and judgments for:
         (a)   Damage to or loss of the property of any person (including, but
not limited to, the provider, its agents, officers, employees and
subcontractors, city’s agents, officers and employees, and third parties); and/
or
         (b)   Death, bodily injury, illness, disease, loss of services, or
loss of income or wages to any person (including, but not limited to, the
agents, officers and employees of the provider, provider’s subcontractors and
city, and third parties), arising out of, incident to, concerning or resulting
from the negligent or willful act(s) or omissions of the provider, its agents,
employees and/or subcontractors, in the performance of activities pursuant to
such municipal consent.
   (B)   No municipal consent indemnity provision shall apply to any liability
resulting from the negligence of the city, its officers, employees, agents,
contractors or subcontractors.
   (C)   The provisions of the required indemnity provision set forth in an
individual municipal consent shall provide that:
      (1)   It is solely for the benefit of the parties to the municipal
consent and is not intended to create or grant any rights, contractual or
otherwise, to any other person or entity;
      (2)   To the extent permitted by law, any payments made to, or on behalf
of the city under the provisions of this section are subject to the rights
granted to providers under Tex. Utilities Code §§ 54.204 through 54.206; and
      (3)   Subject to the continued applicability of the provisions of Tex.
Utilities Code §§ 54.204 through 54.206, as set forth in division (C)(2) above,
the provisions of the indemnity shall survive the expiration of the municipal
consent.
   (D)   The city shall advise the provider as soon as practicable, in writing,
of actual or potential litigation that may give rise to any provider’s
obligation to defend and indemnify under this section. Failure to comply with
this notice requirement shall not be deemed a waiver by the city to require
such indemnification.
(1998 Code, § 122-190)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.21  RENEWAL OF MUNICIPAL CONSENT.
   A provider shall request a renewal of a municipal consent by making written
application to the Public Works Director or his or her designee at least 90
days before the expiration of the consent.
(1998 Code, § 122-191)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.22  ANNEXATION; DISANNEXATION.
   Within 30 days following the date of the passage of any action affecting the
annexation of any property to or the disannexation of any property from the
city’s corporate boundaries, the city agrees to furnish provider written notice
of the action and an accurate map of the city’s corporate boundaries showing
street names and number details. For the purpose of compensating the city under
this chapter, a provider shall start including or excluding access lines within
the affected area in the provider’s count of access lines on the effective date
designated by the State Comptroller of Public Accounts, for the imposition of
state local sales and use taxes, but in no case less than 30 days from the date
the provider is notified by the city of the annexation or disannexation.
(1998 Code, § 122-192)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.23  SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are severable. However, in the event this
chapter or any tariff that authorizes the provider to recover the fee(s)
provided for this chapter or any procedure provided in this chapter or any
compensation due the city under this chapter becomes unlawful, or is declared
or determined by a judicial, administrative or legislative authority exercising
its jurisdiction to be excessive, unrecoverable, unenforceable, void, illegal
or otherwise inapplicable, in whole or in part, or is exchanged for another
means of compensation under higher authority, the provider and city shall meet
and negotiate a new agreement that is in compliance with the authority’s
decision or enactment. Unless explicitly prohibited, the new agreement shall
provide the city with a level of compensation comparable to that set forth in
this chapter as long as the agreed-to compensation is recoverable by the
provider in a manner permitted by law for the unexpired portion of the term of
this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 122-193)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.24  GOVERNING LAW.
   This chapter shall be construed in accordance with the city code(s) in
effect on the date of passage of this chapter to the extent that such code(s)
are not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and laws of the
United States or the state, subject to the city’s ongoing authority to adopt
reasonable regulations to manage its public rights-of-way, pursuant to §§
52.17 and
52.18 of this chapter or as otherwise provided by law. Municipal consents
entered into pursuant to this chapter are performable in the county.
(1998 Code, § 122-194)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.25  TERMINATION.
   (A)   The city shall reserve the right to terminate any municipal consent
and any rights or privileges conveyed under this chapter in the event of a
material breach of the terms and conditions of the municipal consent of this
chapter, subject to a 30-day written notice and the opportunity to cure the
breach during that 30-day period.
   (B)   Material breaches of a municipal consent specifically include, but are
not limited to, continuing violations of §§
52.11,
52.17 and/or
52.18 of this chapter, and the furnishing of service of any kind that requires
municipal authorization but that is not authorized by §
52.03(A) of this chapter.
   (C)   A material breach shall not be deemed to have occurred if the
violation occurs without the fault of a provider or occurs as a result of
circumstances beyond its control. Providers shall not be excused from
performance of any of then obligations under this chapter by economic hardship,
nor misfeasance or malfeasance of their Public Works Director or his or her
designees, officers or employees.
   (D)   A termination shall be declared only by a written decision by motion,
resolution or ordinance of the City Commission after an appropriate public
proceeding before the City Commission, which shall accord the provider due
process and full opportunity to be heard and to respond to any notice of
grounds to terminate. All notice requirements shall be met by giving the
provider at least 15-days’ prior written notice of any public hearing
concerning the proposed termination of its consent. Such notice shall state the
grounds for termination alleged by city.
(1998 Code, § 122-195)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
§ 52.26  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Any person seeking to place facilities on, in or over the public
rights-of-way, city property, city structures or utility infrastructure shall
first file an application for a municipal consent with the city and shall abide
by the terms and provisions of this chapter pertaining to use of the public
rights-of-way and pay the fees specified herein.
   (B)   The city may institute all appropriate legal action to prohibit any
person from knowingly using the public rights-of-way unless the city has
consented to such use in accordance with the terms of this chapter and with a
municipal consent.
   (C)   Any person using the public rights-of-way without a municipal consent
shall be liable for the same fees and charges as provided for herein.
(1998 Code, § 122-196)  (Ord. 99-15, passed 4-7-1999)
CHAPTER 53:  SOLID WASTE
Section
   
53.01   Purpose of chapter
   
53.02   Definitions
   
53.03   Duty of owner or occupant to provide and maintain containers
   
53.04   Specifications for residential containers
   
53.05   Maintenance of containers
   
53.06   Location of containers; hours of collection
   
53.07   Draining and wrapping of garbage and trash
   
53.08   Preparation and placement of brush, yard waste, bulky waste,
construction debris and trash for collection by city
   
53.09   Persons authorized to collect and transport waste
   
53.10   Disposal of large dead animals
   
53.11   Materials not collected by city
   
53.12   Frequency of garbage collection
   
53.13   Billing and charges for city collection service
   
53.14   Disconnection of water and sewer service for non-payment of bills
   
53.15   Collection from commercial and institutional establishments by
authorized franchise hauler
   
53.16   Hand collection from commercial establishments by city
   
53.17   Dumpster service generally
   
53.18   Rates for dumpster service
   
53.19   Frequency of dumpster collection
   
53.20   Special collection agreements
   
53.21   Hours of collection in residential areas
   
53.22   Commercial recycling
   
53.23   Special and hazardous waste disposal
   
53.24   Compliance with chapter; suspension of collection service
 
   
53.99   Penalty
§ 53.01  PURPOSE OF CHAPTER.
   The accumulation of garbage, trash and rubbish on the premises of private
residences, businesses, public and private institutions and vacant lots, and in
the streets and alleys of the city, constitutes a public menace and nuisance
and greatly increases the danger of the spread of infectious, contagious and
epidemic diseases, and the regulations of this chapter are adopted for the
purpose of preserving and protecting the public health, safety and general
welfare by requiring property owners, tenants, occupants and lessees to secure
and maintain containers and receptacles of sufficient size and material for the
deposit of garbage, trash and rubbish for collection and removal at regular
intervals and to maintain their premises free of accumulations thereof.
(1998 Code, § 102-1)  (Ord. 93-75, passed 1-19-1994)
§ 53.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASHES. Residue from legally burning wood, coal or other combustible material
in and around a residential unit.
   BAGS. Plastic and paper sacks designed to store refuse, with sufficient wall
strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by the top, and with the
opening closed by a tie or other seal. Total weight of a BAG and its contents
shall not exceed 50 pounds.
   BRUSH. Tree trimmings, weeds, large hedge trimmings and trees cut in lengths
not to exceed eight feet.
   BULKY WASTE. Residentially generated appliances, furniture and other bulky
items, including, but not limited to, stoves, refrigerators, hot water heaters,
air conditioners, mattresses, washing machines, furniture and other materials
other than construction debris, dead animals, hazardous waste or stable matter.
Weights or volumes may exceed the maximums allowed for containers. The waste
must be manageable by two workers and capable of being placed in a compactor
truck without size reduction by the collection crew.
   BUNDLE. Construction debris and/or rubbish securely tied together forming an
easily handled package not exceeding four feet in length, and not more than two
feet in diameter, and weighing not more than 50 pounds. It may contain
incidental amounts of brush and tree trimmings.
   COMMERCIAL REFUSE. All bulky waste, garbage, rubbish or stable matter
generated by a producer at a commercial unit.
   COMMERCIAL UNIT. All premises, locations, properties or entities, whether
public or private, but not a residential unit or industrial unit, within the
corporate limits of the city.
   CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS. Waste building materials resulting from residential
construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations.
   CONTAINER, RESIDENTIAL. Standard trash cans with a maximum capacity of 33
gallons. Cans may be constructed of plastic, metal or fiberglass and shall have
handles of adequate strength for lifting. The mouth of the container shall have
a diameter greater than or equal to that of the base. Cardboard boxes, plastic
bags or paper bags which are adequate for the purpose for which they are used
are acceptable, as determined by the Director, provided they are disposable. No
single RESIDENTIAL CONTAINER, when loaded, shall exceed 50 pounds in weight.
   CONTRACTOR. The person performing refuse collection and disposal under
contract with the city.
   CUSTOMER. Such persons, or the owner, manager or lessee of the premises,
receiving the service.
   DEAD ANIMALS. Animals or portions thereof equal to or greater than ten
pounds in weight that have expired from any cause, except those slaughtered or
killed for human use.
   DELIVER. To place, throw, put, deposit or take any action that results in an
item being moved to a certain place.
   DIRECTOR. The city official whose responsibility is the overall direction of
the waste services division.
   DISPOSAL SITE. A managed area of land upon which solid waste is disposed of
in accordance with standards, rules or orders established by the local board of
health, the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from handling,
preparation, cooking or consumption of food.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Waste, in any amount, which is defined, characterized or
designated as hazardous by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or
appropriate state agency by or pursuant to federal or state law. The term
HAZARDOUS WASTE shall also include used motor oil, gasoline, oil-based paint or
paint cans and creosote-treated wood.
   INFECTIOUS WASTE. Waste material containing pathogens or biologically active
materials which, because of its type, concentration and quality, is capable of
transmitting disease to persons exposed to the waste materials.
   LITTER. The delivery of or causing the delivery of any material on any
public or private property under any of the following conditions:
      (1)   Where such material is delivered to premises where a “no
unsolicited material” marking is posted within two feet of the front door of
the premises; or
      (2)   Where the occupant of the premises has previously notified, in
writing, the publisher or deliver of the material that such materials are not
to be delivered to the premises.
   MATERIAL. Any newspaper, advertising, circular, advertising material, paper,
brochure or product.
   NON-COMMERCIAL PRIVATE HAULER. Those persons who haul refuse for themselves
and are not collecting a fee from someone else for such services.
   PARK. A park, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area
in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive
recreation.
   PREMISES. Land and premises, or an estate including land and buildings
thereon, contiguous and under one ownership.
   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any dwelling, house, building or other structure designed
or used, in whole or part, for private residential purposes, whether inhabited
temporarily or continuously inhabited, and shall include any yard, grounds,
walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to
such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
   PRODUCER. An occupant of a commercial or industrial or residential unit who
generates solid waste.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, parking
facilities, buildings or other areas regularly frequented or dedicated for use
by members of the public.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any and all property owned by the city, the state, the
United States of America, or any subdivision thereof, whether located within or
outside the corporate limits of the city.
   RECYCLING DROPOFF CENTER. A location, either temporary or permanent, within
the city established for the receipt of recyclable solid waste, including, but
not limited to, newspaper, glass, motor oil, automobile oil filters, automobile
and truck tires and aluminum cans. Because of market demands, the Director of
Sanitation shall from time to time determine the type and/or amount of
recyclable waste accepted at the recycle center.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes, including garbage,
rubbish and ashes.
   RESIDENTIAL REFUSE. All refuse generated by a producer at a residential
unit.
   RESIDENTIAL UNIT. A building or rooms fitted or used, in whole or in part,
for human sleeping accommodations, including, but not limited to, (except as
otherwise expressly provided for in this chapter) residential houses, garage
apartments, duplexes and triplex and quadraplex apartments, encompassing
households and household activity. A multi-family dwelling, whether of single-
level or multi-level construction, consisting of four or less contiguous or
separate single-family dwelling units shall be treated as a RESIDENTIAL UNIT,
except that each single-family dwelling within any such residential unit shall
be billed separately as a RESIDENTIAL UNIT.
   RUBBISH. Non-putrescible solid waste such as waste wood products, paper,
wire, glass, scraps of metal and other like waste products of normal household
activity generated in a residential unit.
   STABLE MATTER. All manure and other waste matter normally accumulated in or
about a stable or any other animal, livestock or poultry enclosure, and
resulting from the keeping of animals, poultry or livestock.
   TOXIC WASTE. Any solid waste identified or listed as hazardous waste by the
administrator of the federal Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the
federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation
Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., as amended from time to time.
   TRASH. See RUBBISH.
   WHITE GOODS. See BULKY WASTE.
   YARD WASTE. Grass, leaves, small branches, shrubbery, flowers and other
plant life, either dry or green, not contaminated with paper or garbage.
(1998 Code, § 102-2)  (Ord. 93-75, passed 1-19-1994; Ord. 98-2, passed 2-4-
1998)
§ 53.03  DUTY OF OWNER OR OCCUPANT TO PROVIDE AND MAINTAIN CONTAINERS.
   Every owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of any house, building, flat,
apartment or tenement in the city, where persons reside, board or lodge, or
where animal or vegetable food is prepared or served, or any private residence,
is required to keep and maintain, in good order and repair, approved containers
for the disposal of garbage and collection by the city.
(1998 Code, § 102-3)  (Ord. 93-75, passed 1-19-1994)  Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.04  SPECIFICATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL CONTAINERS.
   Authorized private receptacles for residential garbage collection shall meet
the following requirements.
   (A)   Durable plastic bags qualify as authorized garbage containers in
accordance with this section. Plastic bags shall have a minimum thickness of
one and two-tenths mils and must be at least 20 gallons in capacity and no
larger than 33 gallons in capacity. All bags shall be securely tied or
otherwise fastened or closed so as to prevent spillage or entry by vectors and
vermin.
   (B)   The container shall be a weather-resistant receptacle of a solid and
durable quality of metal or plastic, not to exceed 33 gallons in capacity.
   (C)   The combined weight of the garbage and container shall not exceed 50
pounds.
   (D)   Rigid containers shall be provided with suitable lifting handles on
the outside, and a close-fitting cover equipped with a handle.
   (E)   The container shall have an opening, at the top, larger than the
bottom, and not have any inside structures, such as inside bands and
reinforcing angles, or anything within the container to prevent the free
discharge of the contents. Containers that have deteriorated, or that have been
damaged to the extent of having jagged or sharp edges capable of causing injury
to collectors or other persons whose duty it is to handle the containers, or to
such an extent that the covers will not fit securely, will be condemned by the
city; and if such containers are not replaced after notice to the owner or user
of their defective condition, they shall be confiscated.
(1998 Code, § 102-4)  (Ord. 93-75, passed 1-19-1994)
§ 53.05  MAINTENANCE OF CONTAINERS.
   Every owner or tenant of an occupied building in the city limits is required
to keep and maintain, in good order and repair, garbage containers for the
deposit of garbage for collection by the city. The lids or covers of all
containers shall at all times be kept secure and fastened so that flies and
other insects may not have access to the contents thereof, and the lids or
covers shall only be removed while the containers and receptacles are being
filled or emptied.
(1998 Code, § 102-5)  (Ord. 93-75, passed 1-19-1994)
§ 53.06  LOCATION OF CONTAINERS; HOURS OF COLLECTION.
   (A)   Approved receptacles which are commercial containers shall be located
at the direction of the Refuse Services Department.
   (B)   If the residence, structure or place of business from which the
garbage and rubbish is to be collected is adjacent to an alley, the owner,
occupant, tenant or lessee of such premises shall be required to keep the
garbage receptacles in the alley adjacent to the property line.
   (C)   If no alley is available or it is not practicable to collect from the
alley, the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of the premises shall place the
approved receptacles in front of the premises within three feet of the street.
   (D)   Receptacles shall be placed at the designated pickup point no later
than 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection. After collection, all approved
receptacles shall be removed from the collection location, and kept on the
premises no closer to the street than the front of the residence, structure or
place of business, no later than 9:00 p.m. on the evening of collection.
   (E)   All owners of property shall require all occupants, tenants or lessees
to comply with the provisions of this chapter and are responsible for such
compliance.
   (F)   In areas where no street curbing exists and surface drainage is
conducted through open roadside ditches, the point of collection shall be on
the shoulder of the street between the edge of the pavement and the drainage
ditch. No container shall ever be placed for collection in such location as to
interfere with the normal flow of surface drainage along and through drainage
ditches.
   (G)   Where special conditions exist which subject containers so placed to
overturn and spill, the city may, at its discretion, require such containers
subject to overturn and spillage to be placed in a portable, movable or
stationary rack; except that, no stationary rack will be required or permitted
in the front of a residence.
   (H)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in divisions (A)
and (B) above, the Director, in instances of mental or physical infirmity of
the customer or other appropriate circumstance of severe hardship, may
authorize receptacles and containers to be placed for collection in such
location as he may designate.
(1998 Code, § 102-6)  (Ord. 93-75, passed 1-19-1994)  Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.07  DRAINING AND WRAPPING OF GARBAGE AND TRASH.
   Garbage and trash must be drained of liquid substances and sacked or wrapped
in paper before the parcel is placed in a container.
(1998 Code, § 102-7)  (Ord. 93-75, passed 1-19-1994)  Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.08  PREPARATION AND PLACEMENT OF BRUSH, YARD WASTE, BULKY WASTE,
CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS AND TRASH FOR COLLECTION BY CITY.
   (A)   Placement of brush, yard waste and trash. Unbundled brush must be
placed road side, not in alleys. All containerized or bundled brush, yard waste
and trash shall be placed adjacent to the place provided for collection of
garbage.
   (B)   Securing of pointed or sharp objects. Pointed or sharp objects,
including, but not limited to, broken glass, jagged metal, razors and wire,
shall be secured or taped or tied before bagging or bundling so as to prevent
injury when handling.
   (C)   Combining waste in bundles. Incidental quantities of brush and tree
trimmings may be combined with other debris and/or rubbish in securely tied
bundles conforming to length and weight requirements for bundles.
   (D)   Unbundled brush. Larger quantities of unbundled brush shall be cut
into lengths of eight feet or shorter and shall be neatly stacked. This brush
will be picked up by the city, at no charge to the owner, as often as the
city’s brush collection work load permits. Unbundled brush must not be mixed
with garbage, trash, construction debris, appliances and the like. If brush is
mixed with other waste, the city will charge for the collection of the entire
trash pile at a rate set by the City Commission.
   (E)   Access for collection of brush. All brush to be collected by the city
shall be placed at a location so that access to it is not obstructed by
overhanging tree limbs, wires or other obstacles which would interfere with
mechanical collection. If improperly placed, the city reserves the right to
deny collection or charge at a rate set by the City Commission.
   (F)   Preparation of yard waste. Yard waste such as leaves, grass clippings
and incidental quantities of light brush shall be placed in authorized
containers not to exceed 50 pounds. Yard waste will be collected at the same
time and place as garbage. The city will not collect yard waste unless it is
prepared as described in this section.
   (G)   Preparation of rubbish.
      (1)   Rubbish (trash) shall be placed in authorized containers not to
exceed 50 pounds, or tied in bundles not to exceed four feet in length or two
feet in diameter and not in excess of 50 pounds. Rubbish so prepared will be
collected at the same time and place as garbage.
      (2)   The city will not collect rubbish that has not been contained or
bundled as described in this section.
   (H)   Bulky waste. Bulky waste (waste manageable by two workers and capable
of being placed in a compactor truck without size reduction by the collection
crew) shall be placed next to the place provided for the collection of garbage.
Refrigeration units must be tagged by an authorized contractor certifying that
the unit has been properly purged of chlorofluorocarbons (CFC). The city will
collect and dispose of bulky waste meeting the requirements described in this
subsection at the same time and place as garbage.
   (I)   Construction debris.
      (1)   Rock, waste, building materials or other refuse resulting from
major building or remodeling operations, or resulting from a general cleanup of
vacant or improved property, will not be classified as garbage, brush or trash
and shall not be removed by the city.
      (2)   Such waste shall be removed by the building contractor or the owner
or occupant of the building at his or her own expense.
   (J)   Obstructing drainage ditch. No brush, yard waste, trash, bulky waste
or construction debris shall ever be deposited for collection in any place
which may cause interference with the normal flow of surface drainage along and
through a drainage ditch.
(1998 Code, § 102-8)  (Ord. 93-75, passed 1-19-1994)  Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.09  PERSONS AUTHORIZED TO COLLECT AND TRANSPORT WASTE.
   No person, except employees of the city, shall empty garbage cans and
receptacles or convey or transport garbage or brush on the streets and alleyway
system of the city, except by authority given by the Director.
(1998 Code, § 102-9)  (Ord. 93-75, passed 1-19-1994)  Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.10  DISPOSAL OF LARGE DEAD ANIMALS.
   The owner of the animal, if known, and otherwise the manager or person in
control of the property upon which the animal is found, shall be responsible
for the removal of large dead animals, including but not limited to horses,
cows, pigs, goats and sheep.
(1998 Code, § 102-10)  (Ord. 93-75, passed 1-19-1994)
§ 53.11  MATERIALS NOT COLLECTED BY CITY.
   The city will not collect the following materials:
   (A)   Hazardous waste;
   (B)   Toxic waste;
   (C)   Infectious waste;
   (D)   Medical waste;
   (E)   Tires (rimless tires may be taken to the city’s recycling center at no
charge);
   (F)   Automobiles and boats, whole or in parts;
   (G)   Dead animals;
   (H)   Dangerous or overweight containers;
   (I)   Hot coals or ashes;
   (J)   Stable matter;
   (K)   Dirt, bricks, concrete or rocks;
   (L)   Loose, uncontainerized garbage, trash or yard waste; and/or
   (M)   Pointed or sharp objects likely to cause injury when handled.
(1998 Code, § 102-11)  (Ord. 93-75, passed 1-19-1994)
§ 53.12  FREQUENCY OF GARBAGE COLLECTION.
   Garbage shall customarily be collected twice weekly.
(1998 Code, § 102-12)  (Ord. 93-75, passed 1-19-1994)
§ 53.13  BILLING AND CHARGES FOR CITY COLLECTION SERVICE.
   (A)   Monthly charges. Monthly charges for basic collection services (to
include garbage, trash, yard waste and brush) shall be established by a
resolution passed by the City Commission and shall be published at least 30
days in advance of the effective date.
   (B)   Charge for collection of unprepared waste. The city may collect and
dispose of improperly prepared or unprepared waste such as brush contaminated
with garbage and/or debris; however, the owner shall be charged for this
collection at the rate established by a resolution by the City Commission and
published at least 30 days in advance of its effective date.
   (C)   Billing; payment of bills.
      (1)   Charges for garbage, trash and brush collection shall be billed
each month at the same time that the city bills its water and sewer customers.
      (2)   These charges shall be due and payable in the office of the
Utilities Department within 15 days of the billing date therefor.
   (D)   Late charge. Charges for garbage, trash and brush collection not paid
by the sixteenth day after the billing date shall be increased by 10%.
(1998 Code, § 102-13)  (Ord. 93-75, passed 1-19-1994)
§ 53.14  DISCONNECTION OF WATER AND SEWER SERVICE FOR NON-PAYMENT OF BILLS.
   If any customer furnished garbage, trash and brush collection does not pay
the charges billed, the city shall take action, up to and including
disconnection, in accordance with the city's billing and fees procedure, posted
at the City's Utility Customer Service Department.
§ 53.15  COLLECTION FROM COMMERCIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS BY
AUTHORIZED FRANCHISE HAULER.
   Except as otherwise provided in §
53.16 of this chapter, every owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of any business,
commercial or institutional property, or other property not entitled to receive
residential garbage collection services, shall contract for commercial garbage
collection and disposal services through the city’s exclusive franchise hauler.
(1998 Code, § 102-15)  (Ord. 93-75, passed 1-19-1994)
§ 53.16  HAND COLLECTION FROM COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS BY CITY.
   In the case of those commercial customers who generate small quantities of
waste, as outlined in this section, the waste shall be collected by the city
and collection shall be governed by the following provisions.
   (A)   Collection days and rates.
      (1)   Frequency and monthly charges for hand collection service shall be
established by an ordinance passed by the City Commission and shall be
published at least 30 days in advance of the effective date.
      (2)   Monthly charges for solid waste hand collection for small
businesses for a limit of six residential containers per collection are posted
at the office the Utility Customer Service Supervisor.
      (3)   Commercial customers who require more frequent service than
established in this section shall be required to contract for dumpster service
from the city’s exclusive franchise hauler.
   (B)   Containers.
      (1)   Any commercial customer desiring to subscribe for collection by the
city shall place the containers at or near the curbline in front of the
establishment, in such a manner and at such times as shall be prescribed by the
Solid Waste Manager. Containers or bags shall be no larger than 33 gallons and
not more than six in count.
      (2)   All boxes and cartons must be broken down and bundled. No bundle
shall exceed 50 pounds in weight.
(1998 Code, § 102-16)  (Ord. 93-75, passed 1-19-1994; Ord. 96-37, passed 9-4-
1996)  Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.17  DUMPSTER SERVICE GENERALLY.
   (A)   (1)   Commercial customers which generate a quantity of waste
sufficient to require dumpster service shall contract with the city’s exclusive
franchise hauler with the following provisions.
      (2)   Commercial customers shall pay the city’s exclusive franchise
hauler directly for services rendered.
   (B)   Owners shall provide an access route capable of supporting the
container service truck.
   (C)   If a dumpster is unserviceable, such as by being blocked or containing
prohibited items, the service truck will return to empty the container only
after the dumpster is serviceable and/or prohibited items have been removed
from the dumpster. The customer may be charged an extra trip charge.
   (D)   Lids and doors of dumpsters shall be kept closed, except when the
dumpster is being filled.
   (E)   The owner or occupant of the premises shall be responsible for keeping
the area around the container clean and clear of all garbage, trash and debris.
(1998 Code, § 102-17)  (Ord. 93-75, passed 1-19-1994)
§ 53.18  RATES FOR DUMPSTER SERVICE.
   Monthly charges for dumpster collection service shall be established by a
resolution passed by the City Commission and shall be published at least 30
days in advance of the effective date.
(1998 Code, § 102-18)  (Ord. 93-75, passed 1-19-1994)
§ 53.19  FREQUENCY OF DUMPSTER COLLECTION.
   The city’s exclusive franchise hauler shall provide dumpster collection
service according to individual collection agreements.
(1998 Code, § 102-19)  (Ord. 93-75, passed 1-19-1994)
§ 53.20  SPECIAL COLLECTION AGREEMENTS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the city from making
special agreements and assessing a special collection fee for the collection of
items which the city or the exclusive franchise hauler does not normally
collect, or for the city collecting excessive amounts of refuse.
(1998 Code, § 102-20)  (Ord. 93-75, passed 1-19-1994)
§ 53.21  HOURS OF COLLECTION IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   No collection of commercial refuse shall be made in residential areas before
7:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m.
(1998 Code, § 102-21)  (Ord. 93-75, passed 1-19-1994)
§ 53.22  COMMERCIAL RECYCLING.
   Commercial customers who recycle all or portions of their solid waste may
contract their recycling service with the city’s exclusive franchise hauler or
any other recycling service company.
(1998 Code, § 102-22)  (Ord. 93-75, passed 1-19-1994)
§ 53.23  SPECIAL AND HAZARDOUS WASTE DISPOSAL.
   Commercial customers who generate hazardous, toxic or special wastes must
comply with federal and state laws, regulations and rules for the collection
and disposal of such wastes. Disposal of these materials does not fall under
the scope of the city’s exclusive franchise agreement.
(1998 Code, § 102-23)  (Ord. 93-75, passed 1-19-1994)  Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.24  COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER; SUSPENSION OF COLLECTION SERVICE.
   (A)   The disposal of any solid waste in any manner other than as designated
by this chapter or sanctioned by the Solid Waste Manager is prohibited and is a
violation of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to dispose of solid waste in a
manner other than that specified by this chapter unless special arrangements
are approved in writing by the Solid Waste Manager.
   (B)   Collection service may be discontinued when the provisions of this
chapter are violated. Such collection service may be suspended until such
prohibited activities have been stopped or deficiencies have been corrected to
the satisfaction of the Solid Waste Manager.
(1998 Code, § 102-24)  (Ord. 93-75, passed 1-19-1994)  Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.99  PENALTY.
   Violation of the following shall be a Class C misdemeanor.
   (A)   Unauthorized use of containers. It shall be unlawful for any person,
other than the owner or occupant of the premises for whom the container has
been furnished and who is currently paying a garbage pickup charge, to place
anything in such container.
   (B)   Obstruction of container; burning in container; defacing or posting
signs on containers.
      (1)   No person shall obstruct a commercial-type container by parking in
front of the container, or obstruct such container in any manner where such
obstruction would interfere with the servicing of such container.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to make a fire or burn any material in a
sanitation container furnished by the city or its exclusive franchise hauler,
or to paint or mark upon or to place any poster, placard or sign upon the
container.
   (C)   Disposal of waste originating outside city limits. It shall be
unlawful to bring into the city limits any trash, garbage, refuse or unwanted
material with the intention of disposing of such refuse.
      (1)   Upon the first conviction of violation of this division (C), the
person shall be fined $500 for each such violation.
      (2)   Upon the second conviction of violation of this division (C), the
person shall be fined $1,000 for each such violation.
      (3)   Upon the third and subsequent convictions of violation of this
division (C), the person shall be fined $2,000 for each such violation.
   (D)   Securing of loads. Should any person haul trash or garbage to a
landfill or a dropoff station, that person shall prevent any garbage or trash
from falling onto any street, alley or thoroughfare in the city. All loads of
loose material shall be covered, enclosed or secured in such a manner so as to
prevent such material from blowing or falling upon public roadways en route.
   (E)   Scavenging of materials prohibited.
      (1)   Municipal solid waste placed at the curb or at an authorized
approved collection point or in the sanitation container becomes the joint
property of city, the authorized franchise hauler and the resident producing
the waste. Once collected, the municipal solid waste becomes the sole property
of the city and/or the authorized franchise hauler.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful, without the effective consent of the owner,
for any person other than the owner, to remove any material from any
receptacle, bag or sanitary container, or to remove the bag, receptacle or
sanitary container itself.
      (3)   Each removal of an item or items from any residential or commercial
location shall constitute a separate violation of this section. Unauthorized
persons removing materials or containers other than those persons designated by
the city to remove such materials shall be fined as follows.
         (a)   Upon the first conviction of a violation of this division (E),
the person shall be fined a minimum of $50 for each such violation.
         (b)   Upon the second conviction of a violation of this division (E),
the person shall be fined a minimum of $200 for each violation.
         (c)   Upon the third and subsequent convictions of a violation of this
division (E), the person shall be fined a minimum of $400 for each such
violation.
(1998 Code, § 102-25)  (Ord. 95-17, passed 11-15-1995; Ord. 11-31, passed 9-21-
2011; Ord. 12-13, passed 4-4-2012)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   VEHICLE OPERATION
      
72.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
      
73.   PEDESTRIANS
      
74.   TOY VEHICLES
      
75.   RAILROADS
      
76.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   State traffic law adopted
   
70.02   Purpose of code
   
70.03   Authority of officers of Fire Department to direct traffic
   
70.04   Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers
   
70.05   Riding motorcycles
   
70.06   Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles
   
70.07   Use of skateboards, roller skates or similar devices on roadway
   
70.08   Removing or damaging traffic barriers
   
70.09   Vehicle repair shops to report vehicles damaged by bullets; records of
vehicle repairs
   
70.10   Parades and processions generally; identification of funeral
processions
   
70.11   Sound amplification systems in vehicles
Traffic-Control Signs, Signals and Devices
   
70.25   Traffic code; powers and duties
   
70.26   Necessity of signs
   
70.27   Ratification of existing devices
   
70.28   Installation of traffic lights
   
70.29   Stop intersections
   
70.30   Yield right-of-way signs
   
70.31   Designation of crosswalks and special zones; marking of traffic lanes
   
70.32   One-way streets and alleys
   
70.33   Turning markers
Cross-reference:
   Junked or abandoned vehicles, see §
94.025
   Vehicular signs, see §
155.049
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate traffic by means of traffic-control devices
and signals, see Tex. Transportation Code §§ 542.202(a)(2), 544.002
   Rules of the road, see Tex. Transportation Code §§ 541.001 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01  STATE TRAFFIC LAW ADOPTED.
   The state traffic law, Tex. Transportation Code §§ 501.001 et seq., is
hereby adopted by reference as if set out at length in this traffic code.
(1998 Code, § 118-1)
§ 70.02  PURPOSE OF CODE.
   The purpose of the regulations prescribed by this traffic code is to ensure
to the people the maximum use and benefit of the public streets of the city and
yet retain the maximum degree of safety to prevent injury to person and
property.
(1998 Code, § 118-2)
§ 70.03  AUTHORITY OF OFFICERS OF FIRE DEPARTMENT TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or
assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
(1998 Code, § 118-3)
§ 70.04  RIDING ON PORTION OF VEHICLE NOT INTENDED FOR PASSENGERS.
   No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designated
or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to any
employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to persons riding
within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.
(1998 Code, § 118-4)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.05  RIDING MOTORCYCLES.
   A person operating a motorcycle shall not ride other than upon the permanent
and regular seat attached thereto or carry any other person, nor shall any
other person ride upon the motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached seat to
the rear or the side of the operator.
(1998 Code, § 118-5)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.06  BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM MOVING VEHICLES.
   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while the vehicle is in
motion.
(1998 Code, § 118-6)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.07  USE OF SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES OR SIMILAR DEVICES ON ROADWAY.
   No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster,
skateboard, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway, except
while crossing a street on a crosswalk and, when so crossing, the person shall
be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to pedestrians.
(1998 Code, § 118-7)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.08  REMOVING OR DAMAGING TRAFFIC BARRIERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a city employee, to remove
or damage any barriers erected under the direction of the Chief of Police or
Street Superintendent either closing a street or for the purpose of warning
traffic of an obstruction in the street.
(1998 Code, § 118-8)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.09  VEHICLE REPAIR SHOPS TO REPORT VEHICLES DAMAGED BY BULLETS; RECORDS OF
VEHICLE REPAIRS.
   (A)   The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought
any motor vehicle which shows evidence of having been struck by any bullet
shall report to the Police Department within 24 hours after the motor vehicle
is received, giving the engine number, the registration number and the name and
address of the owner or operator of the vehicle.
   (B)   This report shall be retained by the person for a period of at least
90 days and shall be available to the Chief of Police at all times.
   (C)   The person shall also keep a record of all vehicles brought in for
repair and the like.
(1998 Code, § 118-9)  Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions authorized, see Tex. Transportation Code § 550.067(c)
§ 70.10  PARADES AND PROCESSIONS GENERALLY; IDENTIFICATION OF FUNERAL
PROCESSIONS.
   (A)   No parade or procession, excepting the forces of the United States
Army, Navy, Air Force or Marines, the military forces of the state and the
forces of the Police and Fire Departments, shall occupy, march or proceed along
any street, sidewalk or other public place or way in the city, except in
accordance with a permit therefor issued by the Chief of Police and such other
regulations as are set forth in this traffic code which may apply.
   (B)   A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as
such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other
identifying insignia or by any other method as may be determined and designated
by the Traffic Division.
(1998 Code, § 118-10)  Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate processions, see Tex. Transportation Code §
542.202(a)(3)
§ 70.11  SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS IN VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a street, highway,
alley, parking lot or driveway, whether public or private property, shall
operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification system from within
the vehicle so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of 50 or more
feet from the vehicle.
   (B)   SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM means any radio, tape player, compact disc
player, loud speaker or other electronic device used for the amplification of
sound.
   (C)   (1)   PLAINLY AUDIBLE means any sound produced by a sound
amplification system from within the vehicle, which clearly can be heard at a
distance of 50 feet or more. Measurement standards shall be by the auditory
senses, based on direct line of sight. Words or phrases need not be discernable
and bass reverberations are included.
      (2)   The motor vehicle may be stopped, standing, parked or moving on a
street, highway, alley, parking lot or driveway, on either public or private
property.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
operator was not otherwise prohibited by law from operating the sound
amplification system, and that any of the following apply:
      (1)   The system was being operated to request medical or vehicular
assistance or to warn of a hazardous road condition;
      (2)   The vehicle was an emergency or public safety vehicle;
      (3)   The vehicle was owned and operated by a public utility company,
including the city;
      (4)   The system or vehicle was used in an authorized public activity,
such as parade, fireworks, sporting event, musical production or other activity
which has the approval of the City Commission or a department of the city
authorized to grant such approval; and/or
      (5)   The vehicle operator had obtained a mechanical loudspeaker/
amplifier permit pursuant to §
94.009 of this code of ordinances.
(1998 Code, § 118-11)  (Ord. 02-05, passed 2-20-2002)  Penalty, see §
10.99
TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND DEVICES
§ 70.25  TRAFFIC CODE; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Director of Transportation and Planning, or his or her designee, shall
oversee the traffic code, with the following duties:
   (A)   Shall place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals and devices
when and as required under this traffic code to make effective the provisions
of this traffic code, and may place and maintain such additional traffic-
control devices as he or she may deem necessary to regulate traffic under this
traffic code or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Director of Transportation and Planning,
or his or her designee, to supervise the installation and proper timing and
maintenance of traffic-control devices.
   (C)    The Director of Transportation and Planning, or his or her designee,
shall keep an official map of all traffic-control signs, signals and devices
placed or erected within the city under the provisions of this traffic code,
along with complete records therefor.
(1998 Code, § 118-73)
§ 70.26  NECESSITY OF SIGNS.
   (A)   No provision of this traffic code for which signs are required shall
be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person
   (B)   Whenever a particular section of this traffic code does not state that
signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are
erected or in place.
(1998 Code, § 118-74)
§ 70.27  RATIFICATION OF EXISTING DEVICES.
   (A)   A list of traffic-control signs, signals, devices and markers which
are in place at the street locations therein shown and are in use for the
purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic, is to be kept on file in the
office of the Director of Transportation and Planning.
   (B)   It shall be a misdemeanor to disobey the instructions of any traffic-
control device.
   (C)   The list of traffic control devices and makers, maintained and updated
by the Director of Transportation and Planning, are hereby affirmed, ratified
and declared to be official traffic-control devices.
(1998 Code, § 118-75)
Editor’s note:
   Exhibit A, giving descriptions and locations of such devices, is on file
with the city and has not been included herein.
§ 70.28  INSTALLATION OF TRAFFIC LIGHTS.
   The Director of Transportation and Planning, or his or her designee, shall
designate any street intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by
electric traffic-control signals or lights and shall cause the signals or
lights to be installed and maintained at the intersections.
(1998 Code, § 118-76)
§ 70.29  STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   The Director of Transportation and Planning, or his or her designee, may
designate any street intersection as a stop intersection and designate the
streets upon which vehicles shall stop before entering the intersection.
Whenever any intersection has been so designated, the Director of
Transportation and Planning, or his or her designee, shall cause the
intersection to be identified by the erection of stop signs indicating which
vehicles approaching the intersection shall stop, and it shall be the duty of
the driver of any vehicle approaching such a sign to bring the vehicle to a
complete stop at the sign or at a clearly marked stop line before entering the
intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police officer or a traffic-
control signal. After having so stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-
way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection or which are
approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. The driver, after
having so yielded, may proceed and the drivers of all other vehicles
approaching on the intersecting street shall yield the right-of-way to the
vehicle so proceeding into or across the intersection.
(1998 Code, § 118-77)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to designate stop intersections, see Tex. Transportation
Code §§ 542.202(a)(8), 544.003
   Duty of drivers with respect to stop signs, see Tex. Transportation Code §§
544.003
§ 70.30  YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY SIGNS.
   The Director of Transportation and Planning, or his or her designee, may
install and maintain yield right-of-way signs at intersections where a special
hazard may exist anywhere vehicles shall be required to yield the right-of-way.
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield right-of-way sign shall, in
obedience to the sign, slow down to a speed not in excess of 15 mph, or shall
stop if necessary, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian crossing
the roadway on which he or she is driving and to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another street so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
(1998 Code, § 118-78)
§ 70.31  DESIGNATION OF CROSSWALKS AND SPECIAL ZONES; MARKING OF TRAFFIC LANES.
   The Director of Transportation and Planning, or his or her designee, is
hereby authorized to:
   (A)   Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon
the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at any intersection where, in his or her
opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at
such other places as he or she may deem necessary;
   (B)   Establish safety zones, quiet zones, play zones and other zones of
such kind and character and at such places as he or she may deem necessary for
the protection of the public; and/or
   (C)   Mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he or she
may deem advisable, consistent with this traffic code and other traffic
ordinances of the city.
(1998 Code, § 118-79)
§ 70.32  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance of the City Commission designates any one-way
street or alley, the Director of Transportation and Planning, or his or her
designee, shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such
regulations shall be effective unless the signs are in place. Signs indicating
the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection
where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
   (B)   Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys which are
designated as one-way streets or alleys, vehicular traffic shall move only in
the indicated direction where signs indicating the direction of traffic are
erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
(1998 Code, § 118-80)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to designate one-way streets and require traffic thereon
to move in one specific direction, see Tex. Transportation Code § 542.202(a)
(10)
§ 70.33  TURNING MARKERS.
   (A)   The Director of Transportation and Planning, or his or her designee is
authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to
intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such
intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or
be other than as prescribed by any provision of this traffic code, state law or
city ordinance, rule or regulation.
   (B)   When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning
thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of those
indications.
(1998 Code, § 118-81)
CHAPTER 71:  VEHICLE OPERATION
Section
General Operating Provisions
   
71.01   No passing zones
   
71.02   Prohibited turns at intersections
   
71.03   U-turns
   
71.04   Obstructing traffic generally
   
71.05   Obstructing intersection or crosswalk
   
71.06   Manner of driving in funeral procession or other procession
   
71.07   Driving on sidewalks
   
71.08   Driving on fresh pavement
   
71.09   Driving on roadway laned for traffic
   
71.10   Vehicles operated on public grounds restricted to designated areas
   
71.11   Digging out; spinning tires
   
71.12   Control of vehicle
   
71.13   Opening doors into traffic
   
71.14   Corner cutting
   
71.15   Entering or leaving limited-access roadway
   
71.16   Overloading or overcrowding vehicle
   
71.17   No wake on flooded street
   
71.18   Weight of load
Speed Regulations
   
71.30   Maximum limits generally
   
71.31   Maximum limits on specific streets
   
71.32   School zones
   
71.33   Competitions of speed
 
   
71.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Speed limit in parks, see §
92.01
   Toy Vehicles, see
Ch. 74
   Traffic Schedules, see
Ch. 76
GENERAL OPERATING PROVISIONS
§ 71.01  NO PASSING ZONES.
   The Director of Transportation and Planning, or his or her designee, is
hereby authorized to determine by resolution those portions of any highway or
street in the city where overtaking and passing or driving on the left side of
the roadway would be especially hazardous, and may, by appropriate signs or
markings on the roadway, indicate the beginning and end of the zones and, when
the signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to any ordinarily
observant person, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof.
(1998 Code, § 118-31)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.02  PROHIBITED TURNS AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The Director of Transportation and Planning, or his or her designee,
is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of
vehicles shall not make a right turn, left turn or U-turn, and shall place
proper signs at the intersections.
   (B)   The making of these turns may be prohibited between certain hours of
any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the hours shall be plainly
indicated on the signs, or they may be removed when these turns are permitted.
   (C)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right turn,
left turn or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
directions of such signs.
(1998 Code, § 118-32)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03  U-TURNS.
   (A)   No vehicle shall make a U-turn in a street, except at a street
intersection. All such turns shall be made by keeping the vehicle to the right
of the centerlines of the intersecting streets.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to make a U-turn at any intersection at which a
traffic light has been placed.
(1998 Code, § 118-33)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04  OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC GENERALLY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, drive or propel a vehicle in
such manner as to block or obstruct the traffic on any street or alley of the
city.
(1998 Code, § 118-34)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.05  OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTION OR CROSSWALK.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage
of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.
(1998 Code, § 118-35)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.06  MANNER OF DRIVING IN FUNERAL PROCESSION OR OTHER PROCESSION.
   Each driver in a funeral or other authorized procession shall drive as near
to the right-hand side of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle
ahead as close as is practical and safe.
(1998 Code, § 118-36)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.07  DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS.
   Any driver of any vehicle who shall drive the vehicle upon or across any
sidewalk or sidewalk area of any street within the city, except on a driveway,
public or private, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1998 Code, § 118-37)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.08  DRIVING ON FRESH PAVEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle upon any portion of
any street in the city that has been freshly paved, unless all barriers or
signal lights have been lawfully removed therefrom indicating that the street
is ready for travel.
(1998 Code, § 118-38)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.09  DRIVING ON ROADWAY LANED FOR TRAFFIC.
   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes
for traffic, the following rules, in addition to all others consistent
herewith, shall apply.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall drive as nearly as practical entirely
within a single lane and shall not move from the lane until the driver has
first ascertained that the movement can be made with safety.
   (B)   Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway and drivers of
vehicles shall obey the direction of every sign.
(1998 Code, § 118-39)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.10  VEHICLES OPERATED ON PUBLIC GROUNDS RESTRICTED TO DESIGNATED AREAS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle
whatsoever through or upon or to park the vehicle upon any park, or other
public property within the city, except upon official designated roadways or
parking lots.
(1998 Code, § 118-40)  (Ord. 07-44, passed 11-21-2007)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.11  DIGGING OUT; SPINNING TIRES.
   Any driver of any motor vehicle who shall cause the vehicle to dig out or
shall cause any vehicle to make unnecessary noise by reason of operating the
vehicle in such manner as to cause the wheels thereof to spin or slide on the
roadway of any street when starting the vehicle or while making any turning
movement shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1998 Code, § 118-41)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.12  CONTROL OF VEHICLE.
   It shall be the duty of every person who shall operate any vehicle within
the city to keep the vehicle under control at all times and to avoid, whenever
possible, colliding with any other vehicle or person.
(1998 Code, § 118-42)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.13  OPENING DOORS INTO TRAFFIC.
   No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any
person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to traffic
for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
(1998 Code, § 118-43)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.14  CORNER CUTTING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle over any
sidewalk area and through any driveway or parking lot or any business entrance
at any intersection, in making either a right or left turn, except for the
purpose of coming to a complete stop to obtain or render some service or make a
sale or purchase.
   (B)   It is the intention of this section to prohibit corner cutting by
driving a vehicle from one street into another across any sidewalk or driveway
or through any driveway.
(1998 Code, § 118-44)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.15  ENTERING OR LEAVING LIMITED-ACCESS ROADWAY.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited-access roadway,
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
(1998 Code, § 118-45)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.16  OVERLOADING OR OVERCROWDING VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is loaded with material or
passengers so as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of
the vehicle, or as to interfere with the driver’s control over the driving
mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with control over
the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
(1998 Code, § 118-46)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.17  NO WAKE ON FLOODED STREET.
   (A)   No person operating a motor vehicle on a flooded street, highway,
alley or parking lot, whether public or private property, shall operate the
vehicle so that it causes a wake that could cause damage to other vehicles or
adjacent real property, or cause substantial inconvenience to an owner or
occupier of adjacent real property.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
operator was operating an emergency, public safety or official government
vehicle directly in furtherance of official duties.
(1998 Code, § 118-48)  (Ord. 02-41, passed 9-18-2002)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.18  WEIGHT OF LOAD.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by law, no commercial motor vehicle,
truck-tractor, trailer or semi-trailer, nor combination of such vehicles, shall
be operated over, on or upon the public city streets and highways within the
corporate limits of the city, having a weight in excess of one or more of the
following limitations.
      (1)   No such vehicle, nor combination of vehicles, shall have a greater
weight than 20,000 pounds carried on any one axle, including all enforcement
tolerances; or with a tandem axle weight in excess of 34,000 pounds, including
all enforcement tolerances; or with an overall gross weight on a group of two
or more consecutive axles produced by application of the following formula:
         W = 500 (LN/N-1 + 12N + 36)
      Where:
      W   =   overall gross weight on any group of two or more consecutive
axles to the nearest 500 pounds
      L   =   distance in feet between the extreme of any group of two or more
consecutive axles
      N   =   number of axles in group under consideration; except that, two
consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry a gross load of 34,000 pounds each
providing the overall distance between the first and last axles of such
consecutive sets of tandem axles is 36 feet or more; provided, that such
overall gross weight may not 80,000 pounds, including all enforcement
tolerances
      (2)   No such vehicle, nor combination of vehicles, shall have a greater
weight than 600 pounds per inch width of tire upon any wheel concentrated upon
the surface of the highway and using high-pressure tires, and a greater weight
than six 650 pounds per inch width of tire upon any wheel concentrated upon the
surface of the highway and using low-pressure tires, nor any axle a load in
excess of 16,000 pounds on high pressure tires, and 20,000 pounds on low-
pressure tires.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as permitting size or
weight limits on the national system of interstate and defense highways within
the corporate limits of the city in excess of those permitted under 23 U.S.C. §
127. If the federal government prescribes or adopts vehicle size or weight
limits greater than those prescribed by 23 U.S.C. § 127 for the national system
of interstate and defense highways, the increased limits shall become effective
on the national system of interstate and defense highways within the corporate
limits of the city.
      (4)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         AXLE LOAD. The total load transmitted to the road by all wheels whose
centers may be included between two parallel transverse vertical planes 40
inches apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle.
         TANDEM AXLE GROUP. Two or more axles spaced 40 inches or more apart
from center to center having at least one common point of weight suspension.
      (5)   (a)   Any police officer, having reason to believe that the gross
weight or axle load of a loaded motor vehicle is unlawful, is authorized to
weigh the same by means of portable or stationary scales furnished or approved
by the Police Department of the city for such use, or the police officer may
cause the loaded motor vehicle to be weighed by any public weigher and may
require such vehicle to be driven to the nearest available scales for the
purpose of weighing.
         (b)   In the event that the gross weight of a vehicle weight pursuant
to division (A)(5)(a) above is found to exceed the maximum gross weight
authorized by law, plus a tolerance allowance of 5% of the gross weight
authorized by law, such police officer shall demand and require the operator or
owner of the motor vehicle to unload, or cause to be unloaded, such portion of
the load as is necessary to decrease the gross weight.
         (c)   In the event that the axle load of a vehicle weighed pursuant to
division (A)(5)(a) above is found to exceed the maximum authorized by law, plus
a tolerance allowance of 5% of the axle load authorized by law, such police
officer shall demand and require the operator or owner of the motor vehicle to
decrease the axle load to the maximum authorized by law plus such tolerance
allowance. The owner or operator may reduce such load by rearranging the cargo,
if possible, or by unloading or having others unload such portion of the cargo
as is necessary to decrease the axle load to the maximum authorized by law,
plus such tolerance allowance. Such vehicle may not be operated further over
the public streets and highways within the city so long as any axle load
exceeds the maximum authorized by law, plus such tolerance allowance, except as
authorized under divisions (A)(5)(d) or (A)(5)(e) below.
         (d)   If the load of a motor vehicle consists of livestock, the
operator shall be permitted to proceed to the destination without unloading,
provided the destination is within the state.
         (e)   If the gross weight of a motor vehicle or an axle load exceeds
the maximum permitted by law plus a tolerance allowance of 5% of the gross
weight authorized by law, but the police officer believes that the cargo cannot
be unloaded or rearranged safely at the place where such vehicle was weighed,
or the police officer believes that the unloading or rearranging of the cargo
at such place would create an unreasonable disruption of traffic, he or she
shall require the operator to proceed to a location where the cargo can be
unloaded or rearranged safely without causing disruption to traffic. Such
location shall be the nearest such place on city property, on property under
the control of the driver or his or her principal, or on property where consent
has been given for such loading and where it is feasible to unload or rearrange
such cargo.
   (B)   Any person desiring to operate a vehicle on city streets in excess of
a load limit set out herein shall first obtain a special permit from the City
Engineer or designee, and such permit shall not be issued unless reasonably
necessary. For any such permit, a fee of $100 shall be authorized. The City
Engineer shall collect or cause to be collected the fee herein prescribed.
   (C)   The limitation as to weight prescribed by this section shall not apply
to road rollers or other road-making or road-repairing machinery being moved or
used on a street by the United States, the state, the county, the city or any
contractor moving or using such road machinery in the performance of or
preparatory to the performance of a contract with either the United States, the
state, the county or the city, but in the event of any such road-making or
road-repairing machinery of a weight in excess of the limit set out herein
being moved over the streets or bridges in the city, the person in charge
thereof shall first obtain from the City Engineer a permit for such movement,
which permit shall designate the route or streets and also the bridges over
which such movement shall take place, and such machinery may then be moved, but
not elsewhere than over such designated routes. There shall be no fee for this
permit.
   (D)   Any person moving or causing to be moved a load which, together with
the weight of the vehicle, exceeds the limit as set out herein, shall be liable
to the city for any damage done by any such excessively loaded vehicle to the
streets, bridges or culverts in the city and the acceptance of either of the
permits provided for in this section shall be conclusive evidence that the
person to whom such permit is issued agrees to make good and pay all such
damages upon demand thereof made by the city.
   (E)   The driver, owner, operator or other person operating or driving any
commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer or semi-trailer or combination
of such vehicles, over, on or upon city streets or public highways within the
limits of the city, shall comply with the provisions of Tex. Transportation
Code §§ 502.151, 621.002, 621.101 and 621.501.
   (F)   Certain sections of city streets, alleys, travelways, bridges or
culverts may be designated for more restrictive load limits by the Public Works
Director or City Engineer. Such locations shall be designated on the site by
appropriate signs.
(1998 Code, § 118-49)  (Ord. 03-01, passed 2-19-2003)  Penalty, see §
71.99
SPEED REGULATIONS
§ 71.30  MAXIMUM LIMITS GENERALLY.
   (A)   No person shall operate or drive any vehicle on any street within the
city at a greater speed than 30 mph, unless signs are erected designating
another speed in accordance with this subchapter.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this subchapter, no person
shall drive a vehicle on a street at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential
hazards then existing. In every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be
necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or
entering the street in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all
persons to use due care.
   (C)   The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of
division (B) above, drive at an appropriate reduced speed when approaching a
hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when a
special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason
of weather or street or highway conditions.
(1998 Code, § 118-111)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.31  MAXIMUM LIMITS ON SPECIFIC STREETS.
   The City Commission may alter the maximum speed limit established by §
71.30 of this chapter on any street or portion thereof within the city in
accord with the provisions of Tex. Transportation Code § 545.356. Whenever
signs are posted giving notice of the maximum legal speed limit so established
for a particular street or portion thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person
to drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of the limit.
(1998 Code, § 118-112)  Penalty, see §
71.99
Statutory reference:
   Speed of vehicles in cities and authority of cities to alter prima facie
speed limits established by state law, see Tex. Transportation Code §§ 545.352,
545.356
§ 71.32  SCHOOL ZONES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive any vehicle at a
speed greater than 20 mph through or to overtake or pass any other vehicle in
any school zone as may be marked or designated within the city during the hours
indicated upon signs erected in the zones or whenever children are present in
the zones.
(1998 Code, § 118-113)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.33  COMPETITIONS OF SPEED.
   Any person who shall attempt to engage in a contest of speed between motor
vehicles of any kind upon any public street or alley within the city shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. The fact that the actual speed attained by any vehicle
attempting to engage in a contest of speed is less than the prima facie legal
speed limit shall be no defense to a complaint of attempting to engage in a
contest of speed in violation of this section.
(1998 Code, § 118-114)  (Ord. 12-26, passed 7-18-2012)  Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   The driver, owner, operator or other person operating or driving any
commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer or semi-trailer or combination
of such vehicles, over, on or upon city streets or public highways within the
limits of the city, who fails to comply with the provisions of §
71.18 of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in
a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be fined in any sum not less than
$250.
(1998 Code, § 118-49)  (Ord. 03-01, passed 2-19-2003)
CHAPTER 72:  STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Section
General Provisions
   
72.01   Presumption regarding responsibility for illegal parking
   
72.02   Impoundment; liability of city; Vehicle Storage Facility Act not
applicable within city limits
   
72.03   Parking time limited on certain streets
   
72.04   Parking for disabled persons
   
72.05   Unattended vehicles
   
72.06   Starting parked vehicle
   
72.07   Ten feet of roadway to be left available for traffic
   
72.08   Designation and marking of parking stalls; designation of areas where
parking is prohibited or limited
   
72.09   Parking in prohibited areas; overtime parking
   
72.10   Parking or standing in alleys
   
72.11   Vehicles exceeding 25 feet
   
72.12   Parking of non-motor vehicles
   
72.13   Parking in residential districts
Loading and Unloading
   
72.25   Generally
   
72.26   Designation of loading zones
   
72.27   Use of passenger curb loading zones
   
72.28   Use of freight curb loading zones
Cross-reference:
   Off-street loading requirements, see §
160.082
   Off-street parking for mobile home parks, see §
156.17
   Off-street parking requirements, see §
160.081
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate standing and parking of vehicles, see Tex.
Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(2)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01  PRESUMPTION REGARDING RESPONSIBILITY FOR ILLEGAL PARKING.
   In any prosecution charging a violation of any ordinance or regulation
governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular
vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such
ordinance or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the
complaint was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such
vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the
registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such
vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation
occurred.
(1998 Code, § 118-221)
§ 72.02  IMPOUNDMENT; LIABILITY OF CITY; VEHICLE STORAGE FACILITY ACT NOT
APPLICABLE WITHIN CITY LIMITS.
   (A)   (1)   Vehicles subject to impoundment. Any vehicle which shall be or
remain standing or parked upon any public street, avenue, way, alley or other
public place may be removed by or upon order of the Chief of Police and placed
in storage in a privately operated garage or other place designated by or
maintained by the city, under the following circumstances:
         (a)   When any vehicle is found upon a street, avenue, alley, way or
public place and a report has been previously made that the vehicle has been
stolen or complaint has been filed and a warrant issued thereon, charging that
the vehicle has been stolen or converted in violation of law;
         (b)   When any police officer of the city has reasonable grounds to
believe that any vehicle has been abandoned;
         (c)   When a police officer arrests any person driving or in control
of a vehicle for an alleged offense and such officer is or may be required by
law to take the person arrested immediately before a magistrate, or if the
arrested person is immediately taken before a Magistrate, and when the arrested
person is the sole occupant or the owner of the vehicle and is immediately
placed in custody;
         (d)   When a vehicle is so disabled that its normal operation is
impossible or impractical and the persons in charge of the vehicle are
incapacitated by reason of physical injury or other causes to such an extent as
to be unable to provide for its removal or custody, or cannot be found or are
not in the immediate vicinity of the vehicle; and/or
         (e)   When any vehicle is left standing or parked unattended in
violation of any applicable provisions of this traffic code, state law or city
ordinance, rule or regulation; provided, however, that, if the vehicle is
parked or standing immediately in front of or immediately adjacent to property
owned by the owner of the vehicle, or property rented by the owner, before the
vehicle shall be removed, the owner thereof shall be given reasonable notice to
remove or cause to be removed the vehicle.
      (2)   Reclaiming by owner. In order to obtain possession of a vehicle
stored under the provisions of this section, the claimant must produce
satisfactory evidence of ownership or right to possession within 30 days from
the date of the storage and, in addition thereto, must pay all charges for
storage and removal of the vehicle, in addition to any fine.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) above shall not be construed to relieve
from or lessen the responsibility of any person who shall leave his or her
vehicle parked on the streets of the city in such a manner that the vehicle may
be impounded, nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability by
reason of impounding or causing to be impounded the vehicle.
(1998 Code, § 118-223)
Statutory reference:
   Removal of illegally parked vehicles, see Tex. Transportation Code § 545.305
§ 72.03  PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   (A)   Erection of signs.
      (1)   The Director of Transportation and Planning is hereby directed to
erect signs where limitations on parking on streets and avenues in the city are
in effect, giving notice of the parking regulations.
      (2)   No citation, as provided for in this section, shall be issued
alleging a violation of this section until after the street or avenue where the
violation occurred has been equipped with such signs as specified in this
division (A).
   (B)   Issuance of citations.
      (1)   The Chief of Police shall cause such streets and avenues to be
regularly patrolled and traffic citations to be issued notifying alleged
violators to appear and answer charges of alleged violations in the Municipal
Court.
      (2)   If a violation occurs, the citation shall be attached to the
vehicle.
      (3)   The citation shall direct the violator to appear in the Municipal
Court within ten days, during the hours specified in the citation.
   (C)   Court appearance.
      (1)   If the owner of the vehicle does not appear in response to a
traffic citation affixed to the motor vehicle within such ten-day period, the
Clerk of the Municipal Court shall send a letter to the owner, informing him or
her of the violation and warning him or her that, if he or she fails to appear
in Court within ten days from the date of the letter, a warrant of arrest will
be issued. All notices shall be addressed to the name and address given on the
license registration receipt for the vehicle to which the citation was
originally attached.
      (2)   If the alleged violator fails to comply with a traffic citation
attached to a vehicle, and fails to make an appearance pursuant to the letter
written to him or her by the Clerk of the Municipal Court directing his or her
appearance in the Court, the Clerk of the Municipal Court shall secure and
issue a warrant for his or her arrest.
(1998 Code, § 118-225)
Editor’s note:
   Exhibit A, referred to in this section, is not included herein, but is
available for inspection at the offices of the city.
§ 72.04  PARKING FOR DISABLED PERSONS.
   (A)   In all city-owned or city-controlled property used for parking, there
shall be designated one or more parking spaces or a parking area for the
exclusive use of vehicles transporting temporary or permanently disabled
persons.
   (B)   The city shall designate a space or area for the exclusive use of
vehicles transporting temporarily or permanently disabled persons by conforming
to the rules promulgated by the state purchasing and general services
commission under Tex. Transportation Code Ch. 681.
   (C)   All private property owners or persons who control property used for
parking shall be required to conform to the identification and dimension
requirements contained in the rules promulgated by the state purchasing and
general services commission under Tex. Transportation Code Ch. 681, when
designating a parking space or area for the disabled.
   (D)   A person commits an offense under the provisions of this section if
the person is neither temporarily or permanently disabled, nor transporting a
temporarily or permanently disabled person, and parks a vehicle with the
special device or displaying a disabled person identification card as specified
by Tex. Transportation Code § 681.003 in a parking space or parking area
designated specifically for the disabled by the city or by a person who owns or
controls private property used for parking as provided in division (C) above.
   (E)   A person commits an offense under the provisions of this section if
the person parks a vehicle neither displaying the special device, nor
displaying a disabled person identification card as specified by Tex.
Transportation Code § 681.003, in a parking space or parking area designated
specifically for the disabled by the city or by a person who owns or controls
private property for parking as provided by division (C) above.
(1998 Code, § 118-226)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.05  UNATTENDED VEHICLES.
   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand
unattended without first stopping the engine and effectively setting the brakes
thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb
or side of the roadway.
(1998 Code, § 118-227)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.06  STARTING PARKED VEHICLE.
   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless
and until the movement can be made with safety.
(1998 Code, § 118-228)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.07  TEN FEET OF ROADWAY TO BE LEFT AVAILABLE FOR TRAFFIC.
   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the
width of either lane of a roadway for free movement of the vehicular traffic;
except that, a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or
unloading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations
or traffic signs or signals of a police officer.
(1998 Code, § 118-229)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.08  DESIGNATION AND MARKING OF PARKING STALLS; DESIGNATION OF AREAS WHERE
PARKING IS PROHIBITED OR LIMITED.
   (A)   (1)   The Director of Transportation and Planning, or his or her
designee, shall cause parking stalls to be maintained and marked off in and on
such streets and parts thereof as may be designated, and he or she shall cause
spaces in which parking is prohibited to be maintained and marked off in and on
such streets and parts thereof as may be designated.
      (2)   The Director of Transportation and Planning, or his or her
designee, shall also cause time limit parking areas to be maintained and marked
off in and on such parts of streets as may be designated.
      (3)   All such spaces or areas shall be clearly indicated by appropriate
signs or by markings on the pavement or curb.
   (B)   (1)   In areas designated as time limit parking areas, parking may be
limited to any period prescribed.
      (2)   Such time limits shall be designated with clearly distinguished
markings or signs at both ends of the time limit area and at reasonable
intervals between the beginning and ending of such time limit area, indicating
the time allowed for parking in such area.
   (C)   Any prohibition of or time limit on parking established under this
section shall apply on such days and between such hours as prescribed.
(1998 Code, § 118-230)
§ 72.09  PARKING IN PROHIBITED AREAS; OVERTIME PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any
vehicle registered in his or her name or owned or operated by him or her or in
his or her possession or under his or her control to be or remain in any space
or area in which parking is prohibited as provided in §
72.08 of this chapter or in a time limit parking area for a longer period of
time than that designated by the markings on the street or by signs clearly
visible.
(1998 Code, § 118-231)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.10  PARKING OR STANDING IN ALLEYS.
   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under
such conditions as to block the free passage of other vehicles in the alley.
Notwithstanding the provisions hereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to
park a vehicle in any alley within the fire limits of the city, except when the
vehicle is actually being used for the purpose of loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers.
(1998 Code, § 118-232)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.11  VEHICLES EXCEEDING 25 FEET.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle, trailer or
combination thereof on the streets, alleys or other public ways of the city
which either shall exceed 25 feet in length or exceed 10,000 pounds in
manufacturer gross vehicle weight.
(1998 Code, § 118-241)  (Ord. 93-37, passed 7-7-1993; Ord. 07-20, passed 5-2-
2007)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.12  PARKING OF NON-MOTOR VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any non-motor vehicle
(including, but not limited to, boats and trailers) on the streets, alleys or
other public ways of the city.
(1998 Code, § 118-242)  (Ord. 93-37, passed 7-7-1993; Ord. 07-20, passed 5-2-
2007)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.13  PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   Parking in residential districts (to include residential uses and all
residential areas) shall comply with the following provision:
   (A)   No vehicle, as defined by Tex. Transportation Code Ch. 541, Subch. C,
§ 541.201, Vehicles, shall be parked or stored between the residential
structure and street frontage, unless parked on an improved driveway.  An
existing improved driveway surface is one made of concrete, asphalt, pavers, or
other material approved by the City's Building Official, that form a continual
surface sufficient to support the entire width, length and weight of the
vehicle.  Improved driveways must originate at the public roadway and form a
continual surface.  Parking surfaces added to an existing, improved driveway
surface in the front or side yard must be connected and/or attached to the
original improved surface.
   (B)   Parking off the improved driveway in the front yard area (area between
residential structure and the street, to include the side yard of corner and
irregular shaped lots) is prohibited.
(Ord. 13-08, passed 5-1-2013)  Penalty, see §
10.99
LOADING AND UNLOADING
§ 72.25  GENERALLY.
   All freight trucks shall be loaded and unloaded from the alley entrance, if
practicable. Where conditions are such as to make the loading or unloading
thereof from an alley impracticable, such trucks shall be parked on the street
in accord with all applicable provisions of this subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 118-233)
§ 72.26  DESIGNATION OF LOADING ZONES.
   The City Director of Transportation and Planning, or his or her designee, is
hereby authorized to determine and designate the location of passenger and
freight curb loading zones, and shall place and maintain appropriate signs
indicating the zones and stating the hours during which the provisions therefor
are applicable.
(1998 Code, § 118-234)
§ 72.27  USE OF PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of
time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any
place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations
applicable to the curb loading zones are effective, and then only for a period
of time not to exceed three minutes, except when the spaces are adjacent to and
serving a hotel or bus station, when the period of time may not exceed 15
minutes.
(1998 Code, § 118-235)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.28  USE OF FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONES.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any length of time
in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during the hours so set
aside; except that, commercial vehicles may so stop, stand or park for the
expeditious unloading and delivery or loading and pickup of material. In no
case shall the stop for unloading, loading, pickup or delivery of material
exceed 30 minutes.
   (B)   The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place
marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping, standing or
parking does not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation
of materials which is waiting to enter or about to enter the zone.
(1998 Code, § 118-236)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 73:  PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
73.01   Crossing roadways
   
73.02   Persons authorized to carry white cane with red tip
   
73.03   Duty of others upon approach of blind person carrying white cane
   
73.04   Use of crosswalks required at intersections; crossing between
intersections
§ 73.01  CROSSING ROADWAYS.
   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at
right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except
in a crosswalk.
(1998 Code, § 118-141)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.02  PERSONS AUTHORIZED TO CARRY WHITE CANE WITH RED TIP.
   For the purpose of guarding against accidents in traffic on the public
streets, it shall be unlawful for any person, except persons wholly or
partially blind, to carry or use on the public streets of the city any canes or
walking sticks which are white in color or white with a red end or bottom.
(1998 Code, § 118-142)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.03  DUTY OF OTHERS UPON APPROACH OF BLIND PERSON CARRYING WHITE CANE.
   Any driver of a vehicle, operator of a motor-driven vehicle or pedestrian
who is not wholly or partially blind who approaches or comes in contact with a
person wholly or partially blind, carrying a cane or walking stick white in
color or white with red end, shall yield the right-of-way to the person and
take such precautions before proceeding as may be necessary to avoid accident
or injury to the person so carrying a white cane or walking stick.
(1998 Code, § 118-143)  Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Human Resources Code § 121.007(a)(b)
§ 73.04  USE OF CROSSWALKS REQUIRED AT INTERSECTIONS; CROSSING BETWEEN
INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   All crossings by any pedestrian of any intersection within the
corporate limits of the city shall be made within the crosswalk of the
intersection.
   (B)   It shall be lawful for a pedestrian to cross a street at any place
other than an intersection; but, when any crossing is made or being made by any
pedestrian, he or she shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the
street approaching the place of crossing and in proximity thereto. It shall be
unlawful for any pedestrian to cause any vehicle to stop or for the pedestrian
to cause any interference with the movements of any vehicle by reason of
crossing at that place.
(1998 Code, § 118-144)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 74:  TOY VEHICLES
Section
Bicycles
   
74.01   Destroying or removing number on frame
   
74.02   Warning signal device required
   
74.03   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
74.04   Speed
   
74.05   Carrying articles
   
74.06   Parking
   
74.07   Riding on sidewalks
Golf Carts, All-Terrain Vehicles and the Like
   
74.20   Definitions
   
74.21   Equipment
   
74.22   Operation
Cross-reference:
   Riding motorcycles, see §
70.05
   Use of skateboards, roller skates or similar devices on roadway, see §
70.07
BICYCLES
§ 74.01  DESTROYING OR REMOVING NUMBER ON FRAME.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously remove,
destroy, mutilate or alter in any manner the number of any bicycle frame.
(1998 Code, § 118-171)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 74.02  WARNING SIGNAL DEVICE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other
device capable of giving a warning signal audible for a distance of at least
100 feet; provided that, a bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any
person use on a bicycle, any siren or whistle.
(1998 Code, § 118-173)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 74.03  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic-control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to
vehicles.
   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right turn,
left turn or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey
the direction of any such sign, except when the person dismounts from the
bicycle to make any such turn, in which event the person shall then obey the
regulations applicable to pedestrians.
(1998 Code, § 118-191)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 74.04  SPEED.
   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
(1998 Code, § 118-192)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 74.05  CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article
which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
(1998 Code, § 118-195)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 74.06  PARKING.
   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against a building in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to
pedestrian traffic.
(1998 Code, § 118-194)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 74.07  RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district.
No person 12 or more years of age shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk in any
district.
(1998 Code, § 118-195)  Penalty, see §
10.99
GOLF CARTS, ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND THE LIKE
§ 74.20  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that is:
      (1)   Equipped with a seat or seats for the use of:
         (a)   The rider; and
         (b)   A passenger, if the motor vehicle is designed by the
manufacturer to transport a passenger.
      (2)   Designed to propel itself with three or more tires in contact with
the ground;
      (3)   Designed by the manufacturer for off-highway use;
      (4)   Not designed by the manufacturer primarily for farming or lawn
care; and
      (5)   Not more than 50 inches wide.
   GOLF CART. A motor vehicle designed by the manufacturer primarily for
transporting persons on a golf course.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle that is self-propelled.
   NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLE. A vehicle that can attain a maximum speed of
35 mph on a paved level surface and otherwise complies with Federal Motor
Vehicle Safety Standard 500 (49 C.F.R. § 571.500).
   PUBLIC HIGHWAY. Includes a road, street, way, thoroughfare or bridge:
      (1)   In the state;
      (2)   For the use of vehicles;
      (3)   Not privately owned or controlled; and
      (4)   Over which the state has legislative jurisdiction under its police
power.
   RECREATIONAL OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that is:
      (1)   Equipped with a seat or seats for the use of:
         (a)   The rider; and
         (b)   A passenger, if the vehicle is designed by the manufacturer to
transport a passenger.
      (2)   Designed to propel itself with four or more tires in contact with
the ground;
      (3)   Designed by the manufacturer for off-highway use by the operator
only;
      (4)   Not designed by the manufacturer primarily for farming or lawn
care; and
      (5)   Not more than 65 inches wide.
   SLOW-MOVING VEHICLE. A motor vehicle designed to operate at a maximum speed
of 25 mph or less.
   SLOW-MOVING VEHICLE EMBLEM. A triangular emblem that conforms to standards
and specifications adopted by the Director of the Texas Department of Public
Safety under the Texas Transportation Code.
(1998 Code, § 118-276)  (Ord. 11-24, passed 8-17-2011)
§ 74.21  EQUIPMENT.
   Golf carts and neighborhood electric vehicles are required to be equipped
with the following equipment, which shall be maintained in good working
condition.
   (A)   Brakes. Golf carts and neighborhood electric vehicles shall have
brakes capable of stopping the vehicle within 50 feet at a speed of 25 mph.
      (1)   A test for deceleration or stopping distance shall be performed on
a dry, smooth, hard surface that is free of loose materials.
      (2)   (a)   Golf carts and neighborhood electric vehicles shall have
parking brakes adequate to hold the vehicle:
            1.   On any grade on which the vehicle is operated;
            2.   Under all loading conditions; and
            3.   On a surface free from snow, ice or loose material.
         (b)   The parking brakes shall be:
            1.   Designed to operate continuously as required once applied,
despite a leakage or an exhaustion of power source; and
            2.   Activated by the vehicle operator’s muscular effort, by spring
action or by equivalent means.
   (B)   Audible warning device. Golf carts and neighborhood electric vehicles
shall be equipped with a horn in good working condition that emits a sound
audible under normal conditions at a distance of at least 200 feet.
   (C)   Safety belts. Golf carts and neighborhood electric vehicles shall be
equipped with front (and rear, if applicable) safety belts, if safety belt
anchorages were part of the manufacturer’s original equipment on the vehicle.
   (D)   Mirrors. Golf carts and neighborhood electric vehicles shall be
equipped with a mirror located to reflect to the operator a view of the highway
for a distance of at least 200 feet from the rear of the vehicle.
   (E)   Muffler. Golf carts and neighborhood electric vehicles propelled by
combustion engines shall be equipped with a muffler in good working condition
that continually operates to prevent excessive or unusual noise. A person may
not use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device.
   (F)   Headlamps. Golf carts and neighborhood electric vehicles shall be
equipped with at least two headlamps.
      (1)   At least one headlamp shall be mounted on each side of the front of
the vehicle.
      (2)   Each headlamp shall be mounted at a height from 24 to 54 inches.
   (G)   Taillamps. Golf carts and neighborhood electric vehicles shall be
equipped with at least two taillamps.
      (1)   Taillamps shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle:
         (a)   At a height from 15 to 72 inches; and
         (b)   At the same level and spaced as widely apart as practicable.
      (2)   A taillamp shall emit a red light plainly visible at a distance of
1,000 feet from the rear of the vehicle.
   (H)   Reflectors. Golf carts and neighborhood electric vehicles shall be
equipped with at least two red reflectors on the rear of the vehicle. A red
reflector may be included as a part of a taillamp. A reflector shall be:
      (1)   Mounted at a height from 15 to 60 inches; and
      (2)   Visible at night at all distances from 100 to 600 feet when
directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps.
   (I)   Stop lamps. Golf carts and neighborhood electric vehicles shall be
equipped with at least two stop lamps.
      (1)   Stop lamps shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle.
      (2)   A stopgap shall emit a red or amber light, or a color between red
and amber, that is:
         (a)   Visible in normal sunlight at a distance of at least 300 feet
from the rear of the vehicle; and
         (b)   Displayed when the vehicle service brake is applied.
      (3)   A stopgap may be included as a part of another rear lamp.
   (J)   Turn signal lamps. Golf carts and neighborhood electric vehicles shall
be equipped with electric turn signal lamps that indicate the operator’s intent
to turn by displaying flashing lights to the front and rear of a vehicle and on
that side of the vehicle toward which the turn is to be made, if they were part
of the manufacturer’s original equipment on the vehicle.
      (1)   Turn signal lamps:
         (a)   Shall be mounted at the same level and spaced as widely apart as
practicable on the front and on the rear of the vehicle; and
         (b)   May be included as a part of another lamp on the vehicle.
      (2)   A turn signal lamp shall emit:
         (a)   A white or amber light, or a color between white and amber, if
the lamp is mounted on the front of the vehicle; or
         (b)   A red or amber light, or a color between red and amber, if the
lamp is mounted on the rear of the vehicle.
      (3)   A turn signal lamp must be visible in normal sunlight at a distance
of:
         (a)   At least 500 feet from the front and rear of the vehicle if the
vehicle is at least 80 inches wide; and
         (b)   At least 300 feet from the front and rear of the vehicle if the
vehicle is less than 80 inches wide.
   (K)   Slow-moving vehicle emblem. Golf carts and neighborhood electric
vehicles shall display a slow-moving vehicle emblem that:
      (1)   Has a reflective surface designed to be clearly visible in daylight
or at night from the light of standard automobile headlamps at a distance of at
least 500 feet;
      (2)   Is mounted base down on the rear of the vehicle at a height from
three to five feet above the road surface; and
      (3)   Is maintained in a clean, reflective condition.
(1998 Code, § 118-277)  (Ord. 11-24, passed 8-17-2011)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 74.22  OPERATION.
   (A)   A person may operate a golf cart or neighborhood electric vehicle on a
public highway in the corporate boundaries of the city:
      (1)   Where the posted speed limit is not more than 35 mph; and
      (2)   They possess a current state Class A, B or C operator’s license,
and:
         (a)   Abide by all drivers’ license restrictions; and
         (b)   Display the license on the demand of a peace officer.
   (B)   Operators of golf carts or neighborhood electric vehicles must adhere
to all the traffic laws that are required when operating a registered motor
vehicle.
   (C)   A golf cart or neighborhood electric vehicle may cross intersections,
including a road or street that has a posted speed limit of more than 35 mph.
   (D)   Occupants of golf carts or neighborhood electric vehicles must remain
seated and ride only in the area designed by the manufacturer for the
transportation of the driver and/or passengers when the vehicle is in
operation.
   (E)   No person operating or occupying a golf cart or neighborhood electric
vehicle on a street, highway, alley, parking lot or driveway, whether public or
private property, shall operate or permit the operation of any sound
amplification system from within the vehicle so that the sound is plainly
audible at a distance of 50 or more feet from the vehicle. (See §
94.009 of this code of ordinances, concerning sound amplification systems in
vehicles.)
   (F)   All-terrain vehicles and recreational off-highway vehicles are not
covered by this section and are prohibited from operation on public highways
unless otherwise stipulated by state statute.
(1998 Code, § 118-278)  (Ord. 11-24, passed 8-17-2011)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 75:  RAILROADS
Section
   
75.01   Obstruction of streets by trains
   
75.02   Obstruction of drainage
   
75.03   Boarding or alighting from moving train
   
75.04   Boarding standing boxcars
 
   
75.99   Penalty
§ 75.01  OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS BY TRAINS.
   (A)   (1)   An officer making an arrest for an offense under this section
shall prepare, in duplicate, a citation to appear in Court showing the name and
address of the individual, the offense charged and the time and place when and
where the individual shall appear in Court. The conductor of the train is an
agent for the service of the citation. The person served the citation gives a
written promise to appear in Court by signing the citation in duplicate. The
arresting officer shall keep the original and the person signing shall keep the
copy.
      (2)   The officer shall release the person from custody after the person
signs the citation.
   (B)   The hearing must be before a Magistrate within the city who has
jurisdiction of the offense.
   (C)   A written promise to appear in Court may be complied with by an
appearance by counsel.
(1998 Code, § 118-261)  Penalty, see §
75.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Transportation Code § 471.007
§ 75.02  OBSTRUCTION OF DRAINAGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any railroad company to obstruct the drainage of
the city in any way or by any means whatsoever.
(1998 Code, § 118-262)  Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.03  BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM MOVING TRAIN.
   It shall be unlawful for any person not an employee of the railroad company
to get on or off of a railroad car or engine while the equipment is in motion.
(1998 Code, § 118-263)  Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.04  BOARDING STANDING BOXCARS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the railroad company
to climb upon any boxcar which may be standing upon any of the side tracks or
switches located within the city.
(1998 Code, § 118-264)  Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Fine for obstruction of street, railway crossing or public highway set
out in Tex. Transportation Code § 471.007.
(1998 Code, § 118-261)
CHAPTER 76:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Truck routes
SCHEDULE I. TRUCK ROUTES.
   (A)   The following streets are designated as truck routes within the city
to ensure the integrity of the roadway infrastructure and to reasonably
separate commercial traffic from neighborhoods while providing adequate routes
for commercial traffic:
 
FM 517                              2nd Avenue (6th Street to Bay Street)
FM 1764 (IH-45 to 6th Street)       14th Street (Loop 197 South to 4th Avenue
                                    South)
FM 1765 (Highway 146 to 6th Street) 5th Avenue South (Highway 146 to 14th
                                    Street)
FM 2004                             Century Boulevard (Highway 3 to GCWA)
FM 3436                             4th Avenue (6th Street to 10th Street)
HWY 3                               6th Street
HWY 146                             Loop 197 South
IH-45                               25th Avenue North (Highway 146 to 19th
                                    Avenue North)
 
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any heavy duty
truck with a Class 7 rating or above and a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR)
range of 26,001 pounds or above upon any street not designated as a truck route
in this schedule. ( GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING means the value specified by
the manufacturer as the loaded weight of a single vehicle.)
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to park any heavy duty truck with a Class 7
rating or above and a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) range of 26,001 pounds
or above in an area zoned residential not on a designated truck route.
   (D)   The Director of Transportation and Planning is hereby authorized and
directed to install appropriate signs and markings to identify those streets
designated as truck routes.
   (E)   Exceptions to the truck route requirements are:
      (1)   Authorized emergency vehicles;
      (2)   Vehicles operated or contracted by a public utility;
      (3)   Vehicles operated or contracted by a municipality or other
government; and
      (4)   Commercial brick delivery vehicles making actual deliveries.
   (F)   Designation of a street as a truck route does not relieve a person
from complying with the parking requirements of §
72.11 of this traffic code.
   (G)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this schedule shall by
deemed guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined accordingly.
(1998 Code, § 118-47)  (Ord. 12-43, passed 12-5-2012)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
      
91.   WATERWAYS AND WATERCRAFT
      
92.   RECREATION AND TOURISM
      
93.   HUMAN RELATIONS; DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES
      
94.   HEALTH AND SANITATION
      
95.   ANIMALS
      
96.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION; FIREWORKS
CHAPTER 90:  STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
Section
General Provisions
   
90.001   Adoption of state law pertaining to street improvements
   
90.002   Approval of plans and specifications for street improvements
   
90.003   Preparation of plans, specifications and cost estimates for street
improvements
   
90.004   Erection or maintenance of obstructions
   
90.005   Impeding passage along streets
   
90.006   Persons causing obstruction by stopping or standing
   
90.007   Obstruction by businesses or business activities
   
90.008   Permit for placing materials on street or sidewalk
   
90.009   Driving across or obstructing ditches
   
90.010   Interference with or obstruction of public improvements
   
90.011   General standards for work; cleaning of premises after completion of
work
   
90.012   Use of unimproved/unopened rights-of-way
Sidewalks, Driveways, Curbs and Gutters
   
90.025   Definitions
   
90.026   Compliance
   
90.027   Injuring sidewalks
   
90.028   Permit for construction or repair; lines and grades to be specified by
City Engineer
   
90.029   Responsibility of contractor for adequacy of work
   
90.030   Specifications
   
90.031   Location of trees or shrubbery planted along sidewalks
Excavations
   
90.045   Permit required for street excavations
   
90.046   Application for street excavation permit
   
90.047   Bond required for street excavations
   
90.048   Issuance of street excavation permit; obligation to restore surface
   
90.049   Manner of opening street; placement of material removed
   
90.050   Use of sheeting and bracing in trenches
   
90.051   Supervision of street excavation work
   
90.052   Responsibility for repair of streets
   
90.053   Manner of repairing and filling street excavations
   
90.054   Protection, guards and warnings for excavations or holes in public
place
   
90.055   Duties upon completion of work in street
   
90.056   Acceptance of completed work in street; use of bond or deposit to pay
for costs of repair
Street Rental Charges
   
90.070   Applicability
   
90.071   Annual report of gross receipts
   
90.072   Amount and payment of rental
   
90.073   Receipt; privileges granted
   
90.074   Rental not a tax
   
90.075   Rental to be in lieu of certain taxes and fees
   
90.076   Reservation of rights by city
   
90.077   Inspection of fixtures; correction of unsafe conditions
Trees, Shrubs, Other Plants at Intersections
   
90.090   Definition
   
90.091   Authority of city to remove prohibited growth
   
90.092   Restricted areas
   
90.093   Maximum height of shrubs and similar plants
   
90.094   Minimum clearance of trees
Construction in Public Rights-of-Way
   
90.105   Findings and purpose
   
90.106   Authority; scope
   
90.107   Definitions
   
90.108   Municipal authorization required
   
90.109   Administration and enforcement
   
90.110   Construction obligations
   
90.111   Conditions of public rights-of-way occupancy
   
90.112   Insurance requirements
   
90.113   Indemnity
   
90.114   Governing law
   
90.115   Termination
   
90.116   Unauthorized use of public right-of-way
Statutory reference:
   Authority to appropriate property for streets, alleys and the like, see Tex.
Local Gov’t Code § 251.001
   General provisions relating to municipal streets, see Tex. Transportation
Code §§ 311.001 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.001  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW PERTAINING TO STREET IMPROVEMENTS.
   All and singular, the rights, powers and provisions of Tex. Transportation
Code §§ 313.001 et seq. are hereby adopted by the city for each street and
alley improvement; provided, however, that, all existing powers relating to
street improvements and special assessments to abutting property and the true
owners thereof, whether express or implied, shall in no way be affected, nor
the city deprived thereof, by the provisions of this section.
(1998 Code, § 106-1)
§ 90.002  APPROVAL OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR STREET IMPROVEMENTS.
   All street and alley improvements within the city shall be constructed only
in accordance with plans and specifications as approved by the Director of
Public Works.
(1998 Code, § 106-2)
§ 90.003  PREPARATION OF PLANS, SPECIFICATIONS AND COST ESTIMATES FOR STREET
IMPROVEMENTS.
   Prior to the beginning of construction of any street or alley improvements
within the city, plans and specifications and estimates of cost shall be
prepared by the Director of Public Works.
(1998 Code, § 106-3)
§ 90.004  ERECTION OR MAINTENANCE OF OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, without obtaining
a permit, to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter or repair or to permit the
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or repair of any fence,
wall, hedge, structure or other character of obstruction:
      (1)   Over, on or across any public property, way, alley, street,
sidewalk or park; or
      (2)   Between the property line of any lot and a public street or alley
line.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section or
fail to comply therewith shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The owner of any
building or premises, or part thereof, where anything in violation of this
section shall be placed or exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent
or other person assisting in the commission of any such violation, shall also
be guilty of a separate misdemeanor.
(1998 Code, § 106-4)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.005  IMPEDING PASSAGE ALONG STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to impede or cause to be impeded the
safe and free passage of persons or vehicles along the streets.
(1998 Code, § 106-5)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.006  PERSONS CAUSING OBSTRUCTION BY STOPPING OR STANDING.
   A person shall not stop or stand in the way so as to in any manner obstruct
the use of the sidewalks, streets or any other public place in the city by
loafing, lounging or standing in or upon the sidewalk, street or other public
place.
(1998 Code, § 106-6)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.007  OBSTRUCTION BY BUSINESSES OR BUSINESS ACTIVITIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or occupy any street or
sidewalk with any bootblack stand, booth, display case or other frame structure
for the purpose of displaying any merchandise or carrying on any business or
occupation or to allow any boxes or merchandise to remain on any sidewalk so as
to obstruct the free passage thereof.
(1998 Code, § 106-7)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.008  PERMIT FOR PLACING MATERIALS ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place any materials, boxes or
other objects whatsoever in or upon any street, alley or sidewalk in the city
without first obtaining the written permission of the Building Official.
   (B)   If written permission is obtained, then it shall be unlawful to remove
the material so placed without first obtaining the written permission of the
Building Official to remove the material.
(1998 Code, § 106-8)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.009  DRIVING ACROSS OR OBSTRUCTING DITCHES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, or cause to be driven, any
automobile, horses, cattle, sheep, hogs or other animals across any ditch at
any place, except the regular bridges across the ditch, or in any way to impede
the free flow of water through the ditch.
(1998 Code, § 106-9)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.010  INTERFERENCE WITH OR OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or obstruct any public
improvements authorized by the City Commission, the Mayor or the Director of
Public Works by means of threats, coercion, duress or any other method
whatsoever, either directly or indirectly.
(1998 Code, § 106-11)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.011  GENERAL STANDARDS FOR WORK; CLEANING OF PREMISES AFTER COMPLETION OF
WORK.
   All work done or performed under the provisions of this chapter shall be
done or performed in a good, workmanlike manner. The work shall not be accepted
or approved by the city until the premises thereof have been cleaned and
cleared of all debris, trash and rubbish which may have accumulated during the
work.
(1998 Code, § 106-12)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.012  USE OF UNIMPROVED/UNOPENED RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   An owner of real property within the city may be issued a permit to erect,
construct and build a single-family residence adjacent to and accessible only
by unimproved/unopened city-accepted right-of-way on the following conditions:
   (A)   The parcel of land upon which the residence is to be constructed shall
be a minimum of two acres;
   (B)   The parcel of land has not been subdivided from a larger parcel of
land since 1-18-1989, unless said subdivision occurred by city’s approval of a
subdivision plat, plat amendment or replat;
   (C)   The parcel of land shall not be subdivided into smaller parcels unless
approved by the city through a subdivision platting process;
   (D)   Only one single-family residence shall be constructed on the parcel of
land for the purpose of homestead;
   (E)   A maximum of four single-family residences may be accessed by the same
unimproved/unopened right-of-way. If, however, an application to construct a
fifth single-family residence is sought, the owner of each existing single-
family residence shall participate in the city’s street assessment program for
road improvements;
   (F)   The property owner(s) shall construct and maintain an all-weather
access road capable of providing ingress and egress to emergency vehicles on
the unimproved/unopened right-of-way. The construction shall be in accordance
with the plans and specifications approved by the City Engineer; and
   (G)   The city is not, nor shall it be, responsible for the construction,
installation or maintenance of any road and/or roadside drainage improvements
on the unimproved/unopened right-of-way.
(1998 Code, § 106-13)  (Ord. 98-57, passed 11-25-1998)
SIDEWALKS, DRIVEWAYS, CURBS AND GUTTERS
§ 90.025  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CURB. The construction parallel to and adjoining the edge of the paving or
roadway surface of the street, definitely marking the limits of that portion of
the street to be used by vehicular traffic.
   DRIVEWAY. The portion of the street lying between the curbline of the street
and the property line of the street used for ingress and egress to property
adjoining a street by vehicles.
   GUTTER. The construction adjoining the curb and forming a part of the street
surface used by vehicles and whose primary function is to provide surface
drainage along the street.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street generally reserved for pedestrian use.
Unless otherwise permitted, it shall be laid so that the property side of the
walk shall be parallel to and identical with the property line of the street.
   STREET. All public thoroughfares within the corporate limits of the city,
such as alleys, avenues, highways, boulevards, streets and the like, and shall
include all that portion of the public way from property line to property line
dedicated to the public use, and includes sidewalks, driveways, grass plots,
curbs and that portion of the street used by vehicles.
(1998 Code, § 106-41)
§ 90.026  COMPLIANCE.
   Any person attempting to build any walk or curb other than as prescribed by
this subchapter, unless otherwise permitted by the City Commission, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1998 Code, § 106-42)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.027  INJURING SIDEWALKS.
   Any person who shall willfully or maliciously tear up, injure, deface or
destroy any sidewalk or portion thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1998 Code, § 106-43)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.028  PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR; LINES AND GRADES TO BE SPECIFIED
BY CITY ENGINEER.
   No person shall construct any sidewalk, driveway, curb or gutter or change
or repair any sidewalk, driveway, curb or gutter on the streets of the city
without having first received a permit from the Building Official for the work
authorizing the construction and having received the necessary lines and grades
from the office of the City Engineer. The construction shall meet the approval
of the City Engineer. The fee for the permit shall be set out on the schedule
based on the cost of improvements, posted at the City Hall Annex, 928 5th Ave.
N., Texas City, Texas.
(1998 Code, § 106-44)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.029  RESPONSIBILITY OF CONTRACTOR FOR ADEQUACY OF WORK.
   In the construction and repair of sidewalks, the contractor shall be
responsible for all work constructed by him or her until accepted by the city,
acting through the City Commission. All work shall be guaranteed by the
contractor for a period of one year from the date of acceptance.
(1998 Code, § 106-45)
§ 90.030  SPECIFICATIONS.
   The city hereby adopts and approves those certain standard specifications
for cement or concrete sidewalks, driveways, curbs and gutters as may be on
file in the office of the Building Official.
(1998 Code, § 106-46)
§ 90.031  LOCATION OF TREES OR SHRUBBERY PLANTED ALONG SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   All trees or shrubbery planted along or upon the sidewalks of any
public street in the city shall be set out in a straight line running parallel
to the curb and at a distance of three feet from the outside line of the curb
or sidewalk space.
   (B)   Any person who shall plant or set out trees or shrubbery or any owner
who shall plant or set out any trees or shrubbery upon sidewalk space abutting
his or her property in violation of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(1998 Code, § 106-47)  Penalty, see §
10.99
EXCAVATIONS
§ 90.045  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR STREET EXCAVATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation or opening in any
street, alley or public highway of the city without first having obtained a
permit to do so.
(1998 Code, § 106-71)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.046  APPLICATION FOR STREET EXCAVATION PERMIT.
   The application for a permit to make any excavation or opening in any of the
streets, alleys or public highways of the city shall be made to the Building
Official, who shall grant the permit with the Director of Public Works’ and the
City Engineer’s approval, and shall state clearly the name of the street or
highway in which it is proposed to make an opening, the exact location in the
highway wherein it is proposed to make the opening, the purpose of making the
opening and the name of the person who proposes to make the excavation or
opening.
(1998 Code, § 106-72)
§ 90.047  BOND REQUIRED FOR STREET EXCAVATIONS.
   When permits are requested to disturb, dig up or in any way obstruct any
street or public place in the city, the Building Official may require from the
applicant, before granting a permit, a cash bond, conditioned to secure the
city against all loss, damage or injury of any kind which may result to the
city by reason of the disturbance, digging up or obstruction of the street. The
amount of the bond shall be as determined by the Director of Public Works and
the City Engineer.
(1998 Code, § 106-73)
§ 90.048  ISSUANCE OF STREET EXCAVATION PERMIT; OBLIGATION TO RESTORE SURFACE.
   It shall be the duty of the Building Official, with the Director of Public
Works’ and the City Engineer’s approval, when any person shall make application
for a permit under the provisions of this subchapter, to grant the permit,
specifying therein where the digging is to be done, when it is to be done and
the manner of replacing the dirt and surface, and at the same time to take from
the person a written obligation for replacing the dirt and surface and
restoring the street to as good condition as before the digging was done.
(1998 Code, § 106-74)
§ 90.049  MANNER OF OPENING STREET; PLACEMENT OF MATERIALS REMOVED.
   In opening a street or other public way, all material for paving or
ballasting must be removed with the least possible injury or loss of the
material and, together with the excavated materials from the trenches, must be
placed where it will cause the least possible inconvenience to the public.
(1998 Code, § 106-75)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.050  USE OF SHEETING AND BRACES IN TRENCHES.
   Whenever the sides of trenches dug in the street will not stand
perpendicularly, sheeting and braces must be used to prevent unnecessary
caving.
(1998 Code, § 106-76)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.051  SUPERVISION OF STREET EXCAVATION WORK.
   All the work of excavating or making any character of opening in any of the
streets, alleys or highways of the city shall at all times be under the
supervision of the Building Official. The person doing the work shall do the
work in the manner directed by the Building Official to the end that the
streets and highways of the city shall not be unduly disturbed and traffic
thereon obstructed.
(1998 Code, § 106-77)
§ 90.052  RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPAIR OF STREET.
   (A)   Where excavating or digging is done in the streets for the purpose of
making sewer, gas, water or wire connections, or for any other purpose, at the
instance of and for the benefit of the abutting owner, the abutting property
owner shall be liable and responsible, and the person doing the work shall be
liable and responsible, for the proper and sufficient repair of the street, and
the City Engineer is hereby authorized and required to make the necessary and
proper repairs at the cost and expense of the person doing the work, or having
the work done, or for whose benefit the work is done, or at the cost and
expense of each of the persons or all of the persons, jointly and severally.
   (B)   Where the work is done by any person for his or her own use and
benefit in the execution of his or her business, the person doing the work
shall be liable and responsible for the proper repair of the street, and the
City Engineer is hereby authorized and required to make the repairs at the cost
and expense of the person doing the work or having the work done.
(1998 Code, § 106-78)
§ 90.053  MANNER OF REPAIRING AND FILLING STREET EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   All holes or trenches dug in the streets shall, after the work
contemplated has been completed, be repaired and filled with new material of
the same kind and character as that originally placed in the street, when the
street was last built or repaired.
   (B)   In all cases where any work is done in and upon the streets of the
city, the backfilling must be puddled and rammed, the streets must be left in
at least as good condition as they were before the work was done and the
streets disturbed; and the person doing the work and the person for whom it is
done will be held responsible for the work and for any subsequent settling of
the ground. Whenever notified by the City Engineer that the street has become
out of repair where the excavation was made and on account of the work done,
the person responsible therefor shall instantly cause the street to be
repaired.
(1998 Code, § 106-79)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.054  PROTECTION, GUARDS AND WARNINGS FOR EXCAVATIONS OR HOLES IN PUBLIC
PLACE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to take out a pole or put in a pole or
take out or put in a grating or light area in any sidewalk, street, alley or
public place within the corporate limits of the city without protecting,
guarding or warning the public against any hole in the sidewalk, street, alley
or public place. After the pole, grating or area cover is put in or taken out,
all the excavations or holes shall be guarded with red lights at night or, if
reasonably necessary, with a guard or barrier by day or night to protect the
traveling public along the sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places from
personal injuries.
(1998 Code, § 106-80)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.055  DUTIES UPON COMPLETION OF WORK IN STREET.
   After the excavation or opening shall have been made, the person so making
it shall backfill the excavation with such materials and in such manner as the
City Engineer may require, and leave the street or highway in at least the same
condition as it was before the opening therein was made.
(1998 Code, § 106-81)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.056  ACCEPTANCE OF COMPLETED WORK IN STREET; USE OF BOND OR DEPOSIT TO PAY
FOR COST OF REPAIRS.
   (A)   The conditions of the bond required by §
90.047 of this chapter shall not be considered to have been complied with until
the Engineer shall have accepted the street or highway as being in good
condition.
   (B)   If the person making the opening shall fail to leave the highway in a
good state of repair, satisfactory to the Engineer, then the Engineer shall
call upon the bondsmen to pay for the cost of repairing the highway; provided,
however, that, if it is a cash deposit instead of a bond the engineer may
proceed to have the street or other highway put in good condition, paying for
the work out of the deposit made with him or her; and, if there be any
remainder of the deposit after paying for the work, the remainder shall be
refunded to the person making the deposit.
(1998 Code, § 106-82)
STREET RENTAL CHARGES
§ 90.070  APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to any and all persons engaged
in the business of distributing, selling or delivering natural gas within the
corporate limits of the city.
(1998 Code, § 106-113)
Charter reference:
   Street rental from public utilities, see
Art. XVII, § 12
Cross-reference:
   Oil and Gas Wells, see
Ch. 120
   Pipelines, see
Ch. 121
§ 90.071  ANNUAL REPORT OF GROSS RECEIPTS.
   All persons using or maintaining any poles, wires, gas pipelines, pipes,
conduits and other fixtures in any of the streets, highways, easements, alleys,
parks or other public ways and places within the corporate limits of the city,
for the purpose of distributing, selling or delivering natural gas within the
city, shall, on or before February 1 of each and every year, file with the
Director of Transportation and Planning, or his or her designee, a sworn report
showing the gross receipts from the sale of gas to consumers for residential
purposes within the city, and also showing the gross receipts from the sale of
gas to commercial consumers, as the consumers are so classified by such
persons, within the corporate limits of the city for the next preceding year
ending December 31.
(1998 Code, § 106-114)
§ 90.072  AMOUNT AND PAYMENT OF RENTAL.
   On or prior to February 1 of each and every year, every person occupying or
using the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks or other public places in
the city with poles, pipes, conduits, wires or other fixtures or structures
shall, as a condition to the further occupancy, pay to the city annually for
the privilege a rental equal to 2% of the annual gross receipts received by the
person from the sale of gas to consumers for residential purposes within the
city, and also 2% of the annual gross receipts received from the sale of gas to
commercial consumers, as the consumers are so classified by such person, within
the corporate limits of the city, representing gas sold to such consumers
residing within the city limits, for the preceding year ending December 31,
which sum shall be paid to the city.
(1998 Code, § 106-115)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to make reasonable charge, not exceeding two percent gross
receipts, for use of streets, alleys and the like by public utilities, see Tex.
Tax Code § 182.025(b)
§ 90.073  RECEIPT; PRIVILEGES GRANTED.
   Upon receipt of the rental required by §
90.072 of this chapter by the city, the Director of Transportation and
Planning, or his or her designee, shall deliver to the person paying the rental
a receipt for the rental. As long as the person shall pay the yearly rental, he
or she shall have the right to use and occupy the streets, highways, easements,
alleys, parks and other public ways and places within the corporate limits of
the city, in accordance with his or her franchise, with such poles, gas
pipelines, pipes, conduits, fixtures, structures, wires or other equipment as
shall be necessary or proper for the carrying on of the business of selling,
distributing and delivering gas within the corporate limits of the city.
(1998 Code, § 106-116)
§ 90.074  RENTAL NOT A TAX.
   The rental for the privilege of using the streets, alleys, highways,
easements and public places in the city provided for in this subchapter is not
charged as a tax, but is made for the privilege now enjoyed and to be enjoyed
by persons for using the streets, alleys or other public ways of the city in
the conduct of their respective business.
(1998 Code, § 106-117)
§ 90.075  RENTAL TO BE IN LIEU OF CERTAIN TAXES AND FEES.
   The rental charge provided for in this subchapter shall be in lieu of any
and all occupation taxes, easement and franchise taxes, whether levied as an ad
valorem, special or other character of tax, and in lieu of license and
inspection fees, street taxes and all other taxes, charges, levies, fees and
rentals of every kind and character which the city is empowered to levy and
collect, excepting only the usual general or special ad valorem taxes which the
city is authorized to levy and impose upon real and personal property.
(1998 Code, § 106-118)
§ 90.076  RESERVATION OF RIGHTS BY CITY.
   The city hereby reserves the right to put into effect at any time other
reasonable restrictions and regulations as to the erection and maintenance of
poles, wires, pipes, conduits and other appurtenances in the streets,
easements, alleys and public ways of the city; from time to time to require
such poles, pipes, wires, conduits and other property, equipment and fixtures
as are necessary to be removed; and to make such other reasonable regulations
as may be deemed necessary.
(1998 Code, § 106-119)
§ 90.077  INSPECTION OF FIXTURES; CORRECTION OF UNSAFE CONDITIONS.
   The City Fire Marshal or designee, Building Official, city police officers
and such other persons as shall be designated by the City Commission shall have
the right to examine and inspect, from time to time, on reasonable notice and
other reasonable rules and regulations, all poles, gas pipelines, pipes,
conduits, wires and other fixtures and structures in the streets, alleys and
public places within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of seeing
that all of such fixtures and structures are in a safe and suitable condition.
Whenever any item is found to be unsafe or unsuitable for the purpose for which
it is used, the person using, possessing or maintaining such item shall cause
the item to be put in a safe and suitable condition within a reasonable time.
(1998 Code, § 106-120)
TREES, SHRUBS, OTHER PLANTS AT INTERSECTIONS
§ 90.090  DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   STREET GUTTER FLOW LINE. The street gutter flow line of the curb adjacent to
and bordering upon each restricted area as designated in this subchapter. If
there is no such curb, the height restrictions set forth in this subchapter
shall be based upon the actual level of the paved or used portion of the public
street adjacent to and bordering upon each such restricted area.
(1998 Code, § 106-143)
§ 90.091  AUTHORITY OF CITY TO REMOVE PROHIBITED GROWTH.
   (A)   In addition to any penalty which may be imposed for the violation of
this subchapter, the city shall be entitled to enter upon and remove from the
triangular corner areas described in this subchapter any of the growths
prohibited by this subchapter.
   (B)   The entry and removal shall be without liability to the owners
thereof.
(1998 Code, § 106-144)
§ 90.092  RESTRICTED AREAS.
   (A)   The areas in the city restricted by the provisions of this subchapter
are as follows: all of that portion of land lying within a triangular shaped
area on each street corner within the city described by metes and bounds as
follows: beginning at the precise corner of the intersection point of the curbs
of each of the two streets forming each corner and extending 20 feet along each
such curbline from the curb intersection point, the third side being determined
by the drawing of a straight line from the ends of the 20-foot extensions,
whether the land be privately owned or unpaved or untraveled street right-of-
way property.
   (B)   Where no curbs are in existence at the street intersections, the 20-
foot lines shall coincide with the central flow line of the ditches paralleling
the uncurbed streets as shall be determined by the Building Official.
   (C)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply only to those areas of
the city designated and classified by
Ch. 160 of this code of ordinances requiring construction on lots in zoned
sections to be set back from the property line of each lot.
(1998 Code, § 106-145)
§ 90.093  MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF SHRUBS AND SIMILAR PLANTS.
   No person shall plant, grow or maintain in any restricted area any plant,
hedge, shrub or other growth, except trees, at a height greater than three feet
from the street gutter flow line.
(1998 Code, § 106-146)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.094  MINIMUM CLEARANCE OF TREES.
   Any trees planted, grown and maintained in any restricted area shall not
have branches or foliage extending from the trunk thereof at a height lower
than 15 feet from the street gutter flow line.
(1998 Code, § 106-147)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CONSTRUCTION IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
§ 90.105  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to:
      (1)   Assist in the management of facilities placed in, on or over the
public rights-of-way, in order to minimize the congestion, inconvenience,
visual impact and other adverse effects and the costs to the citizens resulting
from the placement of facilities within the public rights-of-way;
      (2)   Govern the use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way;
      (3)   Assist the city in its efforts to protect the public health, safety
and welfare;
      (4)   Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way
held in public trust by the city;
      (5)   Preserve the physical integrity of the streets and highways;
      (6)   Control the orderly flow of vehicles and pedestrians;
      (7)   Keep track of the different entities using the rights-of-way, to
prevent interference between them;
      (8)   Assist on scheduling common trenching and street cuts; and
      (9)   Protect the safety, security, appearance and condition of the
public rights-of-way.
   (B)   This subchapter may be referred to as the “Construction in the Public
Rights-of-Way Ordinance”.
(1998 Code, § 106-171)  (Ord. 99-51, passed 8-18-1999)
§ 90.106  AUTHORITY; SCOPE.
   This subchapter applies to all persons that place facilities in, on or over
public rights-of-way.
(1998 Code, § 106-172)  (Ord. 99-51, passed 8-18-1999)
§ 90.107  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AFFILIATE. A person who controls, is controlled by or is under common
control with a provider.
   CERTIFICATED TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Any entity that has been granted a
certificate from the State Public Utility Commission under Tex. Utilities Code
Ch. 54 authorizing that entity to provide local exchange telephone service.
   CITY. The City of Texas City, Texas. As used throughout, the term CITY also
includes the designated agent of the city.
   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer of the city or the City Engineer’s
designee.
   DIRECTION OF THE CITY. All ordinances, laws, rules, resolutions and
regulations of the city that are not inconsistent with this subchapter and that
are now in force or may hereafter be passed and adopted.
   FACILITIES. Any and all of the wires, cables, fibers, duct spaces, manholes,
poles, conduits, underground and overhead passageways, and other equipment,
structures, plant and appurtenances, and all associated physical equipment
placed in, on or under the public rights-of-way.
   PERSON. A natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association,
partnership, firm, limited-liability company, joint venture, joint stock
company or association and other such entity.
   PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY. The area on, below or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway or utility easement in which the
municipality has an interest. The term does not include the airwaves above a
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY with regard to wireless telecommunications.
(1998 Code, § 106-173)  (Ord. 99-51, passed 8-18-1999)
§ 90.108  MUNICIPAL AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person seeking to place facilities on, in or over the public
rights-of-way shall first file an application for a building permit with the
city and shall abide by the terms and provisions of this subchapter pertaining
to use of the public rights-of-way.
   (B)   Any person, except a certificated telecommunications provider, prior
to placing, reconstructing or altering facilities in, on or over the public
rights-of-way, must obtain separate municipal authorization from the city.
   (C)   Any person with a current, unexpired consent, franchise, agreement or
other authorization from the city (“grant”) to use the public rights-of-way
that is in effect at the time this subchapter takes effect shall continue to
operate under and comply with that grant until the grant expires or until it is
terminated by mutual agreement of the city and the person, or terminated as
otherwise provided for in law.
(1998 Code, § 106-174)  (Ord. 99-51, passed 8-18-1999)
§ 90.109  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The City Engineer shall administer and enforce compliance with this
subchapter.
   (B)   A person shall report information related to the use of the public
rights-of-way that the City Engineer requires in the form and manner reasonably
prescribed by the City Engineer.
   (C)   The City Engineer shall report to the City Commission upon the
determination that a person has failed to comply with this subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 106-175)  (Ord. 99-51, passed 8-18-1999)
§ 90.110  CONSTRUCTION OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   A person is subject to reasonable police-power regulation of the city
to manage its public rights-of-way in connection with the construction,
expansion, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of facilities in the public
rights-of-way, pursuant to the city’s rights as a custodian of public property,
based upon the city’s historic rights under state and federal laws.
   (B)   Such regulations include, but are not limited to, the following.
      (1)   At the city’s request, a person shall furnish the city accurate and
complete information relating to the construction, reconstruction, removal,
maintenance, operation and repair of facilities performed by the person in the
public rights-of-way.
      (2)   A person may be required to place certain facilities within the
public rights-of-way underground according to applicable city requirements
absent a compelling demonstration by the person that, in any specific instance,
this requirement is not reasonable or feasible, nor is it equally applicable to
other similar users of the public rights-of-way.
      (3)   A person shall perform operations, excavations and other
construction in the public rights-of-way in accordance with all applicable city
requirements, including the obligation to use trenchless technology whenever
commercially economical and practical and consistent with obligations on other
similar users of the public rights-of-way. The city shall waive the requirement
of trenchless technology if it determines that the field conditions warrant the
waiver, based upon information provided to the city by the person. All
excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way shall be
conducted so as to minimize interference with the use of public and private
property. A person shall follow all reasonable construction directions given by
the city in order to minimize any such interference.
      (4)   A person must obtain a permit, as reasonably required by applicable
city codes, prior to any excavation, construction, installation, expansion,
repair, removal, relocation or maintenance of the person’s facilities. Once a
permit is issued, person shall give to the city a minimum of 48-hours’ notice,
which could be at the time of the issuance of the permit, prior to undertaking
any of the above-listed activities on its network in, on or under the public
rights-of-way. The failure of the person to request and obtain a permit from
the city prior to performing any of the above-listed activities in, on or over
any public right-of-way, except in an emergency as provided for in division (B)
(11) below, will subject the person to a stop-work order from the city and
enforcement action pursuant to this subchapter. If the person fails to act upon
any permit within 90 calendar days of issuance, the permit shall become
invalid, and the person will be required to obtain another permit.
      (5)   When a person completes construction, expansion, reconstruction,
removal, excavation or other work, the person shall promptly restore the
rights-of-way in accordance with applicable city requirements. A person shall
replace and properly relay and repair the surface, base, irrigation system and
landscape treatment of any public rights-of-way that may be excavated or
damaged by reason of the erection, construction, maintenance or repair of the
person’s facilities within 30 calendar days after completion of the work, in
accordance with existing standards of the city in effect at the time of the
work.
      (6)   Upon failure of a person to perform any such repair or replacement
work, and five days after written notice has been given by the city to the
person, the city may repair such portion of the public rights-of-way as may
have been disturbed by the person, its contractors or agents. Upon receipt of
an invoice from the city, the person will reimburse the city for the costs so
incurred within 30 calendar days from the date of the city invoice.
      (7)   Should the city reasonably determine, within two years from the
date of the completion of the repair work, that the surface, base, irrigation
system or landscape treatment requires additional restoration work to meet
existing standards of the city, a person shall perform such additional
restoration work to the satisfaction of the city, subject to all city remedies
as provided herein.
      (8)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the city determines that the
failure of a person to properly repair or restore the public rights-of-way
constitutes a safety hazard to the public, the city may undertake emergency
repairs and restoration efforts. A person shall promptly reimburse the city for
all costs incurred by the city within 30 calendar days from the date of the
city invoice.
      (9)   A person shall furnish the city with construction plans and maps
showing the location and proposed routing of new construction or reconstruction
at least 15 days before beginning construction or reconstruction that involves
an alteration to the surface or subsurface of the public rights-of-way. A
person may not begin construction until the location of new facilities and
proposed routing of the new construction or reconstruction and all required
plans and drawings have been approved in writing by the city, which approval
will not be unreasonably withheld, taking due consideration of the surrounding
area and alternative locations for the facilities and routing.
      (10)   If the City Engineer declares an emergency with regard to the
health and safety of the citizens and requests by written notice the removal or
abatement of facilities, a person shall remove or abate the person’s facilities
by the deadline provided in the City Engineer’s request. The person and the
city shall cooperate, to the extent possible, to assure continuity of service.
If the person, after notice, fails or refuses to act, the city may remove or
abate the facilities, at the sole cost and expense of the person, without
paying compensation to the person and without the city incurring liability for
damages.
      (11)   Except in the case of customer service interruptions and imminent
harm to property or person (“emergency conditions”), a person may not excavate
the pavement of a street or public rights-of-way without first complying with
city requirements. The City Engineer or designee shall be notified immediately
regarding work performed under such emergency conditions, and the person shall
comply with the requirements of city standards for the restoration of the
public rights-of-way.
      (12)   Within 60 days of completion of each new permitted section of a
person’s facilities, the person shall supply the city with a complete set of
“as built” drawings for the segment in a format used in the ordinary course of
the person’s business and as reasonably prescribed by the city and as allowed
by law.
      (13)   The city may require reasonable bonding requirements of a person,
as are required of other entities that place facilities in the public rights-
of-way.
(1998 Code, § 106-176)  (Ord. 99-51, passed 8-18-1999)
§ 90.111  CONDITIONS OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   In the exercise of governmental functions, the city has first priority
over all other uses of the public rights-of-way. The city reserves the right to
lay sewer, gas, water and other pipelines or cables and conduits and to do
underground and overhead work and attachments, restructuring or changes in
aerial facilities in, across, along, over or under a public street, alley or
public rights-of-way occupied by a person, and to change the curb, sidewalks or
grade of streets.
   (B)   The city shall assign the location in or over the public rights-of-way
among competing users of the public rights-of-way with due consideration to the
public health and safety considerations of each user type and, to the extent
the city can demonstrate that there is limited space available for additional
users, may limit new users, as allowed under state or federal law.
   (C)   If the city authorizes abutting landowners to occupy space under the
surface of any public street, alley or public rights-of-way, the grant to an
abutting landowner shall be subject to the rights of the previously authorized
user of the public rights-of-way. If the city closes or abandons a public
right-of-way that contains a portion of a person’s facilities, the city shall
close or abandon such public right-of-way subject to the rights of the person.
   (D)   (1)   If the city gives written notice, a person shall, at its own
expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the
position of person’s facilities that are in the public rights-of-way within 120
days, except in circumstances that require additional time as reasonably
determined by the city, based upon information provided by the person. For
projects expected to take longer than 120 days to remove, change or relocate,
the city will confer with person before determining the alterations to be
required and the timing thereof. The city shall give notice whenever the city
has determined that removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably
necessary for the construction, operation, repair, maintenance or installation
of a city or other governmental public improvement in the public rights-of-way.
This section shall not be construed to prevent a person’s recovery of the cost
of relocation or removal from private third parties who initiate the request
for relocation or removal, nor shall it be required if improvements are solely
for beautification purposes, without prior joint deliberation and agreement
with person.
      (2)   If the person fails to relocate facilities in the time allowed by
the city in this section, the person may be subject to liability to the city
for such delay and as set forth in the city codes or ordinance, now or
hereafter enacted.
      (3)   Notwithstanding anything in this division (D), the City Engineer
and a person may agree in writing to different time frames than those provided
above, if circumstances reasonably warrant such a change.
   (E)   During the term of its municipal consent, a person may trim trees in
or over the rights-of-way for the safe and reliable operation, use and
maintenance of its facilities. All tree trimming shall be performed in
accordance with standards promulgated by the city should the person, its
contractor or agent fail to remove such trimmings within 24 hours, the city may
remove the trimmings or have them removed and, upon receipt of a bill from the
city, the person shall promptly reimburse the city for all costs incurred
within 30 working days.
   (F)   Persons shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its aerial facilities
to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures, if the city gives
written notice of no less than 48 hours. The expense of these temporary
rearrangements shall be paid by the party or parties requesting and benefitting
from the temporary rearrangements. A person may require prepayment or prior
posting of a bond from the party requesting temporary move.
(1998 Code, § 106-177)  (Ord. 99-51, passed 8-18-1999)
§ 90.112  INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A person shall obtain and maintain insurance in the amounts reasonably
prescribed by the city with an insurance company licensed to do business in the
state, acceptable to the city, throughout the term of a municipal consent
conveyed under this subchapter. A person shall furnish the city with proof of
insurance at the time of the request for building permits. The city reserves
the right to review the insurance requirements and to reasonably adjust
insurance coverage and limits when the City Engineer determines that changes in
statutory law, court decisions or the claims history of the industry or the
person require adjustment of the coverage. For purposes of this section, the
city will accept certificates of self-insurance issued by the state, or letters
written by the person in those instances where the state does not issue such
letters, which provide the same coverage as required herein. However, for the
city to accept such letters, the person must demonstrate by written information
that it has adequate financial resources to be a self-insured entity as
reasonably determined by the city, based on financial information requested by
and furnished to the city. The city’s current insurance requirements are
described in Exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein.
   (B)   A person shall furnish, at no cost to the city, copies of certificates
of insurance evidencing the coverage required by this section to the city. The
city may request the deletion, revision or modification of particular policy
terms, conditions, limitations or exclusions, unless the policy provisions are
established by a law or regulation binding the city, the person or the
underwriter. If the city requests a deletion, revision or modification, a
person shall exercise reasonable efforts to pay for and to accomplish the
change.
   (C)   An insurance certificate shall contain the following required
provisions:
      (1)   Name the city and its officers, employees, board members and
elected representatives as additional insureds for all applicable coverage;
      (2)   Provide for 30-days’ notice to the city for cancellation, non-
renewal or material change; and
      (3)   Provide that notice of claims shall be provided to the City
Engineer by certified mail.
   (D)   (1)   The person shall file and maintain proof of insurance with the
City Engineer.
      (2)   An insurance certificate obtained in compliance with this section
is subject to city approval.
      (3)   The city may require the certificate to be changed to reflect
changing liability limits.
      (4)   A person shall immediately advise the City Attorney of actual or
potential litigation which may affect an existing carrier’s obligation to
defend and indemnify.
   (E)   An insurer has no right of recovery against the city. The required
insurance policies shall protect the person and the city. The insurance shall
be primary coverage for losses covered by the policies.
   (F)   The policy clause “other insurance” shall not apply to the city if the
city is an insured under the policy.
   (G)   The person shall pay premiums and assessments. A company which issues
an insurance policy has no recourse against the city for payment of a premium
or assessment insurance policies obtained by a person must provide that the
issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the
city in connection with damage covered by the policy.
(1998 Code, § 106-178)  (Ord. 99-51, passed 8-18-1999)
§ 90.113  INDEMNITY.
   (A)   Each person placing facilities in the public rights-of-way shall agree
to promptly defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from and against all
damages, costs, losses or expenses:
      (1)   For the repair, replacement or restoration of city’s property,
equipment, materials, structures and facilities which are damaged, destroyed or
found to be defective as a result of the person’s acts or omissions; and
      (2)   From and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of
action and judgments for:
         (a)   Damage to or loss of the property of any person (including, but
not limited to, the person, its agents, officers, employees and subcontractors,
city’s agents, officers and employees and third parties); and/or
         (b)   Death, bodily injury, illness, disease, loss of services or loss
of income or wages to any person (including, but not limited to, the agents,
officers and employees of the person, person’s subcontractors, and city and
third parties), arising out of, incident to, concerning or resulting from the
negligent or willful act or omissions of the person, its agents, employees and/
or subcontractors in the performance of activities pursuant to this subchapter.
   (B)   This indemnity provision shall not apply to any liability resulting
from the negligence of the city, its officers, employees, agents, contractors
or subcontractors.
   (C)   The provisions of this indemnity are solely for the benefit of the
city and are not intended to create or grant any rights, contractual or
otherwise, to any other person or entity.
(1998 Code, § 106-179)  (Ord. 99-51, passed 8-18-1999)
§ 90.114  GOVERNING LAW.
   This subchapter shall be construed in accordance with the city code(s) in
effect on the date of passage of this subchapter, to the extent that such code
(s) are not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and laws of
the United States or the state, subject to the city’s ongoing authority to
adopt reasonable regulations to manage its public rights-of-way, pursuant to §§
90.110 and
90.111 of this chapter or as otherwise provided by law.
(1998 Code, § 106-180)  (Ord. 99-51, passed 8-18-1999)
§ 90.115  TERMINATION.
   (A)   The city shall reserve the right to terminate any municipal consent
and any rights or privileges conveyed under this subchapter in the event of a
material breach of the terms and conditions of the municipal consent or of this
subchapter, subject to a 30-day written notice and the opportunity to cure the
breach during that 30-day period.
   (B)   Material breaches of a municipal consent specifically include, but are
not limited to, continuing violations of §§
90.110,
90.111 and
90.112 of this chapter, and the furnishing of service of any kind that requires
municipal authorization but that is not authorized by §
90.108 of this chapter.
   (C)   A material breach shall not be deemed to have occurred if the
violation occurs without the fault of a provider or occurs as a result of
circumstances beyond its control providers shall not be excused from
performance of any of their obligations under this chapter by economic
hardship, nor misfeasance or malfeasance of their chief executive officer or
his designees, officers or employees.
   (D)   A termination shall be declared only by a written decision by motion,
resolution or ordinance of the City Commission after an appropriate public
proceeding before the City Commission, which shall accord the provider due
process and full opportunity to be heard and to respond to any notice of
grounds to terminate. All notice requirements shall be met by giving the
provider at least 15 days’ prior written notice of any public hearing
concerning the proposed termination of its consent. Such notice shall state the
grounds for termination alleged by city.
(1998 Code, § 106-181)  (Ord. 99-51, passed 8-18-1999)
§ 90.116  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   The city may institute all appropriate legal action to prohibit any person
from knowingly using the public rights-of-way, unless the person has complied
with the terms of this subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 106-182)  (Ord. 99-51, passed 8-18-1999)
CHAPTER 91:  WATERWAYS AND WATERCRAFT
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Approval of plans for construction of levees or modifications to
waterway or drainage ditch
Watercraft
   
91.15   Definitions
   
91.16   Application
   
91.17   Identification of vessels requiring numbering
   
91.18   Required equipment
   
91.19   Boating regulations
   
91.20   Swimming and diving
   
91.21   Exceptions for special events
   
91.22   Enforcement
   
91.23   Violation of sewage disposal regulations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01  APPROVAL OF PLANS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF LEVEES OR MODIFICATIONS TO
WATERWAY OR DRAINAGE DITCH.
   No person may construct, attempt to construct, cause to be constructed,
maintain or cause to be maintained any levee or modification to any stream
channel or drainage ditch within the city without first obtaining approval of
the plans therefor by the City Commission; provided that, all such plans shall
be in substantial compliance with rules and standards adopted by the State
Water Development Board.
(1998 Code, § 130-1)  Penalty, see §
10.99
WATERCRAFT
§ 91.15  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOAT. Including, but not limited to, the term MOTORBOAT. A vessel not more
than 65 feet in length, measured from end to end over the deck, excluding sheer
and manufactured or used primarily for non-commercial use.
   BOAT LIVERY. A business establishment engaged in renting or hiring out boats
for profit.
   CONGESTED BOATING AREA. In any area of water such as channels, marinas,
basins, coves, and also, shoreline having piers, docks and platforms. CONGESTED
BOATING AREAS are delineated as follows:
      (1)   Any cove, channel or basin whose access is restricted to a width of
600 feet or less including concave shorelines;
      (2)   Any area beyond the out end of piers, T-heads, breakwaters and
platforms a distance of 100 feet and within 100 feet of the sides of such
structure;
      (3)   Any area between the ends of the structures in division (2) above
and the shoreline when such structures are within 600 feet of each other; and
      (4)   Any area within 300 feet of the water’s edge.
   DEALER. A person customarily engaged in the business of buying, selling,
brokering or exchanging boats or outboard motors at an established or permanent
place of business in the city and that at each place of business there is a
sign conspicuously displayed showing the name of the dealership so that it may
be located by the public and with sufficient space to maintain an office,
service area and display or products.
   DIVE DOWN FLAG. A square or rectangular red flag that has a diagonal white
stripe and is at least 24 inches by 24 inches in size.
   HEADWAY SPEED. Slow, idle speed or speed only fast enough to maintain
steerage on course.
   MANUFACTURER. A person engaged in the business of manufacturing new and
unused boats and outboard motors for the purpose of sale and trade.
   NEW. Every boat or outboard motor after its manufacture and before its sale
or other transfer to a person not a manufacturer or dealer.
   OPERATE. To navigate, pilot or otherwise use a boat or a vessel.
   OUTBOARD MOTOR. Any self-contained, internal combustion propulsion system,
excluding fuel supply, which is used to propel a vessel and which is detachable
as a unit from the vessel.
   OWNER. The person who rightfully claims lawful possession of a vessel by
virtue of the legal title or the U.S. Coast Guard documentation or of an
equitable interest.
   PERSONAL WATERCRAFT. A boat which is designed to be up to ten feet in length
and which is designed to be operated by a person or person sitting, standing or
kneeling on the vessel rather that in the conventional manner of sitting or
standing inside the vessel.
   PUBLIC BULKHEAD. Any bulkhead or component of a bulkhead owned and/or
maintained by the city for the purpose of retaining land and does not include
docks or other improvements intended for other purposes or uses.
   REASONABLE TIME. Fifteen calendar days.
   SLOW, NO WAKE. Forward speed of less than five mph or forward speed without
creating a well or wake.
   UNDOCUMENTED MOTORBOAT. A vessel that is not required to have, and does not
have, a valid marine document issue by either the U.S. Bureau of Customs or the
U.S. Coast Guard, or their agencies.
   VESSEL. Any watercraft, other than a seaplane on water, used or capable of
being used for transportation on water.
   WATER OF THE CITY. Any public water within the territorial limits of the
city.
(1998 Code, § 130-21)  (Ord. 03-16, passed 6-4-2003)
§ 91.16  APPLICATION.
   The provision of the subchapter applies to all public water in the city and
to all watercraft navigated or moving on the public water. Privately-owned
water is not subject to the provisions of this subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 130-22)  (Ord. 03-16, passed 6-4-2003)
§ 91.17  IDENTIFICATION OF VESSELS REQUIRING NUMBERING.
   (A)   Required numbering. Each undocumented vessel on the water of the state
shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of the State Parks and
Wildlife Department, unless specifically exempted.
   (B)   State certificate of number. When a motorboat or vessel is in
operation the certificate of number (registration) or facsimile thereof must
always be aboard and available to a law enforcement officer. When a certificate
is renewed, the same number shall be reissued, if application is made to the
State Parks and Wildlife Department within the 90-day period preceding the
expiration date. All motor boats and vessels, regardless of length or
horsepower are required by law to be registered.
(1998 Code, § 130-23)  (Ord. 03-16, passed 6-4-2003)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.18  REQUIRED EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Operation of vessels without required equipment or identification
prohibited. No person shall operate or give permission for the operation of a
vessel that is not provided with the equipment required by this subchapter or
any documentation required by this subchapter or any documentation required by
the U.S. Coast Guard.
   (B)   Classes of motorboats. Motorboats subject to the provision of this
subchapter are divided into four classes according to the length as follows:
 
Class A Less than 16 feet in length
Class 1 16 feet or over and less than 26 feet in length
Class 2 26 feet or over and less than 40 feet in length
Class 3 40 feet in length or over
 
   (C)   Lights. A vessel or motorboat when not at dock must have and exhibit
at least one bright light, lantern or flashlights from sunset to sunrise in all
weather. A vessel or motorboat when underway between sunset and sunrise in all
weather must have and exhibit the lights prescribed by the Commandant of the
Coast Guard for boats of its class. No other lights that may be mistaken for
those prescribed shall be exhibited.
   (D)   Sound-producing devices. A vessel or motorboat must have an efficient
whistle or other sound-producing device if one is required by the commandant of
the Coast Guard.
   (E)   Life preserving devices.
      (1)   A vessel or motorboat must have at least one life preserver, life
belt, ring buoy or other device of the sort prescribed by the regulations of
the Commandant of the Coast Guard for each person on board, so placed as to be
readily accessible.
      (2)   A vessel or motorboat carrying passengers for hire must have a
readily accessible life preserver of the sort prescribed by the regulations of
the Commandant of the Coast Guard for each person on board.
      (3)   The operator of a Class A or Class 1 vessel or motorboat, while
underway, shall require every passenger under 13 wear of age to wear a life
preserver of the sort prescribed by the regulations of the Commandant of the
Coast Guard. A life belt or ring buoy does not satisfy this requirement. In
addition, a Type IV personal floatation device must be aboard Class 1
motorboats immediately available for use as a throwable device.
   (F)   Fire extinguishers.
      (1)   A vessel or motorboat must have the number, size and type of fire
extinguishers prescribed by the regulations of the Commandant of the Coast
Guard.
      (2)   The fire extinguishers must be capable of promptly and effectively
extinguishing burning gasoline or any burning fossil fuel, whether gas or
liquefied. They must be kept in condition for immediate and effective use at
all times and must be placed so as to be readily accessible.
   (G)   Flame arrestors; backfire traps. A motorboat must have the carburetor
or carburetors of every engine using gasoline as fuel, except outboard motors,
equipped with an efficient flame arrestor, back fire trap or other similar
device prescribed by the regulations of the Commandant of the Coast Guard.
Certain engines that are labeled “model DU Engine accepted for use without an
external back fire flame arrestor” are exempted.
   (H)   Ventilators. Each motorboat and vessel, except an open boat, using as
fuel any liquid of a volatile nature must have the equipment prescribed by the
regulations of the Commandment of the Coast Guard designed to ventilate
properly and efficiently the bilges of the engine and fuel tank compartments so
as to remove any explosive or inflammable gasses.
   (I)   Exhaust water manifold; muffler. A motorboat operation on the water in
the city must have and shall be required to use an exhaust water manifold or a
factory-type muffler installed on the engine.
   (J)   Rearview mirrors.
      (1)   A vessel used to tow a person or person on water-skis or an
aquaplane or similar device on the water in the city must have a rearview
mirror of a size no less than four inches from bottom to top and across from
one side to the other. The mirror must be mounted firmly so as to give the boat
operator a full and complete view beyond the rear of the boat at all times.
      (2)   Division (J)(1) above does not apply to vessels used in water-ski
tournament, competitions or exhibitions, or to a vessel that, in addition to
its operator, has on board a person 13 years of age or older observing the
progress of the person being towed.
   (K)   Canoes, punts, rowboats, sailboats and rubber rafts; equipment
exemptions. All canoes, punts, rowboats, sailboats and rubber rafts when
paddled, poled, oared or windblown are exempt from all required safety
equipment, except the following:
      (1)   One Coast Guard-approved lifesaving device for each person aboard;
and all other Coast Guard-approved and required gear or equipment; and
      (2)   The lights prescribed for Class A vessels by the Commandant of the
Coast Guard.
(1998 Code, § 130-24)  (Ord. 03-16, passed 6-4-2003)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.19  BOATING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Rules of the road. The U.S. Coast Guard inland rules apply to all
public water of the city, to the extent they are applicable.
   (B)   Reckless or negligent operation. No person shall operate any motorboat
or vessel or manipulate any water-skis, aquaplane or similar device in a
willfully or wantonly reckless or negligent/manner that endangers the life,
limb or property of any person.
   (C)   Excessive speed.
      (1)   No person shall operate any boat at a rate of speed greater than is
reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the conditions and hazards,
actual and potential, then existing, including weather and density of traffic,
or greater than will permit the operator, in the exercise of reasonable care,
to bring the boat to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead.
      (2)   No person shall operate a boat within the waters of the city in
excess of headway speed when within a congested boating area.
      (3)   No person shall operate a vessel within 50 feet of any other
vessel, person, stationary platform, bulkhead or other object, or shore, except
at headway speed. Markers of aids to safe operation are excluded.
   (D)   Hazardous wake or wash. No person shall operate a vessel or motorboat
so as to create a hazardous wake or wash.
   (E)   Circular course around person fishing or swimming. No person shall
operate a vessel or motorboat in a circular course around any other vessel or
boat in which any occupant is engaged in fishing or around any person swimming.
   (F)   Interface with markers or ramps.
      (1)   No person shall moor or attach a boat to a buoy, beacon, light
marker, take, flag or other aid to safe operation placed upon the public water
of the city. No person shall move, remove, displace, tamper with, damage or
destroy the markers or aid to a safe operation. Nothing in this division (F)(1)
shall prohibit or regulate the use of floating commercial moorings.
      (2)   No person shall moor or attach a vessel to a public boat launching
ramp, except in connection with launching or retrieving of a boat from the
water.
      (3)   Save and except in an emergency, no person shall moor or attach a
vessel or motorboat or seaplane to a municipally-owned bulkhead without the
express permission of the city in the form of a valid permit or license issued
by the Public Works Department. This division (F)(3) does not apply to
emergency situations affecting vessels or motorboats or seaplanes nor does it
apply to patrol or rescue craft engaged in such patrol or rescue craft engaged
in such patrol or rescue activities.
      (4)   Save or except in an emergency, no person operating a vessel,
motorboat or seaplane shall board passengers to a municipally-owned bulkhead
nor shall anyone discharge passengers to a municipally-owned bulkhead. This
division (F)(4) does not apply to emergency situations affecting vessels or
motorboats or seaplanes, nor does it apply to patrol or rescue craft engaged in
such patrol or rescue activities.
   (G)   Obstructing passage.
      (1)   No person shall anchor a boat in the traveled portion of a river or
channel so as to prevent, impede or interfere with the safe passage of any
other boat through the same area.
      (2)   No person shall anchor a vessel near a public boat ramp so as to
prevent, impede or interfere with the use of the boat ramp.
   (H)   Operating boats in restricted area. No person shall operate a boat
within a water area that has been clearly marked, by buoys or some other
distinguishing device, as a bathing, fishing, swimming or otherwise restricted
area by the city. This division (H) does not apply to a patrol or rescue craft
or in any case of an emergency.
   (I)   Operating vessels in scuba diving or snorkeling area.
      (1)   No person shall operate a vessel within 50 feet of a buoy or of
another vessel displaying a “diver down” flag that marks and area in which a
person is scuba diving or snorkeling.
      (2)   No person shall operate a vessel at a speed greater than the
minimum speed necessary to maintain steerage way and headway while the vessel
is within one hundred 150 feet of a buoy or a vessel displaying a “diver down”
flag that marks an area in which a person is scuba diving or snorkeling.
      (3)   To be entitled to the protections of this division (I), a scuba
diver or snorkerler must prominently display a “diver down” flag from a buoy or
vessel.
      (4)   This division (I) does not apply to a person who is operating a
patrol or rescue craft or in an emergency.
      (5)   Division (I)(1) above does not apply:
         (a)   To a person who is already operating a vessel in an area when
another person displays a “diver down” flag within 150 feet of that vessel;
         (b)   To a person who is operating a vessel in a waterway that is less
than 300 feet wide; or
         (c)   To a person who has permission to enter the area from the person
who placed the buoy or the person who is operating the vessel displaying the
“diver down” flag.
   (J)   Water-skis, aquaplanes and the like; time and manner of operation.
      (1)   No person shall operate a vessel on any water of the city towing a
person or person on water-skis, surfboards or similar devices and no person
shall engage in water-skiing, surfboarding or similar activity at any time
between the hours from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before
sunrise. This division (J)(1) does not apply to motorboats or vessels used in
water-ski tournaments, competitions or exhibitions or trials if adequate
lighting is provided.
      (2)   All vessels or motorboats having in tow or otherwise assisting in
towing a person on water-skis, aquaplanes or similar contrivances shall be
operated in a careful and prudent manner and at a reasonable distance from
person and property so as not to endanger the life or property of any person.
      (3)   A person being towed on water-skis, aquaplanes or similar devices
by a vessel is considered an occupant of the vessel.
   (K)   Operation of personal watercraft.
      (1)   No person shall operate a personal watercraft in the following
manner or under the following circumstances:
         (a)   Unless each person riding on or towed behind the vessel is
wearing a U.S. Coast Guard-approved Type I, II, III or V person floatation
device;
         (b)   If the vessel is equipped by the manufacturer with a lanyard
type engine cutoff switch, unless such lanyard is attached to the person,
clothing or personal floatation device of the operator as appropriate for the
vessel involved;
         (c)   During the period between sunset and sunrise;
         (d)   Within 50 feet of any vessel, person, stationary platform or
other object, or shore, except another personal watercraft or except at headway
speed;
         (e)   If the operator is under 13 years of age, unless the operator:
            1.   Is accompanied by a person at least 17 years of age or older;
or
            2.   The operator has successfully completed a boating safety
course prescribed and approved by the State Parks and Wildlife Department or
the U.S. Coast Guard.
         (f)   If the personal watercraft is a motorboat, within any area
prohibited for operation for a motorboat by state law or local rule or
regulation;
         (g)   While towing water-skis, an aquaplane, a surfboard, a tube or
any other similar device, unless the towing vessel is designed to carry on
board a minimum of tow person;
         (h)   By jumping the wake of another vessel recklessly or
unnecessarily close to that vessel; and/or
         (i)   In a manner that requires the operator to swerve at the last
possible moment to avoid collision.
      (2)   The provisions of this section do not apply to professional
exhibitions or an artificially sanctioned race, tournament or exhibition.
      (3)   Division (K)(1)(d) above does not prohibit the operation of
personal watercraft on bodies of water less than 100 feet in width.
   (L)   Operations of motorboats. No person shall operate a motorboat of over
15 horsepower on the public waters of the city unless the person is 13 years of
age, or:
      (1)   Is accompanied by a person 17 years of age or older; or
      (2)   Has successfully passed a boating safety course prescribed and
approved by the State Parks and Wildlife Department.
(1998 Code, § 130-25)  (Ord. 03-16, passed 6-4-2003)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.20  SWIMMING AND DIVING.
   (A)   Swimming prohibited near certain vessels. No swimmer or diver shall
come within 200 yards of a sightseeing or excursion motorboat, except for
maintenance purposes or unless within an enclosed area.
   (B)   Swimming prohibited from public bulkheads. No person shall dive or
otherwise enter the water from a public bulkhead.
(1998 Code, § 130-26)  (Ord. 03-16, passed 6-4-2003)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.21  EXCEPTIONS FOR SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   Specific provisions of this subchapter may be waived by action of the
City Commission for professional exhibitions, officially sanctioned races or
tournaments. Applications for such special events shall be submitted in writing
for placement on a Commission agenda no less than 30 calendar days prior to the
event. The applications shall state the hours and dates of the event, described
the purpose, list the name, address and phone number of the person or
organization responsible for the event, list specific provision of the
ordinance requiring waiver and, where applicable, list the substitute action
proposed to minimize the adverse effects of the waiver.
   (B)   Procedures shall also be in conformance with
Ch. 160 of this code of ordinances.
(1998 Code, § 130-27)  (Ord. 03-16, passed 6-4-2003)
§ 91.22  ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Enforcement officers.
      (1)   All city peace officers are enforcement officers for the purposes
of this subchapter.
      (2)   The enforcement officers may enforce the provisions of this
subchapter by arresting and taking into custody any person who commits any act
or offense prohibited by this subchapter or who violates any provision of this
subchapter.
   (B)   Water safety vessels; lights. Only official water safety or emergency
vessels may use rotating or flashing blue beacon lights.
   (C)   Required response to police water safety vessel. The operator of a
vessel underway, on sighting a rotating or flashing blue beacon light, shall
reduce power immediately and bring the vessel to a no-wake speed and subsequent
stop until the intention of the water safety vessel is understood.
   (D)   Inspection of vessels.
      (1)   In order to enforce the provisions of this subchapter, an
enforcement officer may stop and board any vessel subject to this subchapter
and may inspect the boat to determine compliance with the applicable
provisions.
      (2)   An officer boarding a vessel shall first identify himself or
herself by presenting proper credentials.
      (3)   No person operating a boat on the water of this city shall refuse
to obey the directions of an enforcement officer when the officer is acting
under the provisions of this subchapter.
      (4)   The safety of the vessel shall always be the paramount
consideration of an arresting officer.
      (5)   If an enforcement officer determines that a vessel and its
associated equipment is being used in violation of this subchapter so as to
create especially hazardous condition, he or she shall direct the operator to
proceed to a nearby destination the officer designates, and the vessel shall
not be used until the condition creating the condition is corrected.
   (E)   Violation; notice to appear.
      (1)   An enforcement officer who arrests a person for a violation of this
subchapter shall deliver to the alleged violator a written notice to appear
within ten calendar days after the date of violation before the court having
jurisdiction of the offense.
      (2)   Persons arrested shall sign the notice to appear, promising to make
their appearance in accordance with the requirements set forth in the notice.
After signing the notice, such person may be released. Failure to appear before
the court having jurisdiction constitutes a violation of this subchapter. A
warrant for the arrest of the person failing to appear may be issued.
(1998 Code, § 130-28)  (Ord. 03-16, passed 6-4-2003)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.23  VIOLATION OF SEWAGE DISPOSAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A person who violates or fails to comply with the State Department of
Water Resources and federal laws concerning the disposal of sewage, trash or
oil, from boats in city water commits a prohibited offense. A separate offense
is committed each day a violation continues.
   (B)   A person who violates or fails to comply with any regulations of the
U.S. Coast Guard pertaining to the necessity to retrofit older vessels or
motorboats with holding tanks for sewage, commits a prohibited offense. A
separate offense occurs each day a violation continues.
(1998 Code, § 130-29)  (Ord. 03-16, passed 6-4-2003)
CHAPTER 92:  RECREATION AND TOURISM
Section
   
92.01   Speed limit in parks
   
92.02   Park hours
   
92.03   Park rules and regulations
   
92.04   Firearms prohibited in parks
   
92.05   Vandalism in parks
   
92.06   Skateboarding and skating in city parks and facilities
   
92.07   Camping in city parks and recreation areas
 
   
92.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   General authority of city relative to parks and recreation, see Tex. Local
Gov’t Code §§ 251.001, 331.001 et seq.
§ 92.01  SPEED LIMIT IN PARKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle in excess of
15 mph upon any street located within any public park located in the city.
(1998 Code, § 82-1)  Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.02  PARK HOURS.
   (A)   Park hours will be posted at each park in the city stating the hours
that each park is open to the public. In the event no signs are posted at a
particular park, that park will be closed from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. each
day. The only exception to the hours posted or stated herein is for activities
that have been approved by the City Recreation and Tourism Director or his or
her agent.
   (B)   Any person entering a city park between prohibited hours will be in
violation of this section, unless extended hours have been previously approved
by the City Recreation and Tourism Director.
(1998 Code, § 82-2)  (Ord. 10-15, passed 7-21-2010)  Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03  PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Recreation and Tourism Director shall have authority to prescribe
written rules and regulations for the administration of the Department and for
the orderly use of the parks and recreational facilities; provided that, such
regulations do not conflict with valid laws or ordinances. A copy of such rules
and regulations shall be maintained for public inspection in the offices of the
Recreation and Tourism Director. The Recreation and Tourism Director is
authorized to include provisions that govern the use of parks and recreational
facilities by the public and may prescribe such rules and regulations that
promote the healthful and generalized use of these facilities, including the
Texas City Dike, which will have its own rules and regulations including hours,
fees and use.
(1998 Code, § 82-3)  (Ord. 94-03, passed 3-2-1994; Ord. 11-21, passed 7-6-2011)
§ 92.04  FIREARMS PROHIBITED IN PARKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a certified peace officer,
to carry a firearm in any city park, regardless of whether or not the person is
duly licensed by the state to carry a concealed handgun.
(1998 Code, § 82-4)  (Ord. 95-21, passed 12-6-1995)  Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05  VANDALISM IN PARKS.
   Any vandalism or destruction on and of city loaned, leased or owned property
shall be a Class C misdemeanor offense, and violation shall be subject to a
fine.
(1998 Code, § 82-5)  (Ord. 94-14, passed 8-31-1994)  Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.06  SKATEBOARDING AND SKATING IN CITY PARKS AND FACILITIES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly use a
skateboard, roller skates or in-line skates, in or upon any prohibited area of
a city park, building or facility, as determined by the Director of Recreation
and Tourism and designated by proper signage.
(1998 Code, § 82-6)  (Ord. 11-21, passed 7-6-2011)  Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.07  CAMPING IN CITY PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp, within the confines of
any public park, public recreation area or city facility located in the city,
without express permission by the Recreation and Tourism Director and it shall
be in conjunction with approved events.
   (B)   Camping shall be defined to include sleeping or living overnight in a
temporary, portable or mobile shelter or vehicle, including tent, but not
excluding sleeping in the open air without a shelter.
(1998 Code, § 82-7)  (Ord. 07-46, passed 12-5-2007; Ord. 11-21, passed 7-6-
2011)  Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Violation of §
92.02 of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in §
10.99.
(1998 Code, § 82-2)
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of §
92.04 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99.
(1998 Code, § 82-4)
   (D)   Such fine for violation of §
92.05 of this chapter shall not exceed $500 per occurrence unless the vandalism
involves fire or a health and safety issue, in which case the fine shall not
exceed $2,000 per occurrence. Such criminal charge shall not bar further civil
proceedings by the city in applicable cases.
(1998 Code, § 82-5)
(Ord. 94-14, passed 8-31-1994; Ord. 95-21, passed 12-6-1995; Ord. 10-15, passed
7-21-2010)
CHAPTER 93:  HUMAN RELATIONS; DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   Policy for use of public broadcasting systems
Discriminatory Housing Practices
   
93.15   Definitions
   
93.16   Discrimination prohibited in sale or rental
   
93.17   Discriminatory publication
   
93.18   Discrimination as to inspection availability
   
93.19   Discriminatory statements as to entry into neighborhood
   
93.20   Discrimination as to disability
   
93.21   Discrimination in residential real estate related transaction
   
93.22   Discrimination in brokerage services
   
93.23   Exemptions
   
93.24   Fair Housing Administrator
   
93.25   Filing of complaints
   
93.26   Investigation of complaints; informal conciliation; prosecution
   
93.27   Intimidation or interference
   
93.28   Cooperation with Secretary of Housing and Urban Development
   
93.29   Education and public information programs
   
93.30   Remedies cumulative
 
   
93.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01  POLICY FOR USE OF PUBLIC BROADCASTING SYSTEMS.
   (A)   The city operates and provides direct feeds to equipment broadcasting
on the electronic media in the county in and around the city. The media used
are Radio 530AM (WPIW517) and Channel 64 on TCI (Time Warner) Cable.
   (B)   The primary purpose of the radio and television transmissions is to
provide public emergency broadcasts in a timely and concise manner.
Technological incidents and natural disasters are two of the primary concerns
for use of the emergency broadcasting systems.
   (C)   Secondary uses of the systems are limited to non-commercial, non-
political and non-religious in the context of public information broadcasts.
These broadcasts, therefore, are limited to educational (historical and public
interest), public informational (how-to’s and safety informational), public
reminders and coming events (scheduled public meetings, non-profit
organizational and charitable functions). Televised events are for use to
disseminate a broad spectrum of informational and historical events for the
review of citizens who are unable to view or attend public functions, which
include dedication ceremonies, sporting events and public meetings and
hearings. These events are considered historical and educational in content.
(1998 Code, § 66-1)  (Ord. 99-33, passed 6-2-1999)
DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICES
§ 93.15  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Includes any person who:
      (1)   Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice;
or
      (2)   Believes that the person will be injured by a discriminatory
housing practice that is about to occur.
   CONCILIATION. The informal negotiations among an aggrieved person, the
respondent and the Administrator to resolve issues raised by a complaint or by
the investigation of the complaint.
   CONCILIATION AGREEMENT. A written agreement resolving the issues in
conciliation.
   DISABILITY. A mental or physical impairment that substantially limits at
least one major life activity, a record of the impairment or being regarded as
having the impairment. The term does not include current illegal use or
addiction to any drug or illegal or federally controlled substance and does not
apply to an individual because of an individual’s sexual orientation or because
that individual is a transvestite.
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
93.16 through
93.22 of this chapter.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as,
or designed and intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families,
or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or
location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
   FAMILIAL STATUS. A person’s status where a discriminatory act committed
because the person who is the subject of discrimination is:
      (1)   Pregnant;
      (2)   Domiciled with an individual younger than 18 years of age in regard
to whom the person:
         (a)   Is the parent or legal custodian; or
         (b)   Has the written permission of the parent or legal custodian for
domicile with that person
      (3)   In the process of obtaining legal custody of an individual younger
than 18 years of age.
   FAMILY. Includes a single individual.
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees,
fiduciaries and any other organization or entity of whatever character.
   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a
consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
(1998 Code, § 66-31)
§ 93.16  DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED IN SALE OR RENTAL.
   (A)   A person may not refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona
fide offer, refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or in any other
manner make unavailable or deny a dwelling to another because of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status or national origin.
   (B)   A person may not discriminate against another in the terms, conditions
or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in providing services or
facilities in connection with a sale or rental of a dwelling because of race,
color, religion, sex, familial status or national origin.
   (C)   This section does not prohibit discrimination against a person because
the person has been convicted under federal law or the law of any state of the
illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance.
(1998 Code, § 66-32)  Penalty, see §
93.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Property Code § 301.021
§ 93.17  DISCRIMINATORY PUBLICATION.
   A person may not make, print or publish or effect the making, printing or
publishing of a notice, statement or advertisement that is about the sale or
rental of a dwelling and that indicates any preference, limitation or
discrimination or the intention to make a preference, limitation or
discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial
status or national origin.
(1998 Code, § 66-33)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Property Code § 301.022
§ 93.18  DISCRIMINATION AS TO INSPECTION AVAILABILITY.
   A person may not represent to another because of race, color, religion, sex,
disability, familial status or national origin that a dwelling is not available
for inspection for sale or rental when the dwelling is available for
inspection.
(1998 Code, § 66-34)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Property Code § 301.023
§ 93.19  DISCRIMINATORY STATEMENTS AS TO ENTRY INTO NEIGHBORHOOD.
   A person may not, for profit, induce or attempt to induce another to sell or
rent a dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry
into a neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, religion, sex,
disability, familial status or national origin.
(1998 Code, § 66-35)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Property Code § 301.024
§ 93.20  DISCRIMINATION AS TO DISABILITY.
   (A)   A person may not discriminate in the sale or rental of, or make
unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a disability
of:
      (1)   The buyer or renter;
      (2)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after
it is sold, rented or made available; or
      (3)   Any person associated with the buyer or renter.
   (B)   A person may not discriminate against another in the terms, conditions
or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services
or facilities in connection with the dwelling because of a disability of:
      (1)   The other person;
      (2)   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after
it is sold, rented or made available; or
      (3)   Any person associated with the other person.
   (C)   In this section, a DISCRIMINATION includes:
      (1)   A refusal to permit, at the expense of the person having a
disability, a reasonable modification of existing premises occupied or to be
occupied by the person if the modification may be necessary to afford the
person full enjoyment of the premises;
      (2)   A refusal to make a reasonable accommodation in rules, policies,
practices or services if the accommodation may be necessary to afford the
person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or
      (3)   The failure to design and construct a covered multi-family dwelling
in a manner that:
         (a)   Allows the public use and common use portions of the dwellings
to be readily accessible to and usable by persons having a disability;
         (b)   Allows all doors designed to allow passage into and within all
premises within the dwellings to be sufficiently wide to allow passage by a
person who has a disability and who is in a wheelchair; and
         (c)   Provides all premises within the dwellings contain the following
features of adaptive design:
            1.   An accessible route into and through the dwelling;
            2.   Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other
environmental controls in accessible locations;
            3.   Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation
of grab bars; and
            4.   Kitchens and bathrooms that are usable and have sufficient
space in which an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver.
   (D)   Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National
Standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usability for
persons having physical disabilities, commonly cited as “ANSI A 117.1",
satisfies the requirements of division (C)(3)(c) above.
   (E)   Division (C)(3) above does not apply to a building the first occupancy
of which occurred on or before 3-13-1991.
   (F)   This section does not require a dwelling to be made available to an
individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or
safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial
physical damage to the property of others.
   (G)   In this section, the term COVERED MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS means:
      (1)   Buildings consisting of four or more units if the buildings have
one or more elevators; and
      (2)   Ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four or more
units.
(1998 Code, § 66-36)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Property Code § 301.025
§ 93.21  DISCRIMINATION IN RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE RELATED TRANSACTION.
   (A)   A person whose business includes engaging in residential real estate
related transactions may not discriminate against another in making a real
estate related transaction available or in the terms or conditions of a real
estate related transaction because of race, color, religion, sex, disability,
familial status or national origin.
   (B)   In this section, RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE RELATED TRANSACTION means:
      (1)   The making or purchasing of loans or the provision of other
financial assistance:
         (a)   To purchase, construct, improve, repair or maintain a dwelling;
or
         (b)   To secure residential real estate.
      (2)   The selling, brokering or appraising of residential real property.
(1998 Code, § 66-37)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Property Code § 301.026
§ 93.22  DISCRIMINATION IN BROKERAGE SERVICES.
   A person may not deny another access to, or membership or participation in,
a multiple-listing service, real estate brokers’ organization or other service,
organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting
dwellings, or discriminate against a person in the terms or conditions of
access, membership or participation in such an organization, service or
facility because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status or
national origin.
(1998 Code, § 66-38)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Property Code § 301.027
§ 93.23  EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   This subchapter does not apply to:
      (1)   The sale or rental of a single-family house sold or rented by the
owner if:
         (a)   The owner does not:
            1.   Own more than three single-family houses at any one time; or
            2.   Own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on the
person’s behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any
right to any part of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three
single-family houses at any one time.
         (b)   The house is sold or rented without:
            1.   The use of the sales or rental facilities or services of a
real estate broker, agent or salesperson licensed under the Real Estate License
Act (Tex. Occupations Code Ch. 1101), or of an employee or agent of a licensed
broker, agent or salesperson, or the facilities or services of the owner of a
dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by five or more families; or
            2.   The publication, posting or mailing of a notice, statement or
advertisement prohibited by §
93.17 of this chapter.
      (2)   The sale or rental of the rooms or units in a dwelling containing
living quarters occupied by or intended to be occupied by not more than four
families living independently of each other, if the owner maintains and
occupies one of the living quarters as the owner’s residence.
   (B)   The exemption in division (A)(1) above applies only to one sale or
rental in a 24-month period if the owner was not the most recent resident of
the house at the time of the sale or rental.
   (C)   This subchapter does not prohibit a religious organization,
association or society or a non-profit institution or organization operated,
supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association or society from:
      (1)   Limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings that it owns or
operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion;
or
      (2)   Giving preference to persons of the same religion, unless
membership in the religion is restricted because of race, color or national
origin.
   (D)   This subchapter does not prohibit a private club that is not open to
the public and that, as an incident to its primary purpose, provides lodging
that it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose from limiting the
rental or occupancy of the lodging to its members or from giving preference to
its members.
   (E)   This subchapter does not prohibit a person engaged in the business of
furnishing appraisals of real property from considering in those appraisals
factors other than race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status or
national origin.
   (F)   The provisions of this subchapter relating to familial status do not
apply to housing:
      (1)   The Commission determines is specifically designed and operated to
assist elderly individuals under a federal or state program;
      (2)   Intended for, and solely occupied by, individuals 62 years of age
or older; or
      (3)   Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one individual 55
years of age or older for each unit as determined by Commission rules.
(1998 Code, § 66-39)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Property Code §§ 301.041 through 301.043
§ 93.24  FAIR HOUSING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint and the commission shall confirm a Fair
Housing Administrator, referred to in the subchapter as “Administrator”, who
shall have the responsibility for implementing this subchapter.
   (B)   The Administrator may delegate his or her authority to investigate and
conciliate complaints to other city employees under his or her direction.
(1998 Code, § 66-40)
§ 93.25  FILING OF COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Only the person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory
housing practice or who believes he or she will be irrevocably injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that has occurred or is occurring, referred to
in this subchapter as “person aggrieved”, may file a complaint with the
Administrator. The complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person
alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing
practice and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a
discriminatory housing practice are based. The Administrator shall prepare
complaint forms and furnish them without charge to any person, upon request.
   (B)   If, at any time, the Administrator shall receive or discover credible
evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any persons have
committed or are committing a discriminatory housing practice as to which no
complaint has been filed, the Administrator may prepare and file a complaint
upon his or her own motion and in his or her own name and the complaint shall
thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person
aggrieved.
   (C)   The Administrator shall receive and accept notification and referral
complaints from the U.S. Attorney General and the Secretary of Housing and
Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of
1968, Pub. Law No. 90-284, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 3601 et seq., and shall treat the
complaints under this division (C) in the same manner as complaints filed
pursuant to division (A) above.
   (D)   All complaints shall be filed within 60 days following the occurrence
of an alleged discriminatory housing practice. Upon the filing or referral of
any complaint, the Administrator shall provide notice of the complaint by
furnishing a copy of the complaint to the persons named in the complaint who
allegedly committed or were threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory
housing practice. The accused may file an answer to the complaint within ten
days of receipt of the written complaint.
   (E)   All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an
officer authorized to administer oaths.
(1998 Code, § 66-41)
§ 93.26  INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS; INFORMAL CONCILIATION; PROSECUTION.
   (A)   Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as provided in this
subchapter, the Administrator shall cause to be made a prompt and full
investigation of the matter stated in the complaint.
   (B)   During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of
the notice of complaint, the Administrator shall, if it appears that a
discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur,
attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary
discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and adequate assurance of
future voluntary compliance with the provisions of this subchapter. Nothing
said or done in the course of the informal endeavors may be made public by the
Administrator, by the complainant or by any other party to the proceedings
without the written consent of all persons concerned.
   (C)   (1)   Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at
conciliation by the Administrator, but within 100 days of the filing of the
complaint with the Administrator, if the efforts of the Administrator to secure
voluntary compliance have been unsuccessful, and if the Administrator has made
a determination that a discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred,
the Administrator shall recommend to the City Attorney that the violation be
prosecuted in the Municipal Court.
      (2)   The City Attorney shall make a determination as to whether to
proceed with prosecution of the complaint in Municipal Court.
      (3)   If the City Attorney determines to prosecute, he or she shall
institute a complaint and prosecute it to conclusion within 30 days after such
determination, or as soon thereafter as possible.
(1998 Code, § 66-42)
§ 93.27  INTIMIDATION OR INTERFERENCE.
   A person commits an offense if the person, without regard to whether the
person is acting under color of law, by force or threat of force intentionally
intimidates or interferes with a person:
   (A)   Because of the person’s race, color, religion, sex, disability,
familial status or national origin and because the person is or has been
selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying or contracting or
negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing or occupation of any
dwelling or applying for or participating in a service, organization or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings; or
   (B)   Because the person is or has been or to intimidate the person from:
      (1)   Participating, without discrimination because of race, color,
religion, sex, disability, familial status or national origin, in any activity,
service, organization or facility described by division (A) above;
      (2)   Affording another person opportunity or protection to so
participate; or
      (3)   Lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons to participate,
without discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, disability,
familial status or national origin, in any activity, service, organization or
facility described by division (A) above.
(1998 Code, § 66-43)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Property Code § 301.171
§ 93.28  COOPERATION WITH SECRETARY OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT.
   The Administrator and the City Attorney are authorized to cooperate with the
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and the U.S. Attorney General
pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Pub. Law
No. 90-284, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 3601 et seq., and may render such service to the
Secretary as they shall deem appropriate to further the policies of this
subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 66-44)
§ 93.29  EDUCATIONAL AND PUBLIC INFORMATION PROGRAMS.
   In order to further the objectives of this subchapter, the Administrator may
conduct educational and public information programs.
(1998 Code, § 66-45)
§ 93.30  REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.
   This subchapter is cumulative in its legal effect and is not in lieu of any
and all other legal remedies which the person aggrieved may pursue.
(1998 Code, § 66-46)
§ 93.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person violating any provision of §§
93.15 through
93.30 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be subject to punishment as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances for each violation. Each day a violation
continues after passage of 75 days from the date of the filing of the initial
complaint with the Administrator shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.
(1998 Code, § 66-47)
      (2)   Any person violating any provision of §§
93.15 through
93.30 of this chapter may be enjoined by a suit filed by the city in a court of
competent jurisdiction, and this remedy is in addition to any other penalty
provision.
(1998 Code, § 66-48)
CHAPTER 94:  HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
General Provisions
   
94.001   Nuisances generally
   
94.002   Spitting on sidewalks, in public buildings or in public vehicles
   
94.003   Medical treatment of city prisoners
   
94.004   Hazardous waste incineration facilities
   
94.005   Glass containers prohibited in certain areas
   
94.006   Extraterritorial jurisdiction
   
94.007   Special conditions
   
94.008   Activities prohibited
   
94.009   Noise
Unsanitary, Unsightly Conditions on Private Premises
   
94.025   Junked or abandoned vehicles
   
94.026   Accumulations of stagnant water
   
94.027   Accumulations of carrion or filth
   
94.028   Accumulations of weeds, rubbish or other objectionable matter
   
94.029   Notice to remove condition; service
   
94.030   Abatement by city authorized; payment of expenses
   
94.031   Statement of expenses incurred by city
   
94.032   Collection of expenses incurred by city; lien
Smoking in Public Places
   
94.045   Definitions
   
94.046   Offenses; exceptions; duties of persons in control of public place
   
94.047   Smoking in hospitals or nursing homes
   
94.048   Employer smoking policies
   
94.049   Exception areas not required
   
94.050   Smoking offenses under Fire Code
   
94.051   Compliance with other regulations
Littering
   
94.065   Depositing in public places
   
94.066   Depositing in vacant lots
   
94.067   Depositing on occupied private property
   
94.068   Depositing in parks
   
94.069   Throwing from vehicles
   
94.070   Proper placement in receptacles
   
94.071   Duties of business owners and occupants
   
94.072   Duties of customers
   
94.073   Prima facie presumption in litter cases
 
   
94.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority of home rules cities to enact health regulations, see Tex. Health
and Safety Code §§ 341.081, 341.002
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.001  NUISANCES GENERALLY.
   Whatever is dangerous to human life, or whatever renders the ground, the
water, the air or food a hazard or an injury to human health, is hereby
declared to be a nuisance. Nuisances defined as set out in Tex. Health and
Safety Code § 341.011.
(1998 Code, § 62-3)
§ 94.002  SPITTING ON SIDEWALKS, IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS OR IN PUBLIC VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to spit on any sidewalk, or on the floor
or wall of any public building, or to spit in or upon any part of any taxicab,
bus or other public vehicle carrying passengers for hire in the city.
(1998 Code, § 62-4)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.003  MEDICAL TREATMENT OF CITY PRISONERS.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Department Detention Officer(s) to obtain
qualified medical treatment for any prisoners in the custody of the city.
(1998 Code, § 62-5)  (Ord. 13-12, passed 4-17-2013)
§ 94.004  HAZARDOUS WASTE INCINERATION FACILITIES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BOILER. An enclosed device using controlled flame combustion and having
the following characteristics:
         (a)   The unit must have physical provisions for recovering and
exporting thermal energy in the form of steam, heated fluids or heated gases;
         (b)   The unit’s combustion chamber and primary energy recovery
section must be of integral design. To be of integral design, the combustion
chamber and the primary energy recovery section (such as waterwalls and
superheaters) must be physically formed into one manufactured or assembled
unit. A unit in which the combustion chamber and the primary energy recovery
section are joined only by ducts or connections carrying flue gas is not
integrally designed; however, secondary energy recovery equipment (such as
economizers or air preheaters) need not be physically formed into the same unit
as the combustion chamber and the primary energy recovery section. The
following units are not precluded from being BOILERS solely because they are
not of integral design: process heaters (units that transfer energy directly to
a process stream) and fluidized-bed combustion units;
         (c)   While in operation, the unit must maintain a thermal energy
recovery efficiency of at least 60%, calculated in terms of the recovered
energy compared with the thermal value of the fuel; and
         (d)   The unit must export and utilize at least 75% of the recovered
energy, calculated on an annual basis. In this calculation, no credit shall be
given for recovered heat used internally in the same unit. (Examples of
internal use are the preheating of fuel or combustion air, and the driving of
induced or forced draft fans or feedwater pumps.)
      HAZARDOUS WASTE. That term is defined by Tex. Health and Safety Code §
361.003(12), and by 42 U.S.C. § 6903(5) (i.e., a solid waste or combination of
solid wastes), which because of its quantity, concentration or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics may:
         (a)   Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or
an increase in serious irreversible illness or incapacitating reversible
illness; or
         (b)   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of,
or otherwise managed.
      INCINERATOR. An enclosed device using controlled flame combustion that
neither meets the criteria for classification as a boiler, nor is listed as an
industrial furnace.
      INDUSTRIAL FURNACE. Any of the following enclosed devices that are
integral components of manufacturing processes and that use controlled flame
devices to accomplish recovery of materials or energy:
         (a)   Cement kilns;
         (b)   Lime kilns;
         (c)   Aggregate kilns;
         (d)   Phosphate kilns;
         (e)   Coke ovens;
         (f)   Blast furnaces;
         (g)   Smelting, melting and refining furnaces (including
pyrometallurgical devices such as cupolas, reverberator furnaces, sintering
machines, roasters and foundry furnaces);
         (h)   Titanium dioxide chloride process oxidation reactors;
         (i)   Methane reforming furnaces;
         (j)   Pulping liquor recovery furnaces; and
         (k)   Combustion devices used in the recovery of sulfur values.
      PREVAILING WIND. The direction from which the wind blows most frequently
over a 12-month period at a location proposed for a hazardous waste
incinerator.
      RESIDENTIAL AREAS. Areas where residential dwellings are actually located
or which are zoned as District A, B or C under
Ch. 160 of this code of ordinances. However, areas zoned District H shall not
be considered RESIDENTIAL AREAS for purposes of this section.
      SOLID WASTE. Any garbage, refuse or sludge from a waste treatment plant,
water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility, and other
discarded material, including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous
material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural
operations and from community activities, but does not include solid or
dissolved materials in domestic sewage, or solid or dissolved materials in
irrigation return flows or industrial discharges which are point sources
subject to permits under 33 U.S.C. § 1342, or source, special nuclear or
byproduct material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42
U.S.C. §§ 2011 et seq.).
   (B)   Siting restrictions. No hazardous waste incinerator shall be
constructed within the corporate limits of the city, or within 5,000 feet of
the corporate limits of the city, unless:
      (1)   Such incinerator is located no closer than four miles to any family
residential area, hospital, nursing home or public or private school in
existence at the time the incinerator is constructed; and
      (2)   The prevailing winds at the location of the hazardous waste
incinerator are not in the direction of then-existing residential areas located
within the corporate limits of the city or within 5,000 feet of the corporate
limits of the city.
   (C)   Duration and intent of section.
      (1)   This section is intended to preserve the status quo and to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city from the potential
harm from such facilities until such time as sufficient investigation can be
completed to determine what measures should be implemented on a permanent
basis.
      (2)   If such permanent measures are not implemented and in effect within
five years of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is
derived, this section shall be reviewed by the City Commission.
   (D)   Conflicting provisions. The provisions of this section shall govern
over any conflicting provisions in any other city ordinances or zoning
regulations currently in effect or enacted in the future by the city, unless
and until the provisions stated in this section are expressly revised or
rescinded.
(1998 Code, § 62-6)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.005  GLASS CONTAINERS PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess any glass
container in any area situated upon the Texas City Dike, “Texas City Dike”
(known as Dike Road), and Skyline Drive from Dike Road to the Galveston County
flood control gate, in its entire length, together with areas adjacent thereto
on both sides.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) above shall not apply where any such
glass container is used or possessed inside a motor vehicle or within the
enclosed perimeter of a business establishment.
(1998 Code, § 62-7)  (Ord. 10-33, passed 12-15-2010)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.006  EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all that property
located within the city and all that property located within 5,000 feet of the
city boundary.
(1998 Code, § 62-8)  (Ord. 98-29, passed 11-25-1998)
§ 94.007  SPECIAL CONDITIONS.
   The conditions listed in this section, in addition to any things or
conditions declared elsewhere in this code to be nuisances, are declared to be
a nuisance and, as such, are to be abated pursuant to §
94.030 of this chapter. The person causing, permitting , or suffering any of
the conditions listed in this section upon his premises, real property, or in
any building occupied or controlled by him or in or upon any street, alley,
sidewalk, or gutter immediately adjacent to such premises shall, upon
conviction, be fined as provided in §
10.99.
   (A)   Any building, erection or any part of such building or erection which
is overcrowded or not provided with adequate means of ingress or egress or is
not sufficiently supported, ventilated, sewered, drained, cleaned or lighted;
   (B)   All vaults, drains, pools, sewers, yards, grounds or premises which
have for any cause become foul, noxious or offensive or injurious to health or
unpleasant to adjacent residences or to persons passing such premises;
   (C)   All carcasses; all decaying flesh, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables;
all deposits of manure; all flesh of any kind or description whatever; all
filthy or offensive water or slops in any private yard or premises; and all
other unwholesome substances when thrown upon or conducted into or upon any
street, alley, public ground or enclosure in such a manner as to render such
substances unwholesome and offensive or liable to become unwholesome or
offensive;
   (D)   The act of burning any hair, leather, rags or any other substances of
any kind which may cause or produce an offensive smell, smoke or odor capable
of annoying persons living in the vicinity or persons passing along the
streets, alleys or public thoroughfares;
   (E)   The act of scattering or distributing any advertisements, circulars,
handbills, printed or written announcements or paper of like character, or any
medicines upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys or within public buildings or
grounds within the limits of the city;
   (F)   Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes and/or
other vermin; and
   (G)   Any poles, posts, lumber or timber materials which are detrimental to
the health or likely to injure any of the inhabitants of the city or its
extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(1998 Code, § 62-9)  (Ord. 98-29, passed 11-25-1998; Ord. 13-12, passed 4-17-
2013)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.008  ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain or allow the
erection of a nuisance.
(1998 Code, § 62-10)  (Ord. 98-29, passed 11-25-1998)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.009  NOISE.
   (A)   Unreasonable noise prohibited. The creation of any unreasonably loud,
disturbing and unnecessary noises in the city is hereby prohibited. Noises of
such character, intensity and duration as are reasonably calculated to be
detrimental to the life or health of any ordinarily reasonable person are
hereby prohibited. This section shall not apply to conduct prohibited under
Tex. Penal Code § 42.01(a)(5).
(1998 Code, § 50-31)
   (B)   Enumeration of prohibited noises. The following acts, among others,
are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this
section; provided, however, that, such enumeration shall not be construed to be
exclusive of other noises:
      (1)   The playing of any radio, phonograph or musical instrument in such
manner, or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., as to create a noise that is reasonably calculated to disturb a
person of ordinary disposition under the same or similar circumstances residing
in a dwelling or other type of residence in the vicinity;
      (2)   The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long
continued noise shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the
vicinity;
      (3)   The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus, streetcar or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a
danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or
if in motion only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and
deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any signal
device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of the device
for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;
      (4)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar or vehicle so out
of repair, so loaded or so operated in such manner as to create loud or
unnecessary noises such as spinning or squealing tires, grating, grinding,
rattling or other noise;
      (5)   The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with the
loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales,
boxes, crates and containers;
      (6)   The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or boat engine, except
through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises therefrom;
      (7)   The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler,
except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of
danger;
      (8)   The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air, unless
the noise thereby created is effectively muffled and reduced;
      (9)   The shouting or crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which
disturbs the quiet and peace of the neighborhood;
      (10)   The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for
the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance,
show or sale of merchandise;
      (11)   The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or
other vehicles;
      (12)   The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or
repair, of any building in a residential or business district other than
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in case of
urgent necessity in the interest of public safety, and then only with a permit
from the City Commission, which permit may be renewed for a period of three
days or less while the emergency continues;
      (13)   The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any
school, institution of learning or court while the school, institution of
learning or court is in session, or adjacent to any hospital, which
unreasonably interferes with the working of the institution; provided,
conspicuous signs are displayed in the streets indicating that the street is a
school, hospital or court street; and
      (14)   The sounding of any bell or gong attached to any building or
premises which is reasonably calculated to disturb a person of ordinary
disposition if the person were in the vicinity thereof.
(1998 Code, § 50-32)
(Ord. 02-05, passed 2-20-2002; Ord. 05-53, passed 12-7-2005; Ord. 13-23, passed
8-7-2013)  Penalty, see §
94.999
Statutory reference:
   Unreasonable noises, see Tex. Penal Code § 42.01(a)(5)
UNSANITARY, UNSIGHTLY CONDITIONS ON PRIVATE PREMISES
§ 94.025  JUNKED OR ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ANTIQUE CAR. A passenger car or truck that is at least 35 years old.
      DEMOLISHER. Any person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into
processed scrap or scrap metal or otherwise to wreck or dismantle motor
vehicles.
      JUNKED VEHICLE. A vehicle that is self-propelled and:
         (a)   Does not have lawfully attached to it:
            1.   An unexpired license plate; or
            2.   A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate.
         (b)   Is:
            1.   Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
            2.   Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
               a.   Seventy-two consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public
property; or
               b.   Thirty consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private
property.
   (B)   Declaration of nuisance; violations.
      (1)   A junked vehicle or vehicle part that is located in a place where
it is visible from a public place or public right-of-way is detrimental to the
safety and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce the value of private
property, invites vandalism, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive
nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and is
detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight
adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city, and is a
public nuisance.
      (2)   Any person commits an offense if that person maintains a public
nuisance as determined under this section.
      (3)   A complaint concerning a public nuisance shall be filed in the
Municipal Court of the city if the public nuisance, as provided under this
section, is not removed and abated and a hearing is not requested within the
ten-day period provided by divisions (D)(1) and (D)(2) below.
   (C)   Responsibility for administration; right of entry; abatement policy.
The Director of Community Development, or a city employee under his or her
direction, shall administer the provisions of this section; except that, the
removal of vehicles or vehicle parts from property may be by any other
authorized person. The Director of Community Development, or a city employee
under his or her direction, shall have authority to enter upon any private
property for the purposes specified in this section, to examine vehicles or
vehicle parts, obtain information as to the identity of the vehicle, and remove
or cause the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part that constitutes a nuisance.
It is the policy of the city to abate and remove junk vehicles or vehicle parts
as public nuisances from private property, public property or public rights-of-
way and to implement the abatement and removal by the use of the procedures
established in this section.
   (D)   Order to remove; hearing; removal and disposition by city. Whenever it
shall be determined that a junked vehicle or vehicle part is located in a place
where it is visible from a public place or public right-of-way, thereby
constituting a public nuisance:
      (1)   For a nuisance on private property, the Director of Community
Development shall give not less than a ten-day notice, stating the nature of
the public nuisance on private property, that it must be removed and abated
within ten days, and that a request for a hearing must be made to the Director
of Community Development before expiration of the ten-day period. The notice
must be mailed by certified mail, with a five-day return requested, to the
owner or occupant of the private premises on which the public nuisance exists,
and to the last known registered owner of the nuisance and each lienholder of
record of the nuisance. If the notice is returned undelivered by the United
States Post Office, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to
a date not earlier than the eleventh day from the date of such return;
      (2)   For a nuisance on public property, the Director of Community
Development shall give not less than a ten-day notice, stating the nature of
the public nuisance on public property or on a public right-of-way, that it
must be removed and abated within ten days, and that a request for a hearing
must be made to the Director of Community Development before expiration of the
ten-day period. The notice must be mailed by certified mail, with a five-day
return requested, to the owner or occupant of the public premises or to the
owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which
such public nuisance exists, and to the last known registered owner of the
nuisance and each lienholder of record of the nuisance. If the notice is
returned undelivered by the United States Post Office, official action to abate
the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the eleventh day
from the date of such return;
      (3)   A public hearing is required before the removal of the vehicle or
vehicle part as a public nuisance. If a public hearing is requested by the
owner or occupant of the public or private premises, or by the owner or
occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the
vehicle is located, it shall be held before the Director of Transportation and
Planning at the City Hall, prior to the removal of the vehicle or vehicle part
as a public nuisance, at a time to be set by him or her, but not earlier than
the eleventh day after the date of the service of notice to abate the nuisance.
An order of the Director of Community Development requiring the removal of the
vehicle or vehicle part must include a description of the vehicle and the
correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if the
information is available at the site;
      (4)   When no public hearing is requested by the owner or occupant of the
premises where the public nuisance exists, upon the expiration of the period of
time set forth in divisions (D)(1) and (D)(2) above, the Director of Community
Development shall enter an order requiring the removal of the vehicle or
vehicle part, the order to include a description of the vehicle or vehicle part
and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if
available at the site;
      (5)   Within five days after the date of the removal, notice shall be
given to the State Department of Highways and Public Transportation identifying
the vehicle or vehicle part; and
      (6)   A junked vehicle or vehicle part may be disposed of by removal to a
scrap yard or demolisher for processing as scrap or salvage.
   (E)   Reconstruction of removed vehicles prohibited. After removal of any
such junked vehicle, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable.
   (F)   Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   A vehicle or vehicle part which is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other
public or private property;
      (2)   A vehicle or vehicle part which is stored or parked in a lawful
manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed
vehicle dealer or a junkyard; and
      (3)   Unlicensed operable or inoperable antique or special interest
vehicles stored by a collector on the collector’s property; provided that, the
vehicles and the outdoor storage areas are maintained in such a manner that
they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public
view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery or other appropriate
means.
   (G)   Administrative personnel; persons authorized to remove vehicles. The
administration of the procedures provided by this section shall be accomplished
by regular, salaried, full-time employees of the city; except that, the removal
of vehicles or vehicle parts from property may be by any other duly authorized
person.
   (H)   Open storage of abandoned vehicles. It shall be unlawful for the owner
or occupant of any building, structure or property within the city, regardless
of how zoned by Ch. 160 of this code of ordinances, to utilize the premises of
the property for the open storage of any abandoned motor vehicle. It shall be
the duty and responsibility of every owner or occupant to remove from the
premises all abandoned motor vehicles upon notice from the designated official
of the city. For the purpose of this section, an ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE is
defined as one that does not have attached to it a valid license plate and
inspection sticker duly issued to the vehicle, is in a state of disrepair, or
is incapable of being removed under its own power. The provisions of this
division (H) shall not apply to any duly licensed junk dealer operating under
and in compliance with Ch. 114 of this code of ordinances.
(1998 Code, § 62-112)  (Ord. 04-32, passed 7-21-2004)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.026  ACCUMULATIONS OF STAGNANT WATER.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot or other premises in the city
to allow or permit holes or places where water may accumulate and become
stagnant to be or remain on the lot or premises or to allow or permit the
accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or to permit stagnant water to remain
thereon, in accordance with Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 342.001.
(1998 Code, § 62-113)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.027  ACCUMULATIONS OF CARRION OR FILTH.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot, building, house,
establishment or premises in the city to allow or permit any carrion, filth or
other impure or unwholesome matter of any kind to accumulate or remain thereon,
in accordance with Tex. Health and Safety Code, § 342.003.
(1998 Code, § 62-114)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.028  ACCUMULATIONS OF WEEDS, RUBBISH OR OTHER OBJECTIONABLE MATTER.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, renter or occupant of any lot or
premises in the city to allow or permit weeds, tall grass, rubbish, brush or
any other unsightly, objectionable or unsanitary matter of whatever nature to
accumulate or remain on any lot or premises, in accordance with Tex. Health and
Safety Code, § 342.004.
(1998 Code, § 62-115)  (Ord. 99-56, passed 9-15-1999)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.029  NOTICE TO REMOVE CONDITION; SERVICE.
   Whenever any condition described in this subchapter is found to exist on any
premises within the city, the owner of the premises shall be notified by the
city in writing to correct, remedy or remove the condition within ten days
after the notice, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply
with the notice.
   (A)   The notice must be given:
      (1)   Personally to the owner in writing;
      (2)   By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded
in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the
property is located; or
      (3)   If personal service cannot be obtained;
         (a)   By publication at least once;
         (b)   By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building
on the property to which the violation relates; or
         (c)   By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven
into the ground on the property to which the violation relates.
   (B)   If a notice is mailed to a property owner in accordance with division
(A)(2), and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or
"unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is
considered as delivered.
   (C)   In a notice provided under this section, representatives of the city
may inform the owner by regular mail and a posting on the property, or by
personally delivering the notice, that if the owner commits another violation
of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety
on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city, without
further notice, may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the
expense against the property.  If a violation covered by a notice under this
subsection occurs within the one-year period, and the city has not been
informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the city, without
notice, may take any action permitted by the Tex. Health and Safety Code §
342.006(a)(1) and (2) and assess its expenses as provided by Tex. Health and
Safety Code § 342.007.
(1998 Code, § 62-116)  (Ord. 13-09, passed 4-3-2013)
Penalty, see §
94.999
Statutory reference:
   Notice to remove unsanitary, unsightly and the like conditions, see Tex.
Health and Safety Code § 342.006
§ 94.030  ABATEMENT BY CITY AUTHORIZED; PAYMENT OF EXPENSES.
   (A)   If the owner of any lot or premises upon which a condition described
in this subchapter exists fails to correct, remedy or remove the condition
within ten days after notice to do is given in accord with this subchapter, the
city may do work or make improvements as are necessary to be made, and pay
therefore and charge the expenses incurred thereby to the owner of the lot or
to the property’s city water bill or place a mechanic’s lien on said property.
The expenses shall be assessed against the lot or real estate upon which the
work was done or the improvements made. The doing of the work by the city shall
not relieve the person from prosecution for failure to comply with the notice
in violation of §
94.029(A) of this chapter.
   (B)   In addition to the actual expenses incurred for lot cleaning,
clearing, abating of any nuisances, or for improvements made as are necessary
to correct, remedy or remove such a condition, an additional charge of $50
shall be added to the amount assessed against the property, to reimburse the
city for its administrative expenses associated with the preparation, filing
and release of such lien.
(1998 Code, § 62-118)  (Ord. 04-33, passed 7-21-2004; Ord. 10-16, passed 7-7-
2010)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to correct or remove conditions described in this
subchapter, see Tex. Health and Safety Code § 342.006(a)
§ 94.031  STATEMENT OF EXPENSES INCURRED BY CITY.
   Whenever any work is done or improvements are made by the city under the
provisions of §
94.030 of this chapter, the Mayor, the Director of Community Development or a
city employee under the Director’s direction, on behalf of the city, shall file
a statement of the expenses incurred thereby with the County Clerk. The
statement shall give the amount of the expenses and the date on which the work
was done or the improvements were made, and the name of the owner, if known,
and the legal description of the property.
(1998 Code, § 62-119)  (Ord. 04-34, passed 7-21-2004)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Health and Safety Code § 342.007(b)
§ 94.032  COLLECTION OF EXPENSES INCURRED BY CITY; LIEN.
   (A)   After the statement provided for in §
94.031 of this chapter is filed, the city shall have a privileged lien on the
lot or real estate upon which the work was done or improvement made, to secure
the expenses thereof.
   (B)   The lien shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street
improvements, and the amount thereof shall bear interest at the rate of 10% per
annum from the date the statement was filed.
   (C)   For any expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery
and foreclosure of the lien may be had in the name of the city, and the
statement of expenses made in accord with §
94.031 of this chapter, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof
of the amount expended for the work or improvements.
(1998 Code, § 62-120)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Health and Safety Code § 342.006
SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES
§ 94.045  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EDUCATIONAL FACILITY. Any day care facility, nursery school, elementary
school, middle school, junior high school, senior high school, vocational
school, special education center, college or university.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for
direct or indirect monetary wages, commissions or profits and any contract
employee; or any volunteer who, except for monetary wages, acts in a capacity
essentially similar to an employee.
   EMPLOYER. Any person, partnership, corporation, association or other entity
who employs the services of one or more persons.
   ENCLOSED AREA. All space between floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all
sides by smoke-impermeable walls or windows (exclusive of doorways) that extend
from that floor to the ceiling, including all space therein screened by
partitions, “office landscaping” or similar structures that do not extend from
the floor to the ceiling or are not smoke impermeable.
   EXCEPTION AREA.
      (1)   EXCEPTION AREA means any area in which smoking is permitted
pursuant to §
94.046 of this chapter. Except as otherwise prohibited by this subchapter, one
or more EXCEPTION AREA may be created within an enclosed area; provided,
however, that:
         (a)   The exception area created within an enclosed area shall be no
larger than 30% of the total public accessible floorspace and shall be separate
from the other areas. Notwithstanding these requirements, the following areas
may, but need not be, designated, at the option of the owner, as EXCEPTION
AREAS in their entirety only:
            1.   A tobacco specialty shop;
            2.   A hotel or motel sleeping room rented to guests;
            3.   Bars;
            4.   Bowling centers; and
            5.   A private enclosed office workspace as defined in this
subchapter.
         (b)   If the EXCEPTION AREA does not constitute the entirety of an
enclosed area, it shall be located by the exhaust system of the enclosed area,
if any, or otherwise located and ventilated so that smoke is not drawn into or
across any area where smoking is prohibited;
         (c)   The EXCEPTION AREA shall be designated in conformity with the
requirements of this subchapter; and
         (d)   An indoor facility used for sporting, civic or cultural events
may have an exception area in the spectator seating area; provided, the area is
enclosed and does not occupy more than 10% of the available seating area.
      (2)   The EXCEPTION AREA shall not include the following areas:
         (a)   Elevators;
         (b)   Restrooms;
         (c)   Retail establishments (other than as stated in this subchapter
in restaurants, bars, hotel/motel rooms, private office workspace, bowling
centers, common areas of malls and shopping centers and tobacco specialty
shops);
         (d)   Lobbies and seating areas of theaters;
         (e)   Waiting areas;
         (f)   Spectator seating areas of indoor facilities being used for
sporting, civil or cultural events except as set forth in division (1)(d) of
this definition;
         (g)   Public meeting rooms; and
         (h)   Areas where smoking is prohibited by the Fire Code or any other
applicable ordinance or regulation of the city.
   LOUNGE BAR. All areas of any establishment having 50% of its gross sales
from sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, including any
establishment which operates under a permit or license issued under the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Code and which meets this requirement.
   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any enclosed indoor area under the control of an
employer to which employees have access during the course of employment,
including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, employee restrooms
and employee cafeterias. A private residence is not a PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT.
   POSITIVE EXTINGUISHMENT. A facility designed for the safe extinguishment of
burning tobacco products, using sand or water as its primary extinguishment
element.
   PUBLIC PLACE.
      (1)   An enclosed indoor area at any time during which the public is
admitted by general invitation or is otherwise given a generally unrestricted
access to any portion of the enclosed area, excepting and excluding bars as
that term is defined in this section. A PUBLIC PLACE shall include, but is not
limited to, an indoor enclosed area at any time during which it is being
utilized in whole or in part for any of the following purposes:
         (a)   Commercial establishments, including, but not limited to, retail
establishments and restaurants;
         (b)   A vehicle of public ground transportation, including, but not
limited to, taxicabs, limousines for hire, trains, buses, ferries and trolleys;
         (c)   Elevators;
         (d)   Libraries, educational facilities, museums, auditoriums, art
galleries and meeting rooms, except as set forth in §
94.046 of this chapter;
         (e)   Hotels and motels;
         (f)   Health care facilities, including, but not limited to,
laboratories associated with the rendition of health care treatment, hospitals,
nursing homes and doctors’ and dentists’ offices;
         (g)   Places of entertainment, including, but not limited to,
gymnasiums, theaters, concert halls and arenas;
         (h)   Restrooms;
         (i)   Railroad, trolley, cruise ship and bus stations and airports;
         (j)   Convention centers and civic centers; and
         (k)   Governmental facilities, including, but not limited to, all
governmental vehicles.
      (2)   The imposition of a fee, use charge, membership requirement or
other condition of entry to an enclosed area shall not prevent the area from
being constituted a PUBLIC PLACE.
   RESTAURANT. Any food service establishment where food is prepared and
intended for individual portion service, and includes the site where
individuals’ portions are provided. The term includes, but is not limited to, a
coffee shop, cafeteria, luncheonette, cocktail lounge, sandwich stand, soda
fountain and any other eating establishment, organization, club, including a
veterans’ club, boardinghouse or guesthouse, and delicatessen-type operations,
as well as kitchens in which food is prepared on the premises for serving
elsewhere, including catering facilities. This term does not include private
homes, grocery stores, the location of vending machines and supply vehicles.
   RESTAURANT BAR. Any area of a restaurant, excluding the dining area, that is
primarily devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by
guests on the premises and in which food service, if any, is only incidental to
the consumption of such beverages.
   RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT. Any enclosed area in any portion of which goods or
services of any nature are sold or offered for sale directly to consumers,
including, but not limited to, grocery stores, convenience stores, dry goods
stores, banks, department stores and specialty stores.
   SERVICE LINE. Any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for
or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service involves the
exchange of money.
   SMOKE and SMOKING. Include the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar
or cigarette or any other lighted smoking equipment or device which contains a
burning tobacco product, and the lighting of, emitting or exhaling the smoke of
a pipe, cigar or cigarette or other tobacco product of any kind.
   SPORTING EVENT. Any indoor area being occupied for any event wherein an
individual or team of individuals participates in an athletic endeavor which
requires physical exertion, including, but not limited to, the following
activities: baseball, football, basketball, hockey, soccer, tennis, wrestling,
boxing, swimming or other water sports, volleyball, gymnastics, handball,
skating (ice and roller), weight lifting, fencing, martial arts related sports,
table tennis, rodeo, track and field games and horse and dog racing.
   TOBACCO SPECIALTY SHOP. An enclosed area utilized primarily for the sale of
tobacco products and accessories and to which the sale of other products is
merely incidental.
(1998 Code, § 62-141)
§ 94.046  OFFENSES; EXCEPTIONS; DUTIES OF PERSONS IN CONTROL OF PUBLIC PLACE.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if he or she is knowingly or intentionally
smoking in public and is not in an area designated as an exception area under
this section.
   (B)   In conformity with this section, a person having ownership, possession
or control of a public place commits an offense if he or she knowingly or
intentionally permits or fails to make a reasonable effort to prevent
commission by another of the offense described in division (A) above within
such a public place.
   (C)   In conformity with this section, a person having ownership, possession
or control of a public place may, but is not required to, designate exception
areas in which smoking is permitted. It is an affirmative defense to the
application of the offense stated in division (A) above if the person smokes or
is smoking:
      (1)   Exclusively within an exception area designated for smoking
tobacco; or
      (2)   As a participant in an authorized theatrical performance.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of every person having ownership, possession or
control of any public place to cause extinguishment facilities to be provided
and maintained as required in this section, and any knowing or intentional
failure to maintain compliance with such duty shall constitute an offense. An
extinguishment facility shall be provided:
      (1)   Outside or immediately inside each exterior entrance to the public
place; and
      (2)   In each exception area, if any; provided that, a positive
extinguishment facility need be provided only at the entrance to any enclosed
area containing more than one exception area; and, further provided that,
extinguishment facilities may not be situated in elevator cars or in any other
non-exception area.
   (E)   It shall be the duty of every person having ownership, possession or
control of any public place to cause any exception areas and the boundaries
thereof to be clearly disclosed to persons within the public place, and any
knowing or intentional failure to maintain compliance with such duty shall
constitute an offense. The information that is required to be provided under
this division (E) may be furnished in any one or more of the following manners,
as applicable:
      (1)   By conspicuously posting signs in the exception area which clearly
define the bounds of the exception area and stating that smoking is permitted
therein.
         (a)   In a restaurant or other public place that has controlled
seating whereby an employee directs patrons to seating or waiting areas, the
employee shall ask the patron whether he or she requires or prefers a no
smoking or smoking permitted area before directing a patron to a seat in the
appropriate area. If the establishment takes advance reservations, the person
taking the reservations shall ask whether the patron requires or prefers a no
smoking or smoking permitted area at the time the reservation is made. Any
outdoor seating attached to or adjacent to a restaurant or other public place
is exempt from the provisions of this division (E)(1)(a).
         (b)   Any sign that is required to be posted pursuant to this division
(E)(1)(b) shall be printed in proportional and proportionally spaced letters of
a color clearly contrasting with the background upon which they are printed,
which letters shall have a height of not less than three-fourths inch and shall
also contain the international “no smoking” logo of a diameter of not less than
three inches. The wording shall be one of the following, as appropriate: “No
Smoking”, “Smoking Permitted in Designated Areas Only” or “Smoking Permitted”.
A public place that is an exception area in its entirety is not required to
have the international “no smoking” logo on its signs. Such signs shall be
posted so that they are clearly visible to persons prior to entering the
establishment, without regard to whether the entrance doors are open or closed.
      (2)   If the entirety of the public place has been designated as an
exception area, by posting a sign at each entrance thereto, which sign must
clearly indicate the bounds of the exception area and state that smoking is
permitted therein.
   (F)   It is an exception to the application of divisions (A), (B) or (C)
above that the person smoking is present at an event in which an entire room or
confined area is used for a private social function and the event is under the
control of the sponsor of the function and not the owner, proprietor or person
in charge of the public place. This exception includes, but is not limited to,
areas of public places, such as hotels, which are normally rented out to
private groups, and bowling centers.
   (G)   It shall be the duty of every person in control of a public place in
which smoking is declared an offense by division (A) above to request any
person known not to be in an exception area to extinguish the burning tobacco
product. Any knowing or intentional failure to maintain compliance with such
duty shall constitute an offense.
   (H)   The following shall apply to taxicabs.
      (1)   The holder of any franchise or permit to operate a taxicab service
within the city may, but is not required to, designate one or more of the
taxicabs operated pursuant to the franchise or permit in which smoking is
permitted.
      (2)   Each such taxicab shall be designated by notices clearly visible to
persons entering and in the taxicab as a taxicab in which smoking is permitted
or a taxicab in which smoking is not permitted.
      (3)   Drivers operating taxicabs in which smoking is not permitted shall
not smoke in the taxicab at any time.
(1998 Code, § 62-142) (Ord. 13-12, passed 4-17-2013)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.047  SMOKING IN HOSPITALS OR NURSING HOMES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the person in charge of any hospital or
nursing home knowingly or intentionally to permit any patient to be assigned to
an enclosed bed-space area that has been designated as an exception area if the
patient has requested assignment to a non-smoking area during the course of his
or her admission to the hospital or nursing home.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not a patient assigned to
such enclosed bed-space area to be in possession of a burning tobacco product
or to smoke tobacco within an enclosed bed-space area that has been designated
as an exception area.
(1998 Code, § 62-143)  (Ord. 98-5, passed 2-18-1998)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.048  EMPLOYER SMOKING POLICIES.
   Each employer shall adopt, implement and maintain a written smoking policy
which shall contain, as a minimum, the following provisions and requirements.
   (A)   Any non-smoking employee may object to his or her employer about smoke
in any portion of his or her place of employment normally frequented by the
employee. Using already available means of ventilation, separation or
partition, the employer shall attempt to reach a reasonable accommodation,
insofar as possible, between the preferences of non-smoking and smoking
employees. An employer is not required by this provision to incur an expense or
make structural or other physical modifications to accommodate the preferences
of non-smoking or smoking employees.
   (B)   If an accommodation which is satisfactory to all affected non-smoking
employees cannot be reached as to any portion of the place of employment about
which complaint has been voiced, the preferences of the non-smoking employees
shall prevail to the end that non-smoking employees may work in a smoke-free
environment. However, the requirements of this division (B) shall not apply to
any private, enclosed office workspace occupied exclusively by smokers, even
though such office may be visited by non-smokers.
   (C)   The smoking policy shall be announced within three weeks of its
adoption to all employees working in the place of employment and posted
conspicuously in all work places under the employer’s jurisdiction. A copy of
the smoking policy shall be provided to all future employees at the time of
their entry into employment.
(1998 Code, § 62-144)
§ 94.049  EXCEPTION AREAS NOT REQUIRED.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to require any person to
establish an exception area in order to accommodate the preference of smokers.
Any exception area that is designated must be created and maintained in strict
compliance with this subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 62-145)
§ 94.050  SMOKING OFFENSES UNDER FIRE CODE.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to repeal or excuse
compliance with smoking prohibitions imposed by the Fire Code of the city.
   (B)   To the extent that any offense under the Fire Code of the city
conflicts with any provision of this subchapter, then the offense shall be
punishable pursuant to the Fire Code.
(1998 Code, § 62-149)
§ 94.051  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.
   Nothing in this subchapter excuses non-compliance with any state or federal
law, city ordinance or other rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto which
prohibits smoking.
(1998 Code, § 62-151)
LITTERING
§ 94.065  DEPOSITING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the city, except in public receptacles, or in
authorized private receptacles for collection.
(1998 Code, § 102-51)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.066  DEPOSITING IN VACANT LOTS.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the city, whether owned by the person or not.
(1998 Code, § 102-52)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.067  DEPOSITING ON OCCUPIED PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the city, whether owned by the person or not; except that, the owner or
person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other
public place or upon any private property.
(1998 Code, § 102-53)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.068  DEPOSITING IN PARKS.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city, except
in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or
upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not
provided, all litter shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence.
(1998 Code, § 102-54)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.069  THROWING FROM VEHICLES.
   No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the city or upon private
property.
(1998 Code, § 102-55)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.070  PROPER PLACEMENT IN RECEPTACLES.
   Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or
upon private property.
(1998 Code, § 102-56)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.071  DUTIES OF BUSINESS OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.
   (A)   Generally. The owner or occupant of any store or other place of
business situated within the city shall at all times keep his or her premises
clean of wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper napkins, cartons, package containers
and other used or waste materials thrown or left on the premises by its
customers and take reasonable measures to prevent such materials from drifting
or blowing to adjoining premises.
   (B)   Receptacles. Receptacles of sufficient size and number shall be placed
on the premises, accessible to the customers of the business, where the
articles of waste referred to in division (A) above may be disposed of.
   (C)   Signs. Each and every business establishment shall place upon its
premises in a conspicuous place, in close proximity to the receptacles referred
to in division (A) above, signs which shall, in essence, convey to its
customers a request that they use the receptacles for the disposal of waste
material.
(1998 Code, § 102-57)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.072  DUTIES OF CUSTOMERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any customer going upon the premises of another to
in any manner dispose of wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper napkins, cartons,
package containers and other used or waste materials, except in the proper
receptacles.
(1998 Code, § 102-58)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.073  PRIMA FACIE PRESUMPTION IN LITTER CASES.
   (A)   This section shall control in any prosecution charging a violation of
any provision of this subchapter.
   (B)   Proof that litter deposited or thrown within the city in violation of
any provision of this subchapter, together with proof that the name of the
person named in the complaint was endorsed on one or more pieces of the litter
so deposited or thrown, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption
that the person named in the complaint was the person who deposited or threw
the litter in violation of any provision of this subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 102-59)
§ 94.999  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of §
94.004 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided
in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. Each day that a violation continues or has
not been totally abated shall be deemed a separate offense.
(1998 Code, § 62-6)
   (C)   The person causing, permitting or suffering any of the conditions
listed in §
94.007 of this chapter upon his or her premises, real property or in any
building occupied or controlled by him or her or in or upon any street, alley,
sidewalk or gutter immediately adjacent to such premises shall, upon
conviction, be fined as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(1998 Code, § 62-9)
   (D)   (1)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §§
94.025 through
94.032 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be fined in accordance with §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. Each and every day’s violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
      (2)   If the owner or occupant of any lot or premises under the
provisions of §§
94.025 through
94.032 of this chapter shall be a corporation, and shall violate any provision
of §§
94.025 through
94.032 of this chapter, the president, vice-president, secretary or treasurer
of the corporation, or any manager, agent or employee of the corporation, shall
be also severally liable for the penalties provided in this section.
(1998 Code, § 62-111)
   (E)   A person who commits an offense under §
94.025 of this chapter is, on conviction, subject to a fine in accordance with
§
10.99 of this code of ordinances. On conviction, the Court shall order removal
and abatement of the nuisance.
(1998 Code, § 62-112)
   (F)   (1)   The violation of any provision of §§
94.045 through
94.051 of this chapter shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense, punishable
by a fine not to exceed $200 for each offense. Each day a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
(1998 Code, § 62-150)
      (2)   Violation of any provision of §§
94.045 through
94.051 of this chapter that is not otherwise punishable pursuant to Tex. Rev.
Civ. Stat. Art. 2372w, as amended, shall be punishable by a fine of not less
than $150 and not more than $200. Each day any violation continues shall
constitute and be punishable as a separate offense.
(1998 Code, § 62-152)
   (G)   Any person violating any provision of §§
94.065 through
94.073 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(1998 Code, § 102-60)
(Ord. 98-29, passed 11-25-1998; Ord. 13-12, passed 4-17-2013)
CHAPTER 95:  ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
95.001   Confinement required
   
95.002   Collar and tag required for dogs and cats
   
95.003   Applicability of County Health District’s animal control regulations
   
95.004   Killing of wild creatures in city parks and nature preserves
Dogs and Cats
   
95.015   Definitions
   
95.016   Rabies vaccination required; certificate
   
95.017   Issuance of tag; fee; wearing of tag; replacement tags
   
95.018   Records of tags
   
95.019   Affixing tag, collar or harness in cruel manner
   
95.020   Impoundment authorized
   
95.021   Redemption of impounded dogs and cats; destruction or vaccination of
unredeemed animals
   
95.022   Payment of costs of impoundment
   
95.023   Dogs running at large
   
95.024   Destruction of dangerous or vicious dogs
   
95.025   Barking or howling dogs
   
95.026   Intentionally releasing or dumping dogs
   
95.027   Maximum number of dogs
   
95.028   Prohibition against the chaining or tethering of dogs and mandating
that dog enclosures must provide 150 square feet of space
   
95.029   Dangerous and vicious animals
Rabies Control
   
95.040   Report and confinement of rabid animals
   
95.041   Killing of rabid animals
Bird Sanctuaries
   
95.055   Established
   
95.056   Injuring or molesting birds or nests
   
95.057   Destruction of nuisance birds
Livestock
   
95.070   Definitions
   
95.071   Owner’s registration requirements
   
95.072   Posting
   
95.073   Running at large
   
95.074   Notification of loose livestock
 
   
95.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Noise regulations, see §
94.009
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 95.001  CONFINEMENT REQUIRED.
   Animals shall be confined within a building or home, or within a fenced yard
or premises, so that the animals cannot escape from the building, house or
fenced yard or premises without human assistance.
(1998 Code, § 18-1)  (Ord. 94-01, passed 1-19-1994)  Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.002  COLLAR AND TAG REQUIRED FOR DOGS AND CATS.
   On dogs and cats, there shall at all times be securely attached to a collar
or harness around the neck of the animal a city tag, which shall be purchased
at Galveston County Animal Resource Center.
(1998 Code, § 18-2)  (Ord. 94-01, passed 1-19-1994)  Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.003  APPLICABILITY OF COUNTY HEALTH DISTRICT’S ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS.
   Control of animals shall be controlled by the County Health District’s
rules, regulations and policies, in addition to those contained in this code
and applicable state laws.
(1998 Code, § 18-3)  (Ord. 94-01, passed 1-19-1994)
§ 95.004  KILLING OF WILD CREATURES IN CITY PARKS AND NATURE PRESERVES.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if the person intentionally or knowingly
kills, seriously injures, or administers poison to an animal, other than
cattle, horses, sheep, swine or goats, within the boundaries of a city park or
nature preserve, without legal authority.
   (B)   An ANIMAL, as used in this section, shall mean an uncaptured wild
creature or a wild creature whose capture was accomplished by conduct at issue
under this section; except that, ANIMAL shall not include birds or fowl covered
under §§
95.055 through
95.057 of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 18-107)  (Ord. 03-15, passed 5-21-2003)  Penalty, see §
95.999
DOGS AND CATS
§ 95.015  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AT LARGE. A dog shall be deemed at large within the meaning of this
subchapter when it is not under the control of the owner, or that of a person
authorized by the owner to care for such dog, either by cord, leash, chain or
confinement.
   CATS. Both male and female feline animals.
   CONFINEMENT. Confined within a building or home, or within a fenced yard or
premises, so that the dog cannot escape from the building, house or fenced yard
or premises without human assistance.
   DOGS. Both male and female canine animals.
   OWNER. Any person, firm, association or group, unincorporated or not,
owning, keeping or harboring a dog or cat.
(1998 Code, § 18-31)
§ 95.016  RABIES VACCINATION REQUIRED; CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   All dogs and cats, four months of age or older, within the city are
hereby required to be immunized against rabies by means of an anti-rabies
vaccine approved by the Galveston County Animal Resource Center and
administered by a duly licensed veterinarian.
   (B)   Every veterinarian who vaccinates any dog or cat within the city shall
issue a certificate of vaccination to the owner, stating the name and address
of the owner, a description of the dog or cat, the date of vaccination, the
number of the rabies vaccination tag and the kind of vaccine used, which the
owner shall give to the authorized person of the city.
(1998 Code, § 18-32)
§ 95.017  ISSUANCE OF TAG; FEE; WEARING OF TAG; REPLACEMENT TAGS.
   (A)   Upon the presentation of proof of vaccination of each dog or cat and
the payment of a fee of $10, the the Galveston County Animal Resource Center
shall furnish the owner thereof a durable tag per animal. The tag shall be
valid for the time of ownership or control of such animal and shall at all
times be securely attached to a collar or harness around the neck of the
animal.
   (B)   In the event of replacement for a lost tag or change in ownership or
control of such animal, there shall be a fee of $10.
(1998 Code, § 18-33)
Statutory reference:
   Annual registration of dogs and issuance of identification tags, see Tex.
Health and Safety Code §§ 822.021 et seq.
§ 95.018  RECORDS OF TAGS.
   The the Galveston County Animal Resource Center shall prepare a card upon
which shall be recorded the name of the person receiving an identification tag
under §
95.017 of this chapter, his or her address, a description of the animal for
which a tag is issued and the date of inoculation. The card shall be kept in
such a place as to be readily available to the Galveston County Animal Resource
Center for inspection.
(1998 Code, § 18-34)
§ 95.019  AFFIXING TAG, COLLAR OR HARNESS IN CRUEL MANNER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to so affix, attach or secure on or to
any dog or cat any tag, rope, collar or harness or other article in such a
manner as to cause the animal pain or suffering.
(1998 Code, § 18-35)  Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.020  IMPOUNDMENT AUTHORIZED.
   It shall be the duty of the city animal control officers to cause to be
taken up or impounded all dogs or cats found in the city in violation of the
terms of this subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 18-36)
§ 95.021  REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS AND CATS; DESTRUCTION OR VACCINATION OF
UNREDEEMED ANIMALS.
   (A)   Generally. The owner of any impounded dog or cat shall have the right
to redeem the dog or cat upon payment to the poundmaster of the sums provided
for in the County Health District regulations for each dog or cat redeemed, in
addition to the tax or fine, if any.
(1998 Code, § 18-37)
   (B)   Destruction of unredeemed animals.
      (1)   All impounded dogs or cats shall be redeemed in accordance with
County Health District regulations.
      (2)   All impounded dogs or cats not redeemed in accordance with such
regulations shall be destroyed.
(1998 Code, § 18-38)
   (C)   Vaccination of redeemed animals. All dogs or cats redeemed at the
pound must be immediately vaccinated against rabies as provided in this
subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 18-39)
§ 95.022  PAYMENT OF COSTS OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   Every owner of any dog or cat impounded, whether by the city or voluntarily
by the owner, shall be liable for all costs and fees incurred by the
impoundment.
(1998 Code, § 18-40)
§ 95.023  DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   No owner or keeper of any dog shall permit the dog to run at large within
the corporate limits of the city.
(1998 Code, § 18-41)  Penalty, see §
95.999
Statutory reference:
   Authority of cities to regulate or restrain and prohibit the running at
large of dogs and to authorize their destruction when at large, see Tex. Health
and Safety Code § 826.033
§ 95.024  DESTRUCTION OF DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS DOGS.
   (A)   Any dangerous or vicious dog or dog having dangerous or vicious
propensities and tendencies found at large after the owner thereof has previous
knowledge or notice that such dog is dangerous or vicious or has dangerous or
vicious propensities and tendencies may be killed by any police officer of the
city without the officer having to catch or impound such dog.
   (B)   If any dog bites or attempts to bite any person while the dog is at
large, then the dog shall be conclusively presumed to be a dangerous dog and a
dog of dangerous propensities and tendencies.
   (C)   If any dog attacks or attempts to attack any other dog or other animal
while such dog is at large, or chases or otherwise attempts to catch a person,
then the dog shall be conclusively presumed to be a vicious dog and to have
vicious propensities and tendencies.
(1998 Code, § 18-42)
§ 95.025  BARKING OR HOWLING DOGS.
   Any person who shall harbor or keep on his or her premises or in or about
his or her premises or premises under his or her control any dog which, by loud
or unusual barking or howling, shall cause or is reasonably liable to cause the
peace and quiet of the neighborhood or the occupants of adjacent premises to be
disturbed, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1998 Code, § 18-43)  Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.026  INTENTIONALLY RELEASING OR DUMPING DOGS.
   Any person found guilty of intentionally releasing or dumping a dog within
the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1998 Code, § 18-44)  Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.027  MAXIMUM NUMBER OF DOGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, possess or maintain
more than four dogs upon or within any premises owned by such person within the
city at any one time.
(1998 Code, § 18-45)  Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.028  PROHIBITION AGAINST THE CHAINING OR TETHERING OF DOGS AND MANDATING
THAT DOG ENCLOSURES MUST PROVIDE 150 SQUARE FEET OF SPACE.
   (A)   Any person owning and/or controlling dogs whether vaccinated or
unvaccinated licensed or unlicensed, shall not allow said animal to be tied or
chained to dog houses, or other stationary objects.
   (B)   No person shall, at any time, fasten, chain or tie any dog or cause
such dog to be fastened, chained or tied while such dog is on the dog owner’s
property, or on the property of the dog owner’s landlord, or on any property
within the limits of the city.
   (C)   Any dog confined within a fenced yard must have an adequate space for
exercise based on a dimension of at least 150 square feet per dog; provided
further that, where dogs are kept or housed on property without a fenced yard,
the owner of such dogs or persons have custody of such dogs shall provide an
enclosure for such dogs meeting the 150 square foot per dog dimensions. Such
enclosure shall be constructed of chain link or similar type materials with all
four sides enclosed. The enclosure shall be sufficient height to prevent the
dog from escaping from such enclosure. The top of such enclosure shall be
covered with materials to provide the dog with shade and protection from the
elements.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit owners or
others walking dogs with a hand held leash.
   (E)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit owners from
allowing dogs to be attached to over head runs (i.e., leash or chain attached
to an over head wire at least ten feet long, that allows the dog to move
unheeded.)
(1998 Code, § 18-46)  (Ord. 07-13, passed 3-7-2007)  Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.029  DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS TENDENCIES. The following shall be deemed animals
with dangerous or vicious tendencies:
         (a)   Any animal that inflicts severe injury or death to a person, or
bites a person on public or private property;
         (b)   Any animal that has killed a domestic animal without provocation
while off the owner’s property;
         (c)   Any animal which chases or approaches a person upon the streets,
sidewalks or any public or private property in a menacing fashion or apparent
attitude of attack such that the person reasonably believes that the animal
will cause physical injury to that person; and
         (d)   Any individual animal with a known propensity, tendency or
disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise threaten the
safety of persons or domestic animals.
   (B)   Wild and exotic animals. Any animal, under the definition of the term
“wild and exotic”, shall be presumed to be a vicious animal. WILD AND EXOTIC
ANIMALS shall mean any mammal, amphibian, reptile or fowl which is of a species
which is wild by nature, and of a species which, due to size, vicious nature or
other characteristic, is dangerous to human beings. Such animals shall include,
but not be limited to, lions, tigers, leopards, panthers, lynx, wolves,
raccoons, skunks (whether deodorized or not), apes, gorillas, monkeys, foxes,
elephants, rhinoceroses, alligators, crocodiles and all forms of poisonous
reptiles, and any other animal that is not indigenous to the county. The term
“wild animal” shall not include gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, mice, rabbits
and ferrets.
   (C)   Declaration of vicious animal.
      (1)   An animal shall be automatically declared to be a vicious animal
under division (A) above, divisions (a) through (c) of the definition.
      (2)   The city’s Environmental Crimes Officer, or his or her designee,
may find and declare an animal to be a vicious animal if the Director has cause
to believe that an animal is a vicious animal under division (A) above,
division (d) of the definition or division (B) above.
   (D)   Notification to owner of designation of vicious animal. The city’s
Environmental Crimes Officer, or his or her designee, shall notify the owner of
the animal of its designation as a vicious animal and of the requirements for
the owners of a vicious animal as set out in division (H) below.
   (E)   Appeals. If the animal is declared to be vicious under this section,
the notice shall inform the owner of the animal that a determination hearing
may be requested to contest the declaration. The request for a hearing must be
in writing and must be received by the Environmental Crimes Officer, or his or
her designee, within ten calendar days of the date of the vicious animal
declaration. Failure to appeal the declaration of vicious animal within the
ten-day period shall result in the regulatory authority’s declaration as final.
   (F)   Defenses to declaration of vicious animal. It is a defense to the
determination of an animal as vicious and to the prosecution of the owner of an
animal previously declared to be vicious if:
      (1)   The person was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the
animal or was observed or reported to have teased, tormented, abused or
assaulted the animal;
      (2)   The person was committing or attempting to commit a crime;
      (3)   The domestic animal killed was at the time teasing, tormenting,
abusing or assaulting the animal;
      (4)   The animal was protecting or defending a person within the
immediate vicinity of the animal from an unjustified attack or assault;
      (5)   The animal was injured and responding to pain; or
      (6)   The animal was protecting her puppies, itself or its kennel mates.
   (G)   Registration of vicious animals; required notifications to
Environmental Crimes Officer; sale or relocation of animal.
      (1)   The owner of an animal declared to be vicious under this section
shall, within ten calendar days of the date of the vicious animal declaration,
register the animal with the Environmental Crimes Officer, or his or her
designee.
      (2)   The owner shall notify the Environmental Crimes Officer, or his or
her designee, as soon as possible, but under any circumstances within 24 hours,
if a vicious animal is loose, stolen or unconfined in any approved enclosure,
has attacked another animal or has attacked a person, or has died.
      (3)   The city’s Environmental Crimes Officer, or his or her designee,
may, at his or her discretion, allow or disallow the relocation, giving or
selling of a vicious animal. The approval by the Galveston County Animal
Resource Center to give, sell or relocate a vicious animal shall be in writing.
      (4)   If the owner of the vicious animal obtains approval to relocate,
sell or give away a vicious animal, the owner shall provide the Environmental
Crimes Officer, or his or her designee, with the name, address and telephone
number of the new owner or location of the new or improved enclosure. The new
owner must sign a sworn statement that he or she will comply with all the
requirements of owners of vicious animals if within the city. The new owner
must comply with the requirements of owners of vicious animals. The new owner
must comply with the requirements of owners within 30 days.
   (H)   Requirements for owners of vicious animals.
      (1)   An owner of an animal declared to be a vicious animal under this
section must comply with the following within 30 days of such final
determination. Compliance with these requirements will be determined by the
Officer or designee.
         (a)   The animal must be registered in accordance with this section.
         (b)   The vicious animal must be kept in a proper enclosure. The fence
or structure/pen must form an enclosure suitable to prevent entry of young
children, and must be locked and secured such that a dog cannot climb, dig,
jump or otherwise escape of its own volition. The enclosure shall be securely
locked at all times. The structure/pen must have six secure sides (including
top and bottom) to prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure. The
structure/pen shall provide protection from the elements for the animal.
         (c)   The owner must present to the Environmental Crimes Officer, or
his or her designee, a certificate of public liability insurance in the amount
of $100,000 to cover any damages caused or which may be caused by the vicious
animal. The insurance shall be for a 12-month period and shall not be cancelled
unless the animal is no longer kept by the owner. The city shall be named as a
certificate holder and shall be entitled to receive notices of cancellation and
policy renewals directly.
         (d)   The vicious animal, when taken outside the enclosure, must be
securely muzzled in a manner that will not cause injury to the vicious animal
or interfere with its vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting
any person or animal, and the vicious animal must be restrained by a
substantial chain or cable leash having a minimum tensile strength of 1,000
pounds and not to exceed six feet in length, and shall be restricted from any
public park.
         (e)   The owner shall post a sign on his or her premises warning that
there is a vicious animal on the property. This sign shall be visible and
capable of being read from the public street or highway.
         (f)   The vicious animal must be spayed or neutered and micro-chipped.
      (2)   If the owner of an animal declared to be vicious under this section
is unable to unwilling to comply with the ownership requirements listed in this
division (H), the animal shall be euthanized by an animal shelter, the animal
control agency, a licensed veterinarian or the regulatory authority. An animal
declared to be vicious under this section shall not be offered for adoption or
sale and shall not be moved from the approved enclosure or the city without
written permission from the regulatory authority.
   (I)   Dangerous or vicious animals at large. Any animal having dangerous or
vicious propensities and tendencies found at large after the owner thereof has
previous knowledge or notice that such animal is dangerous or vicious or has
dangerous or vicious propensities and tendencies may be killed by any law
enforcement officer without the officer having to catch or impound such animal
or notifying the owner of the animal.
   (J)   License revocation. The Environmental Crimes Officer, his or her
designee, may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a city collar/
tag for any dog or cat whose owner has been notified that the animal has been
declared dangerous or vicious, if:
      (1)   The dog or cat is not confined or is found running at large;
      (2)   The dog or cat is not muzzled as required in this section;
      (3)   The dog or cat bites or attempts to bite any person or chases or
otherwise attempts to catch a person;
      (4)   The dog or cat attacks or attempts to attack any other animal when
in violation of any section of this chapter;
      (5)   The owner has been convicted of any violation of a federal, state
or local law, ordinance or rule pertaining to the dog or cat;
      (6)   The owner does not register the vicious animal or obtain the
insurance coverage as required in division (G) above; or
      (7)   The owner does not build, obtain or provide an enclosure for the
vicious animal, have the enclosure approved by the regulatory authority and
confine the vicious animal within the enclosure. The owner shall have 30 days
from the date on which the owner knows his or her animal has engaged in vicious
conduct to obtain the approved enclosure.
   (K)   Muzzling. Any dog tied or staked to public property shall be securely
muzzled by the owner in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal or
interfere with its vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting any
person or animal. Further, the owner of any animal which has been conclusively
presumed to be dangerous or vicious shall muzzle such animal when:
      (1)   The animal is not confined in a secure enclosure or is off the
premises of the owner;
      (2)   The animal is on the premises of a business when such business is
open or accessible to the public;
      (3)   The animal is on the outside premises of private property and not
confined in such a manner as to preclude contact with casual visitors such as a
mail person or delivery person, meter reader, children and the like;
      (4)   The animal is on the outside of premises of private property where
appropriate and adequate warning signs which are visible and capable of being
read from the public street or highway have not been posted; or
      (5)   The animal is on a leash, on or off the owner’s property, and not
confined as required in division (H)(2) above.
   (L)   Exemptions. The provision of this section shall not apply to any law
enforcement agency where a dog is being used for law enforcement.
(1998 Code, § 18-47)  (Ord. 07-14, passed 3-7-2007)  Penalty, see §
95.999
RABIES CONTROL
§ 95.040  REPORT AND CONFINEMENT OF RABID ANIMALS.
   Rabid animals shall be reported and confined in accordance with Tex. Health
and Safety Code §§ 826.041 through 826.044.
(1998 Code, § 18-71)
§ 95.041  KILLING OF RABID ANIMALS.
   The Animal Control Officers and police officers of the city shall have the
right to shoot or kill any rabid animal within the corporate limits of the city
which shall manifest a disposition to bite.
(1998 Code, § 18-72)
BIRD SANCTUARIES
§ 95.055  ESTABLISHED.
   The area embraced within the corporate limits of the city shall be the
improved areas of the city, municipal parks, the seawall and the Texas City
Dike, and such area is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary.
(1998 Code, § 18-101)
§ 95.056  INJURING OR MOLESTING BIRDS OR NESTS.
   It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or molest in any manner any bird
or wildfowl, or to rob bird nests or wildfowl nests, within the corporate
limits of the city.
(1998 Code, § 18-102)  Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.057  DESTRUCTION OF NUISANCE BIRDS.
   (A)   If starlings, pigeons or similar birds are found to be congregating in
numbers in a particular locality within the corporate limits of the city, and
by such congregating constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property in
the opinion of the county health authorities or the City Commission, a meeting
shall be called by either authority.
   (B)   (1)   A joint committee appointed by the City Commission and by the
County Health Authorities shall meet; and, if as a result of such meeting no
satisfactory alternative is found to abate the nuisance, the birds constituting
such nuisance may be destroyed, in such numbers and in such a manner as may be
deemed advisable by the committee.
      (2)   Such meeting shall be subject to the open meetings laws.
(1998 Code, § 18-103)
LIVESTOCK
§ 95.070  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LIVESTOCK. Any grazing animal, including but not limited to cattle, horses,
mules, asses, burros, sheep and goats.
   RUN AT LARGE. An animal is not under actual physical restraint by means of a
pen, fence or other structure or any type of lead.
(1998 Code, § 18-121)  (Ord. 05-08, passed 7-20-2005)
§ 95.071  OWNER’S REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The owner or possessor of any livestock situated within the city
limits of the city must annually complete an application and obtain an owner’s
registration from the Police Department. The Police Department shall retain a
copy on file of each owner’s registration.
   (B)   The cost of the owner’s registration shall be $10, regardless of
amount of livestock.
   (C)   Owner’s registrations shall expire automatically on August 31 of each
year.
(1998 Code, § 18-122)  (Ord. 05-08, passed 7-20-2005)  Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.072  POSTING.
   (A)   The owner’s registration number must be clearly posted at all exterior
gates to the premises to which the livestock is housed or kept.
   (B)   Failure to post proof of owner’s registration is an offense.
   (C)   Posting or exhibiting fraudulent owner registration information, in
whole or in part, is an offense under this section.
(1998 Code, § 18-123)  (Ord. 05-08, passed 7-20-2005; Ord. 05-29, passed 8-3-
2005)  Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.073  RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (A)   Livestock must be contained in an area with fencing adequate to
prevent the animals from exiting the confines from which they are housed or
kept.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit livestock owned
or possessed by that person to run at large.
   (C)   A culpable mental state is not required as an element of this offense.
It is an affirmative defense to prosecution if the livestock was running at
large due to the act of a third person, other than the owner or occupant of the
premises, or due to some factor not reasonably foreseeable by the owner or
person having possession of the livestock.
   (D)   Livestock running at large are subject to impoundment by Galveston
County designated by the city.
(1998 Code, § 18-124)  (Ord. 05-08, passed 7-20-2005)  Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.074  NOTIFICATION OF LOOSE LIVESTOCK.
   The Police will contact the county regarding loose livestock.
§ 95.999  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   If any person violates any provision of §
95.028 of this chapter, it shall constitute a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalties set forth
in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(1998 Code, § 18-46)
   (C)   Anyone violating any provision of §§
95.055 through
95.057 of this chapter by trapping, hunting, shooting, shooting at or molesting
any bird or wildfowl or robbing the nests of birds or wildfowl in the corporate
limits of the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall
be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(1998 Code, § 18-104)
   (D)   Failure of the owner or possessor of livestock to register the
livestock is an offense under §
95.071 of this chapter. A violator on the first violation shall be issued a
warning citation. For subsequent violations, the violation may be punishable by
a fine of not less than $25 and not more than $500, upon conviction.
(1998 Code, § 18-122)
   (E)   (1)   A violator on the first violation of §
95.072(B) of this chapter shall be issued a warning citation. For subsequent
violations, the violation may be punishable by a fine of not less than $25 and
not more than $500, upon conviction.
      (2)   Violation of §
95.072(C) of this chapter is punishable by a fine of not less than $50 and not
more than $500, upon conviction.
(1998 Code, § 18-123)
   (F)   An offense under §
95.073 of this chapter is punishable by a fine of not less than $25 and not
more than $500, upon conviction.
(1998 Code, § 18-124)
(Ord. 05-08, passed 7-20-2005; Ord. 05-29, passed 8-3-2005; Ord. 07-13, passed
3-7-2007)
CHAPTER 96:  FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION; FIREWORKS
Section
Fire Prevention Code
   
96.01   Adoption of International Fire Code
   
96.02   Amendments to International Fire Code
Liquefied Petroleum Gas
   
96.15   Definitions
   
96.16   Standards for piping and appliances
   
96.17   Standards for installation and repair of equipment; inspections
   
96.18   Storage inside or underneath buildings
   
96.19   Treatment of gas for odor
Fireworks
   
96.30   Definitions
   
96.31   General prohibition
   
96.32   Exceptions
   
96.33   Public displays exempted
   
96.34   Illegal fireworks declared nuisance; seizure and destruction
 
   
96.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Exhibit A - Permit Fee Schedule
Statutory reference:
   Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code, see Tex. Natural Resources Code § 113.001
   Malodorants, see Tex. Utilities Code, § 121.252
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
§ 96.01  ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
   There is hereby adopted by the City Commission, for the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property
from fire or explosion, that certain Code known as the 2015 Edition of the
International Fire Code including an amended Appendix A, and Appendices B, C,
D, E, F, H, I and K of the 2015 Edition of the International Fire Code
published by the International Fire Code Institute and the International
Conference of Building Officials, being particularly the 2015 Edition thereof
and the whole thereof, save and except such portions as are hereinafter
deleted, modified or amended by this subchapter, of which code and standards
copies have been and are now filed in the office of the City Secretary and the
same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length
herein, and from the date on which this subchapter shall take effect, the
provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city.
(Ord. 15-43, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 96.02  AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.
   The code adopted by §
96.01 of this chapter is amended as provided in this section.
   (A)   Sec. 101.1 Administration.
      Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of
Texas City, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”
   (B)   Sec. 102.7 is amended by the addition of the following:
      Sec. 102.7 Referenced codes and standards. Whenever amendments have been
adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and
standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. The
referenced codes and standards referenced in this code are listed in Chapter
80, and such codes and standards shall be considered to be part of the
requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and
as further regulated in Sections 102.7.1 and 102.7.2.
   (C)   Secs. 103.1, 103.2, and 103.3 are amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 103 Department of Fire Prevention.
      Sec. 103.1 General. The Fire Code shall be enforced by the Division of
Fire Prevention. The Division of Fire Prevention is hereby established as a
division of the Fire Department of the City of Texas City and shall be operated
under the supervision of the Fire Marshal, and Chief of the Fire Department.
      Sec. 103.2 Appointment. The Fire Marshal in charge of the Division of
Fire Prevention shall be appointed by the Fire Chief on the basis of proper
qualification.
      Sec. 103.3 Deputies. The Chief of the Fire Department may detail such
members of the Fire Department as inspectors as shall from time to time be
necessary and each member so assigned shall be authorized to enforce the
provisions of the International Fire Code. [Remainder of section 103
unchanged].
   (D)   Sec. 105.6 is amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 105.6 Required Operational Permits. The Fire Code Official is
authorized to issue operational permits for the operations set froth in section
105.6.1 through 105.6.48. Operational permits are required for: Installation of
New Fire Alarm Systems, additions or upgrades to Fire Alarm Systems, Re-Test of
Fire suppression/alarm Systems, Above ground fuel storage tank, underground
storage tanks, removal of underground storage tanks, taking underground tanks
out of service, Flammable/Combustible liquid dispensing operations; Dry
cleaning plant, Flammable Finish booths (spray booths), Day Care Center, Open
burning, New or upgraded Fixed Fire Suppression systems, New Fire sprinkler
system installation, additions, alterations upgrades to Fire sprinkler systems,
Fire Works Displays, Explosive storage, Storage/Dispensing of compressed gas,
Storage/Dispensing of liquefied gas, Tents & Air supported structures.
Operating without the required operational permit shall result in a stop work
order, as well as a permit fee at twice the rate of the originally required
permit. Permit fee schedule attached at the end of this chapter at Exhibit A,
is available at Texas City Fire Administration Building, as well as the Fire
Department web page http://www.texas-city-tx.org/Fire.htm. The Commission may
change the rates to the attached Exhibit A upon recommendation of fire code
officials, by ordinance, and said amended schedule shall be posted at the Texas
City Fire Administration Building and on the Fire Department web page.
   (E)   Sec. 109.3 is amended by the addition of the following:
      Sec. 109.3 Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the
provisions or terms of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction in the Municipal Court, shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed TWO THOUSAND AND NO/100 ($2,000.00) DOLLARS for each offense, and each
and every day any such violation shall continue and shall be deemed to
constitute a separate offense.
   (F)   Section 109.4 is amended by the addition of the following:
      Section 109.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision
of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or
who shall erect, install, alter, repair, do work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit
or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction in the Municipal Court, shall be subject to a
fine of not less than TWO HUNDRED AND NO/100 ($200.00), and not to exceed TWO
THOUSAND AND NO/100 ($2,000.00) dollars for each offense or by imprisonment not
exceeding 3 days (72 hours), or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that
a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   (G)   Sec. 111 is amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 111 Stop Work Orders. Any person, firm, or corporation operating
without the required applicable operational permit listed in Sec.105.6
amendment shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction in the
Municipal Court, shall be subject to a fine of not less than TWO HUNDRED AND
NO/100 ($200.00), and not to exceed TWO THOUSAND AND NO/100 ($2,000.00) DOLLARS
for each offense. [Remainder of section 111 unchanged.]
   (H)   Sec. 111.4 is amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 111.4 Any person who shall continue any work after having been
served with a stop work order except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to for a
fine not to exceed TWO THOUSAND AND NO/100 ($2,000.00) DOLLARS for each
offense, and each and every day such violation shall continue shall be deemed
to constitute a separate offense.
   (I)   Sec. 202 is amended by the addition of the following:
      Sec. 202 General Definitions.
      SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY. Real property designed and used for the
purpose of renting or leasing individual storage spaces to customers for the
purpose of storing and removing personal property on a self-service basis.
      FIREWATCH & STANDBY PERSONNEL. Qualified fire service personnel, approved
by the Fire Marshal. When utilized, the number required shall be as directed by
the Fire Chief or Fire Marshal. Charges for utilization shall be as normally
calculated by the jurisdiction. The owner or lessee shall be responsible for
remitting utilization charges in a timely manner as arranged by the Fire
Marshal or his designee. The owner, lessee, or responsible party shall have a
maximum of ten (10) business days to remit fire watch fees. Persons failing to
remit fire watch fees within ten (10) business days of actual day worked shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction in the Municipal Court, shall
be subject to a fine not less than Two Hundred and No/100 Dollars ($200.00),
and not to exceed Two Thousand and No/100 Dollars ($2,000.00), for each
offense.
   (J)   Sec. 307 is amended to read as follows:
      Open Burning.
      Sec. 307 Prohibited Open Burning. Open burning shall be prohibited within
the City of Texas City.  Exception:
      Permits may be issued for open burn, trench burn, not to exceed 15 feet
in diameter and 8 feet in height, and are located a minimum of 50 feet from any
structure or property line. Additional requirements may be imposed, and are at
the discretion of the Fire Marshal.
   (K)   Sec. 403 is amended by the addition of the following:
      Standby Personnel.
      Sec. 403 Fire watch & Standby Personnel
      Sec. 403.12.1 Fire watch & Standby personnel/Crowd managers. When, in the
opinion of the Fire Marshal or his designee, it is essential for public safety
in a residential occupancy, a place of assembly or any other place where people
congregate, because of the number of persons, or the nature of the performance,
exhibition, display, contest, activity or the required fire protection system
is inoperable or red tagged, the owner, agent or lessee shall employ standby
personnel, to remain on duty 1 hour prior to times such places are open to the
public, or when such activity is being conducted.
      Before each performance or the start of such activity, standby personnel
shall keep diligent watch for fires during the time such place is open to the
public or such activity is being conducted to take prompt measures as directed
by the Fire Marshal. Such duties may include, but not be limited to,
extinguishment of fires that occur and assist in the evacuation of the public
from the structure.
      There shall be trained standby personnel/crowd managers or crowd manager
supervisors at a ratio determined by the Fire Chief, or Fire Marshal.
   (L)   Sec. 503.2.3 Surface is amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 503.2.3 Surface. Fire lanes shall be constructed of an asphalt or
concrete surface capable of supporting the imposed loads of fire apparatus and
meeting the requirements of the City of Texas City parking lot standards. Those
portions of the fire lane within sixty feet (60') of the structure to be
protected shall be constructed with 6-inch thick, 3000 psi concrete or 5-inch
thick, 3600 psi concrete reinforced with No. 3 bars spaced 24 inches on centers
both ways and with sub-grade to a density not less than 95 percent as
determined by TSDHPT Test Method Tex-113. Portions of the fire lane constructed
of asphalt shall be ninety-five (95) percent compaction with a 6-inch asphalt
stabilized base and 2-inch type D hot mix asphalt concrete. State Highway
specification number 292. Whenever forty percent (40%) of existing, non-
conforming fire lanes are replaced within a twelve month period, the entire
fire lane shall be replaced according to current standards.
      All fire lanes shall be maintained and kept in a good state of repair at
all times by the owner and the City of Texas City shall not be responsible for
the maintenance thereof. It shall further be the responsibility of the owner to
insure that all fire lane markings required by Sec. 503.3 be kept so that they
are easily distinguishable by the public.
   (M)   Sec. 503.2.4 is amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 503.2.4 Turning Radius. The required turning radius and curve radius
for access roads shall be a minimum of twenty-five feet (25').
   (N)   Section 503.6 is amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 503.6 Security gates. Where security fencing is necessary, the owner
shall provide gates or openings which may be secured. Gates when provided must
open fully in either direction or be of a sliding or raised arm type. The main
entry gates serving Group R & I occupancies shall be equipped with an approved
automated entry system. All other entry points along the fire lane must be
automated or Knox compatible as approved by the Fire Marshal, to permit
immediate access by fire personnel and equipment in the event of fire or
emergency.
   (O)   Sec. 901.5 is amended to read as follows:
      System Approval and Testing.
      Sec. 901.5 Installation acceptance testing. All required tests shall be
conducted by and at the expense of the owner or his representative. The Fire
Department shall not be held responsible for any damages incurred in such test.
Where it is required that the Fire Department witness any such test, such test
shall be scheduled with a minimum of 48 hour notice to the Fire Marshal or his
representative. [Remainder of section 901.5 unchanged.]
   (P)   Sec. 902 is amended to read as follows:
      Fire Area: For the purpose of this provision, fire walls shall not define
separate buildings or fire areas.
      PROTECTED PROPERTIES. Fire hydrants required to provide a supplemental
water supply for automatic fire protection system shall be within 150 feet of
the fire department connection for such system. [Remainder of section 902
unchanged.]      
      FIRE HYDRANT LOCATIONS. Fire hydrants shall be located 2 feet to 6 feet
back of curb or fire lane and shall not be located in the bulb of a cul-de-sac.
Hydrant discharges must be a minimum of (18") inches in height from final grade
to lowest point of discharge. [Remainder of section 902 unchanged.]
   (Q)   Sec. 903.3.7 is amended by the addition of the following:
      Sec. 903.3.7 Fire department connections. All buildings with fire
department hose connections (FDC) on the building shall have a sign with (6)
inch reflective letters “FDC” directly above the unobstructed connection. The
sign shall be mounted directly to the building unobstructed, have RED letters
on a WHITE background or WHITE letters on a RED background and be made of a
durable material.
      All buildings with fire department hose connections (FDC) off the
building shall have a sign with (6) inch reflective letters “FDC” directly
above the unobstructed connection. The sign shall be mounted to a durable post,
have RED letters on a WHITE background or WHITE letters on a RED background and
be made of a durable material. [Remainder of section 903.3.7 unchanged.]
      First line--FDC
      Second line--Address, suite#, and or BLDG#
      Third line--Additional space for Address or Building information.
      Note: All FDC connections shall be a minimum of 36"(inches) above grade
and no higher than 48"(inches) above grade.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7306ab21d381f71b691cecb749da3bd91fbd7fa7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2879.jpg]
 
   Sprinkler riser rooms shall have a sign on the door visible from the
exterior of building. The sign shall be mounted directly to the door
unobstructed, have RED reflective letters on a WHITE background or WHITE
reflective letters on a RED background and be made of a durable material. Doors
may be painted or stenciled, Sign shall be a minimum of 12" X 12" and have
large visible lettering (minimum 2" letters). Group R occupancies may have
smaller signs if approved by Fire Marshal’s Office.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7306ab21d381f71b691cecb749da3bd91fbd7fa7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2881.jpg]
 
      Fire alarm and detection systems.
   (S)   Sec. 907.2.3; change to read as follows:
      Sec. 907.2.3 Groups E, I, & R. A manual fire alarm system shall be
installed in Group E, Group I, and Group R occupancies. When automatic
sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems or detectors
shall be connected to the building fire alarm system. An approved smoke
detection system shall be installed in Group E (daycares, schools), Group I
(nursing homes assisted living homes, hospitals), and Group R occupancies
(senior apartment communities, hotels in which room doors do not discharge
directly to the exterior of building). An approved off site fire alarm
monitoring service shall be provided for groups E, I, R and occupancies
required to have an automatic sprinkler system. Fire Alarm monitoring service
must report directly to Texas City Central dispatch center. Occupancy shall
provide Texas City Fire Marshal’s Office with all monitoring information such
as name of service provider, account number and pass code. Where automatic fire
sprinklers are not required, a full-coverage smoke detection system shall be
provided in all Group E occupancies. Unless separated by a minimum of 100 feet
open space, all buildings, whether portable buildings or the main building,
will be considered one building for alarm occupant load consideration and
interconnection of alarm systems. [Remainder of section 907.2.3 unchanged.]
   (T)   Sec. 907.2.6.1 is amended by the addition of the following:
      Sec. 907.2.6.1 Group I Occupancies. An approved smoke detection system
shall be installed in Group I4 occupancies where automatic fire sprinklers are
not required, a full-coverage smoke detection system shall be provided in all
Group I occupancies. [Remainder of section 907.2.6.1 unchanged.]
   (U)   Sec. 1003 is amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 1003 Means of egress illumination. Emergency lighting with battery
back-up shall be provided if travel distance to an exit is greater than 100
feet. Emergency lighting shall be at intervals not greater than 100 feet apart
and shall illuminate the path of egress. [Remainder of section 1003 unchanged.]
   (V)   Sec. 1101.1 is amended to read as follows:
      Commercial Build-outs/Renovations Plan Review. Commercial renovation
plans shall be reviewed and approved by Texas City Fire Department prior to
construction. Failed inspections may incur a re-inspection fee. Re-Inspection
Fee amounts are listed on the Fire Department Fee Schedule. [Remainder of
section 1101.1 unchanged.]
   (W)   Sec. 2404.4 is amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 2404.4 Fire Protection. New and existing spray booths and spray
rooms shall be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system  .
. . {'{'}remainder of section unchanged{'}'} complying with Chapter 9 which
shall also protect all exhaust plenums, exhaust ducts and both sides of dry
filters when such filters are used. [Remainder of section 2404.4 unchanged.]
   (X)   Sec. 5701 is amended to read as follows:
      Sec. 5701 Location Where Above-Ground Tanks are Prohibited. The storage
of flammable or combustible liquids in outside above ground tanks is prohibited
within each and every zoning district within the City of Texas City with the
exception of those districts which are zoned for light industrial zoning use.
Installation of above ground tanks in all zoning districts shall be permitted
at the discretion of the Fire Marshal following his review of the proposed
installation location, and the fire protection for the storage area. Tanks
shall not be located within one hundred feet (100') of the property line of any
Group E, I or R occupancies. [Remainder of section 5701 unchanged.]
   (Y)   An added False Fire alarm section to read as follows:
      Determination of false alarm.
      Fire Marshal’s Office, or by the Fire department officer on the scene of
the premises reporting an alarm signal will determine if the alarm is false. If
any of the following conditions listed below are present, the alarm will be
considered a false alarm:
      (1)   There is no evidence of a fire or other activity that would warrant
a call for immediate fire department assistance at the premises;
      (2)   No individual who was on or near the premises called the fire
department dispatch or verified a need for an immediate emergency response.
      (3)   Unlawful tampering with a fire alarm system.
      Fees and cost recovery:
      A municipal citation may be issued to the owner, occupant or person in
charge where the alarm system is located.
      False alarm fee schedule:
         1st through 4th  - No fee
         5th - $150.00 fee
         6th and above - $250.00 fee, each
      Exempt Alarms: The first four (4) false alarms from any one system during
a 12-month consecutive period be exempt.
      Example: False alarm occurs on November 3, 2015, all false alarms that
occurred between November 3, 2015 and November 3, 2014 will be counted.
   (Z)   Amended Appendix A:
      APPEALS
      A101.1 Scope. The Texas City Building and Standards Commission referenced
in Chapter 150 of the City of Texas City, Texas Code of Ordinances shall hear
all appeals within the jurisdiction, to decide if modifications comply with the
intent of the protection required by the International Fire Code pursuant to
the provisions of Section 108 of the International Fire Code. The Building and
Standards Commission shall operate in accordance with this section, and shall
be authorized to hear evidence from appellants and the fire code official
pertaining to the application and intent of this code for the purpose of
issuing orders pursuant to these provisions.
   (AA)   Sec. A101.2 is deleted.
   (BB)   Sec. A101.2.1 is deleted.
   (CC)   Sec. A101.2.2 is deleted.
   (DD)   Sec. A101.2.3 is deleted.
   (EE)   Sec. A101.2.4 is deleted.
   (FF)   Sec. A101.2.5 is deleted.
   (GG)   Sec. A101.3 is deleted.
   (HH)   Sec. A101.3.1 is deleted.
   (II)   Sec. A101.3.2 is deleted.
   (JJ)   Sec. A101.3.3 is deleted.
   (KK)   Sec. A101.4 is deleted.
   (LL)   Sec. A101.5 is deleted.
   (MM)   Sec. A101.6 is deleted.
   (NN)   Sec. A101.7 is amended to read as follows:
      Sec. A101.7 Meetings. The board shall meet in any event within 30 days
after notice of appeal has been received.
   (OO)   Sec. A101.8 is deleted.
   (PP)   Sec. A101.9 Decisions. [Unchanged.]
   (QQ)   Sec. A101.10 is amended to include:
      Sec. A101.10 Procedures. Authorizing suits for injunctive relief.
      Notwithstanding any penal provision of this Ordinance, the City Attorney
is authorized to file on behalf of the City of Texas City, the Fire Chief or
his authorized representative, or both for injunctive relief as may be
necessary to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. [Remainder of section
A101.10 unchanged.]
(Ord. 15-43, passed 12-16-2015)
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS
§ 96.15  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EQUIPMENT. All that equipment designed to use as fuel any form of
manufactured or liquefied petroleum gases.
   STANDARD GRADE. The grade of article which is accepted by dealers in such
equipment and recognized as complying with all fire law regulations.
(1998 Code, § 54-101)
§ 96.16  STANDARDS FOR PIPING AND APPLIANCES.
   All persons who may install or equip any residence, business house,
apartment house or other building located and situated within the city with any
installation of equipment shall use in any installation, whether for domestic
or industrial use, only a standard grade of pipe or piping. All appliances used
in connection with any installation shall be a standard grade and type of
equipment. Any system which uses any form of manufactured or liquefied
petroleum gases must bear the label of approval or listing of Underwriters’
Laboratories, Inc.
(1998 Code, § 54-102)  Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.17  STANDARDS FOR INSTALLATION AND REPAIR OF EQUIPMENT; INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Minimum standards. Any equipment shall be installed or repaired in a
workmanlike manner which shall comply with all laws and the regulations of the
city, the regulations of the Code adopted by §
96.01 of this chapter and the regulations recommended by the National Fire
Protection Association.
   (B)   Approval by Inspector. When any equipment is installed, it shall not
be placed in operation or used unless and until the installation has been
approved by the City Inspector.
   (C)   Inspection fee. Any person installing any equipment shall, upon
requesting an inspection for approval, pay an inspection fee as set by the City
Commission for each piece of equipment, to cover the cost of inspection.
(1998 Code, § 54-103)  Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.18  STORAGE INSIDE OR UNDERNEATH BUILDINGS.
   The storage of any liquefied petroleum gases in any container, either above
ground or underground, is prohibited inside of or underneath any building in
the city.
(1998 Code, § 54-104)  Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.19  TREATMENT OF GAS FOR ODOR.
   All liquefied petroleum gas sold within the city shall be treated with a
malodorant in quantities as required by state law to create an odor easily
detected in case of leaks in piping or equipment.
(1998 Code, § 54-105)  Penalty, see §
96.99
FIREWORKS
§ 96.30  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISTRIBUTOR. Those who sell fireworks to retailers or to jobbers, for resale
to others.
   FIREWORKS. Any composition or device designed to produce a visible or
audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, such as
firecrackers, cannon crackers, skyrockets, torpedoes, Roman candles, sparklers,
squibs, fire balloons, star shells, gerbs or any other substance in whatever
combination by any designated name intended for use in obtaining visible or
audible pyrotechnic display, and such term shall include all articles or
substances within the commonly accepted meaning of FIREWORKS, whether
specifically designated and defined in this section or not.
   ILLEGAL FIREWORKS. A fireworks device manufactured, distributed or sold in
violation of this subchapter.
   IMPORTER. Those who import fireworks from a foreign country for sale to
distributors, jobbers or retailers within the state.
   JOBBER. Those who purchase fireworks for resale to consumers only.
   MANUFACTURER. Persons that are engaged in the making of fireworks.
   PERSON. Any natural person, association of persons, partnership,
corporation, agent or officer of a corporation, and shall also include all
warehousemen, common and private carriers, bailees, trustees, receivers,
executors and administrators.
   PUBLIC DISPLAY. The igniting and shooting of fireworks for public amusement.
   RETAILER. Those who purchase fireworks for resale to consumers only.
(1998 Code, § 54-125)  (Ord. 98-56, passed 12-2-1998)
§ 96.31  GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this subchapter, it shall be
unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, or have in his or her
possession with intent to sell, keep, use, discharge, cause to be discharged,
ignite, detonate, fire or otherwise set in action any fireworks of any
description.
(1998 Code, § 54-126)  (Ord. 98-56, passed 12-2-1998)  Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.32  EXCEPTIONS.
   The general prohibitions as set forth in §
96.31 of this chapter shall not apply to the following.
   (A)   Section
96.31 of this chapter shall not apply to toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or
similar devices in which paper caps containing 0.0025 grains or less of
explosive compounds are used; provided, they are so constructed that the hand
cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for exploding, and toy paper
pistol caps which contain less than 0.0025 grains of explosive compounds, the
sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
   (B)   It shall not be unlawful, upon a permit issued by the Fire Marshal or
designee, for any person engaged in any organized play, legitimate theatrical
performance, circus or other show designed for the amusement and edification of
the general public to use, discharge or cause to be discharged and ignited
fireworks as a part of an act, performance, play or circus, so long as such
person does not also engage in the retailing, wholesaling, selling or
distribution of any of such fireworks. The Fire Marshal or designee shall cause
to be made an investigation of each application made under this subchapter to
determine whether the use of such fireworks as proposed shall be of such a
character that it may be hazardous to property or dangerous to any person; and
he or she shall, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, grant or deny the
application for such permit.
   (C)   Section
96.31 of this chapter shall not apply to signal flares and torpedoes of the
type and kind commonly used by any railroads, which signal flares and torpedoes
are received by and stored or transported by any railroad for use in railroad
operation; nor shall §
96.31 of this chapter apply to any marine signal flare or rocket which is
transported or received or stored for use only as ship’s stores; nor shall §
96.31 of this chapter apply to signal flares or rockets for military or police
use; nor shall §
96.31 of this chapter apply to signal flares for use by motorists in distress.
(1998 Code, § 54-127)  (Ord. 98-56, passed 12-2-1998)
§ 96.33  PUBLIC DISPLAYS EXEMPTED.
   The provisions of §
96.31 of this chapter shall not apply to a public display of fireworks made
under the terms and conditions of this section, and such display shall be
permitted upon compliance with the provisions of city’s adopted Fire Prevention
Code and of this section, as follows.
   (A)   Any adult person or any firm, copartnership, corporation or
association planning to make a public display of fireworks shall first make
written application for a permit to the Fire Marshal or designee at least 48
hours in advance of the date of the proposed display.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Fire Marshal or designee to make an
investigation as to whether the display as proposed by the applicant for a
permit under this subchapter shall be of such a character that it may be
hazardous to property or dangerous to any person; and he or she shall, in the
exercise of reasonable discretion, grant or deny the application, subject to
the conditions prescribed in this section. If the application is approved, a
permit shall be issued for the public display by the Fire Marshal or designee.
Such permit shall be for a period of time designated on the permit, but shall
not exceed 14 days, and the permit shall not be transferable. If the
application is denied by the Fire Marshal or designee, he or she shall notify
the applicant of the denial in writing.
   (C)   The applicant for a display permit under this section shall, at the
time of making application, furnish proof that he or she carries compensation
insurance for his or her employees as provided by the laws of the state; and he
or she shall file with the Fire Marshal  or designee a certificate of insurance
evidencing the carrying of public liability insurance in an amount not less
than $300,0000, issued by an insurance carrier authorized to transact business
in the state, for the benefit of the person named therein as insured, as
evidence of ability to respond in damages in at least the amount of $300,000,
such policy to be approved by the Fire Marshal or designee. In lieu of
insurance, the applicant may file with the Fire Marshal or designee a bond in
the amount of $300,000, issued by an authorized surety company approved by the
Fire Marshal or designee, conditioned upon the applicant’s payment of all
damages to persons or property which shall or may result from or be caused by
such public display of fireworks or any negligence on the part of the applicant
or his or her agents, servants, employees or subcontractors in the presentation
of the public display.
   (D)   The range of aerial displays shall not be more than 200 feet, and the
fireworks shall be discharged vertically from tubes approved by the Fire
Marshal or designee.
   (E)   The limit of a display authorized by this section shall be not more
than 45 minutes per performance, and there shall not be more than two
performances in each 24 hours.
   (F)   No public display of fireworks shall be of such a character and so
located, discharged or fired as to be hazardous or dangerous to persons or
property, and this determination shall be within the sound discretion of the
Fire Marshal or designee.
   (G)   The persons handling the display of fireworks under this section shall
be competent, adult persons and experienced pyrotechnic operators approved by
the Fire Marshal or designee. No person not approved by the Fire Marshal or
designee shall handle fireworks at the public display. The names of the
experienced pyrotechnic operators shall be designated on the permit issued.
   (H)   (1)   For each public display of fireworks under this section, the
Fire Marshal or designee may require that not less than two firefighters of the
city be in attendance during the display.
      (2)   The expense of such firefighters at the display shall be borne by
the applicant for the permit and shall be paid in advance at the time of the
application for the permit.
   (I)   The material to be used for a public display authorized by this
section shall not be stored within the city limits, but shall be brought in on
the day of the public display and then shall be taken immediately to the place
of display for further handling and storage.
(1998 Code, § 54-128)  (Ord. 98-56, passed 12-2-1998)
§ 96.34  ILLEGAL FIREWORKS DECLARED NUISANCE; SEIZURE AND DESTRUCTION.
   (A)   The presence of any fireworks within the city and within the area
immediately adjacent and contiguous to the city limits extending for a distance
outside of such city limits for a total of 5,000 feet, in violation of this
subchapter, is hereby declared to be a common and public nuisance. The Fire
Marshal or designee is directed and required to seize any fireworks found in
violation of this subchapter, and any authorized Deputy of the Fire Marshal or
designee, or any police officer of the city, or any other duly-constituted
state peace officer is empowered to stop the transportation of and detain any
fireworks being transported illegally or to close any building where any
fireworks are found stored illegally until the Fire Marshal or designee can be
notified, in order that such fireworks may be seized in accordance with the
terms of this subchapter.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any penal provision of this subchapter, the City
Attorney is authorized to file suit on behalf of the city, the Fire Marshal or
designee, or both, for such injunctive relief as may be necessary to prevent
unlawful storage, transportation, keeping or use of fireworks within the city
or within the 5,000-foot area described in division (A) above. It shall not be
necessary to obtain injunctive relief as a prerequisite to seizure of
fireworks.
   (C)   If any fireworks or combustibles are deemed by the Fire Marshal or
designee to be in such a state or condition as to constitute a hazard to life
or property, the Fire Marshal or designee may dispose of such fireworks or
combustibles without further process of law. The Fire Marshal or designee is
authorized to dispose of any abandoned fireworks or combustibles that he or she
deems to be hazardous to life or property.
   (D)   If the person so charged is found guilty of violating the provisions
of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto with regard
to possession, handling or storage of fireworks or combustibles, the Fire
Marshal or designee is authorized to dispose of the confiscated material in
such a way as he or she shall deem equitable.
(1998 Code, § 54-129)  (Ord. 98-56, passed 12-2-1998)
§ 96.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who shall manufacture, assemble, store or process fireworks
in violation of §§
96.30 through
96.34 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine as set
forth in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. If fireworks are separately wrapped or
packaged, the commission or omission of any act prohibited by §§
96.30 through
96.34 of this chapter shall be a separate offense as to each such separately
wrapped or separately packaged fireworks.
(1998 Code, § 54-130)  (Ord. 98-56, passed 12-2-1998)
APPENDIX A: EXHIBIT A - PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE
   Texas City Fire Department
   1725 25th Street North
   PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE
 
FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS: Installation, Upgrades, Alterations, Re-Test       $100
STORAGE TANKS: (Flammable/Combustible/Corrosives)
Above ground, Underground, Tank removal, tanks out of service, abandon $50 ea
in place Propane & Lp gas storage and sales
DRY CLEANING PLANT  - ANNUAL                                          $25
FLAMMABLE FINISHES - SPRAY BOOTHS: (Annual)                            $50
DAY CARE CENTER & GROUP HOME ANNUAL: Nursing homes                     $25
BURN PERMIT RESIDENTIAL: (30 days)                                     $10
BURN PERMIT COMMERCIAL: (60 days) .5 acres or more of cleared burn     $75
debris/trench burns/commercial property
FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM: Installation, Alterations, Re-Test            $100 ea
FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS                                                 $50
Add $3 per head for Sprinkler Systems: Installation, Alteration
TENTS & AIR SUPPORTED STRUCTURES                                       $15
MOTOR FUEL DISPENSING FACILITY                                         $75
STORAGE OR DISPENSING OF COMPRESSED GAS AND LIQUIFIED GAS              $50 ea
FIREWORKS DISPLAY & STORAGE, EXPLOSIVE STORAGE                         $75
 
   Checks payable to City of Texas City
Note: Operational permits are required annually. One time operational permits
will expire no later than  60 days from issuance.
Note: Obtaining Annual Operational permits is the sole responsibility of the
Business or Occupant. Operating without required permit will result in a stop
work order, and a permit fee at twice the rate of original fee.
(Ord. 15-43, passed 12-16-2015)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   ADVERTISING
      
111.   TOBACCO
      
112.   VEHICLES FOR HIRE
      
113.   TAXICABS
      
114.   JUNK DEALERS
      
115.   SOLICITATIONS
      
116.   AUCTIONS
      
117.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
      
118.   AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
      
119.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
120.   OIL AND GAS WELLS
      
121.   PIPELINES
      
122.   HOUSE MOVERS
CHAPTER 110:  ADVERTISING
Section
   
110.01   Posting advertisements on utility poles or fire alarm boxes
   
110.02   Posting advertisements on public rights-of-way
   
110.03   Placing advertisements on vehicles
   
110.04   Maintenance of signs
   
110.05   Cleanliness of area surrounding signs
   
110.06   Unsafe signs; notice to City Commission; notice; order to demolish;
demolition
§ 110.01  POSTING ADVERTISEMENTS ON UTILITY POLES OR FIRE ALARM BOXES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to post, tack, paste or attach any bill,
card, poster, notice or advertisement of any kind on or to any telegraph,
telephone, fire alarm or electric light or power pole in the city, or in any
manner injure or deface such fixtures or poles.
(1998 Code, § 6-1)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.02  POSTING ADVERTISEMENTS ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, post or display any bill,
card, poster, notice or advertisement of any kind on or in any public street,
alley or other right-of-way in the city.
(1998 Code, § 6-2)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.03  PLACING ADVERTISEMENTS ON VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to paste or fasten or otherwise attach
to or upon any part of any vehicle any notice, sign or advertisement unless
placed in such a manner so as to prevent the notice, sign or advertisement from
being blown or carried about by the elements.
(1998 Code, § 6-3)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.04  MAINTENANCE OF SIGNS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to maintain any existing
billboard or signboard so as to keep it in a good state of repair.
(1998 Code, § 6-4)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.05  CLEANLINESS OF AREA SURROUNDING SIGNS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to keep the grass or weeds cut
and removed on or around any billboard or signboard, and it shall be unlawful
to permit trash to collect within a distance of 20 feet from the billboard or
signboard.
(1998 Code, § 6-5)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.06  UNSAFE SIGNS; NOTICE TO CITY COMMISSION; NOTICE; ORDER TO DEMOLISH;
DEMOLITION.
   (A)   General. If the Building Inspector has reason to believe any billboard
or signboard has deteriorated because of failure to maintain it, or for any
other reason, to the extent that, as a practical matter, it cannot be placed in
a safe condition from the standpoint of the public without substantially
rebuilding the billboard or signboard, then he or she shall so advise the City
Commission.
(1998 Code, § 6-6)
   (B)   Notice of hearing. After notice is given to the City Commission under
the provisions of division (A) above, the Commission may then give reasonable
notice to the operator or owner of the billboard or signboard of a hearing to
be held by the Commission to determine whether the billboard or signboard
should be demolished.
(1998 Code, § 6-7)
   (C)   Order to demolish. A full and fair hearing shall be held at the
appointed time and place to determine whether the billboard or signboard should
be demolished as provided in division (B) above. If, as a result of the
hearing, it is determined that the billboard or signboard should be demolished
and all material and debris removed in that it could not be repaired and placed
in a safe condition without substantially rebuilding the billboard or
signboard, then the City Commission shall so order, and ten days’ written
notice shall be given the owner or operator to accomplish the demolition and
removal.
(1998 Code, § 6-8)
   (D)   Demolition by city. If, after the notice as required by division (C)
above, the owner or operator fails or refuses to remove and demolish the
billboard or signboard, upon an order duly passed by the City Commission, the
Building Inspector may cause the billboard or signboard to be demolished, and
the cost for so doing, including the removal of all material and debris, shall
be charged to the owner or operator of the billboard or signboard, and the cost
shall be the lawful debt of the owner or operator to the city.
(1998 Code, § 6-9)
CHAPTER 111:  TOBACCO
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Offenses generally
   
111.03   Sale or delivery to minor; posting of signs regarding age restrictions
   
111.04   Employing or permitting minor to sell tobacco products
   
111.05   Sale or delivery near school or child care facility
   
111.06   Free distributions prohibited in certain places
   
111.07   Locking devices for vending machines
   
111.08   Enforcement
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MINOR. A person under 18 years of age.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not
limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping
tobacco.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic self-service device
which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses
tobacco products.
(1998 Code, § 62-181)  (Ord. 96-32, passed 8-21-1996)
§ 111.02  OFFENSES GENERALLY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any minor to possess any tobacco product
unless the possession by the minor is in direct supervision of the parent or
guardian of such person and in the privacy of the parent’s or guardian’s home.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person to sell tobacco products to a minor
as outlined in Tex. Health and Safety Code § 161.081, Sale of Cigarettes or
Tobacco Products to Minors Prohibited.
   (C)   It is unlawful for a minor to falsely state that he or she is 18 years
of age or older or to present any document that indicates that he or she is 18
years of age or older to a person engaged in the selling of tobacco products.
(1998 Code, § 62-182)  (Ord. 96-32, passed 8-21-1996)  Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.03  SALE OR DELIVERY TO MINOR; POSTING OF SIGNS REGARDING AGE
RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away
or deliver tobacco products to a minor.
   (B)   Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided for in
this chapter shall be posted at or near every display of tobacco products and
on or upon every vending machine which offers tobacco products for sale. (Signs
and decals are supplied by the Department of Health, Stock No. 4-171.)
(1998 Code, § 62-183)  (Ord. 96-32, passed 8-21-1996)  Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.04  EMPLOYING OR PERMITTING MINOR TO SELL TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage, employ or permit a minor to
sell tobacco products.
(1998 Code, § 62-184)  (Ord. 96-32, passed 8-21-1996)  Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.05  SALE OR DELIVERY NEAR SCHOOL OR CHILD CARE FACILITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away or
deliver tobacco products within 100 feet of any school, child care facility or
other building used for education or recreational programs for minors.
(1998 Code, § 62-185)  (Ord. 96-32, passed 8-21-1996)  Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.06  FREE DISTRIBUTIONS PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in the business of selling or otherwise
distributing, promoting or advertising tobacco products, in the course of such
person’s business, to distribute, give away or deliver tobacco products free of
charge to any person on any right-of-way, park, playground or other property
owned by the city, any school district, any park district or any public
library.
(1998 Code, § 62-186)  (Ord. 96-32, passed 8-21-1996)  Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.07  LOCKING DEVICES FOR VENDING MACHINES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, give
away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling, giving away or
delivering tobacco products by use of vending machines, unless such vending
machine is equipped with a manual, electric or electronic locking device
controlled by the person so as to prevent its operation by minors.
   (B)   Any premises where access by persons under the age of 18 years is
prohibited by law, or premises where the public is generally not permitted and
where vending machines are strictly for the use of employees of businesses
located at such premises, shall be exempt from the requirements of division (A)
above.
(1998 Code, § 62-187)  (Ord. 96-32, passed 8-21-1996)  Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.08  ENFORCEMENT.
   The Chief of Police and any heads of law enforcement agencies are encouraged
to develop alternative enforcement strategies, which may include, but are not
limited to, counseling with minors and their parents or guardians, and the
issuance of citations (formal citations and/or warnings) to minors.
(1998 Code, § 62-188)  (Ord. 96-32, passed 8-21-1996)
§ 111.99  PENALTY.
   A violation of this chapter shall constitute a Class C misdemeanor
punishable, upon conviction thereof, by a fine not to exceed $500.
(1998 Code, § 62-189)  (Ord. 96-32, passed 8-21-1996)
CHAPTER 112:  VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Section
Automobile Wreckers
   
112.01   Purpose and scope
   
112.02   Definitions
   
112.03   Application process
   
112.04   Required identification on wreckers
   
112.05   Qualification for placement on non-consent wrecker rotation list
   
112.06   Use of non-consent wrecker rotation list
   
112.07   Records of removal of vehicles required; contents and retention
period; inspection by police
   
112.08   Non-consent wrecker responding to scene of collision
   
112.09   Procedure on failure of vehicle owner to designate wrecker company;
maintenance of wrecker non-consent rotation list
   
112.10   Following vehicles in response to collision scene
   
112.11   Influence by police as to selection of wrecker
   
112.12   Interference with police, fire or EMS
   
112.13   Duty of owner or driver to notify police of accident
   
112.14   Removal of vehicle without permission or before accident investigation
   
112.15   Non-consent tows at police direction
   
112.16   Authority of peace officer
   
112.17   Tow service and operating procedures
   
112.18   Additional special rules for heavy-duty rotation
   
112.19   Conduct of operators
   
112.20   Suspension or revocation of a permit
   
112.21   Suspension and revocation procedures; appeals
   
112.22   Permissible fees and charges
   
112.23   Repossessions; private property tows
Bus Service
   
112.35   Definition
   
112.36   License or franchise required; applicability
   
112.37   Licensing generally
   
112.38   Suspension or revocation
   
112.39   Insurance
   
112.40   Routes
   
112.41   Drivers to have bus operator’s license; display of driver information
   
112.42   Alcoholic beverages
   
112.43   Vehicles and inspections
   
112.44   Appeals
AUTOMOBILE WRECKERS
§ 112.01  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   (1)   The city, pursuant to the authority granted by state law, in
order to protect the public, to protect the rights of persons whose vehicles
may be towed, to maintain safe and efficient operating rules and to preserve
the peace of the community, hereby engages in the licensing and regulation of
business enterprises engaged in the non-consent towing, removing and storing of
motor vehicles in the incorporated areas of the city.
      (2)   The purpose and intent of this subchapter is to regulate non-
consent tows initiated by a police officer or city official, to the extent not
preempted by federal or state law. This subchapter shall not apply to consent
tows from public or private property within the city.
   (B)   The Texas City Police Department is authorized to enforce these rules
and shall be referred to as “TCPD” for the remainder of this subchapter.
   (C)   Accordingly, no person shall operate a wrecker or heavy-duty wrecker
in the incorporated areas of the city on non-consent towed vehicles unless the
wrecker has been registered and permitted with the TCPD. For the purposes of
this subchapter, a PERSON shall mean a sole proprietor, partnership,
corporation or LLC. Multiple assumed names or DBAs of a person shall not be
permitted. This subchapter does not apply to a consent tow.
   (D)   Furthermore, no person or business entity shall operate a vehicle
storage facility for the storage of motor vehicles that have been subjected to
non-consent tows under this subchapter unless the facility is registered with
the state and meets all state requirements.
   (E)   This subchapter must be liberally construed to give effect to its
purpose and intent. Unless superseded by state regulations, the city is the
final authority.
(1998 Code, § 126-30)  (Ord. 03-38, passed 10-15-2003; Ord. 03-49, passed 11-5-
2003; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-17-2016)
§ 112.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICATION. The written application form approved by the TCPD and all
required documentation and all applicable fees.
   AUXILIARY TOW LIGHTS. A set of red lamps, connected to the wrecker, which
are attached to the rear of the towed vehicle and, when lit, will signal stops
and turn movements of the towed vehicle.
   CONSENT TOW. Any tow of a motor vehicle initiated by the owner or operator
of the vehicle or by a person who has possession, custody, or control of the
vehicle if such tow is performed pursuant to this subchapter. The term does not
include a tow of a motor vehicle initiated by a peace officer investigating a
traffic accident or a traffic incident that involves the vehicle, or a tow
initiated by a city official pursuant to a court order.
   COMMISSION. The Texas Commission of Licensing and Regulation.
   CONVICTION. A finding of guilt by a judge or jury, or any plea of guilty or
nolo contendere, unless such conviction has been held invalid by the courts or
the proceedings against the defendant have been dismissed and the defendant
discharged by the court.
   DOING BUSINESS AS (DBA). The operating name of a company, as opposed to its
legal name.
   EMERGENCY LIGHTS. Flashing, rotating or strobe lights that are mounted above
the roof of the wrecker. The lights shall be mounted as high and as wide as
possible and visible in all directions when activated. EMERGENCY LIGHTS shall
be amber only in color. No lamps or lenses other than amber may be displayed. A
rearward-facing directional arrow panel, mounted contiguous with the EMERGENCY
LIGHTS, is permitted.
   EVIDENTIARY CRIME SCENE. A crime scene in the incorporated city that
requires the response of a law enforcement agency’s specialized investigative
unit(s). Examples include, but are not limited to, a homicide scene or an auto
theft chop shop.
   HEAVY-DUTY WRECKER. A wrecker having a chassis rated at five tons or greater
by the vehicle manufacturer, equipped with a winch capable of lifting a minimum
of 30,000 pounds as rated by the winch manufacturer, air brakes, and tandem
axles. Except where a distinction is made, the term WRECKER includes HEAVY-DUTY
WRECKER.
   HIGH MOUNTED STOP LAMP. A lamp conforming to Lamps, Reflective Devices, and
Associated Equipment (49 C.F.R. § 571.108).
   INCIDENT. An unplanned, randomly occurring traffic event that adversely
affects normal traffic operations.
   INCIDENT MANAGEMENT TOW. Any tow of a vehicle in which the tow truck is
summoned to the scene of a traffic accident or to an incident, including the
removal of a vehicle, commercial cargo, and commercial debris from an accident
or incident scene.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. A city police officer, or a peace officer for a law
enforcement agency located in the county or state. (See Tex. Code C.C.P. Ch. 2,
Art. 2.12.)
   LAW ENFORCEMENT SCENE. The scene of a crime, collision or custodial arrest,
or the location of a vehicle that is a traffic hazard, a recovered stolen
vehicle or an abandoned vehicle.
   NO SHOW. When the TCPD dispatcher telephones a towing company on the
rotation list to perform a non-consent tow, and the wrecker does not arrive on
the scene within the 30-minute time limit. A towing company is allowed three
“no shows” during the calendar year. Any violation of this provision shall
result in suspension or revocation of that wrecker company’s permit for the
remainder of the calendar year.
   NON-CONSENT TOW. Any tow of a motor vehicle that is not a consent tow.
   NON-CONSENT TOW LIST. The TCPD shall maintain a master list of all wrecker
companies to be utilized in the event of a tow conducted not at the permission
or direction of the motor vehicle’s legal or registered owner, or such owner’s
authorized representative.
   OPERATE. To drive or otherwise use a wrecker.
   OPERATOR. Any person operating a wrecker, regardless of whether the person
owns the truck.
   OWNER. Any person who holds the legal title of the motor vehicle or who has
the legal right of possession thereof.
   PASS. When the TCPD dispatcher telephones a towing company on the rotation
list to perform a non-consent tow, and is unable to contact the towing company,
or the towing company refuses or declines to accept the telephone call, or the
towing company refuses to accept the towing assignment. Each towing company
shall be allowed ten passes during a calendar year. Any violation of this
provision shall result in suspension or revocation of that wrecker company’s
permit for the remainder of the calendar year.
   PERSON. A sole proprietor, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company (LLC),  assumed name or doing business as (DBA) shall be considered a
PERSON for the purposes of this subchapter.
   PUBLIC ROADWAY. A public street, alley, road, right-of-way, or other public
way, including paved and unpaved portions of the right-of-way.
   STORAGE COMPANY. An individual, partnership, corporation or any other
association that is engaged in the business of storing motor vehicles for
compensation or the expectation of compensation. The term includes the owner,
operator, employee and/or agent of the STORAGE COMPANY.
   TCPD. The City of Texas City Police Department.
   TOW. The movement of a motor vehicle by a wrecker.
   TOWING COMPANY. An individual, association, corporation, or other legal
entity that controls, operates, or directs the operation of one or more tow
trucks over a public roadway in this state, but does not include a political
subdivision of the state.
   VEHICLE. A device in, on, or by which a person or property may be
transported on a public roadway. The term includes an operable or inoperable
automobile, truck, motorcycle, recreational vehicle, or trailer, but does not
include a device moved by human power or used exclusively on a stationary rail
or track.
   VEHICLE OWNER. The motor vehicle’s legal or registered owner, or such
owner’s authorized representative who is physically present at the law
enforcement scene.
   VEHICLE STORAGE FACILITY. As defined by Tex. Transportation Code § 2303.002,
and that is operated by a person who holds a license issued under Tex.
Transportation Code Ch. 2303 to operate the facility.
   VEHICLE STORAGE FACILITY OWNER. An individual, partnership, corporation or
any other association (other than a governmental entity) that is engaged in the
business of operating a garage, parking lot, storage lot or any type of
facility to store motor vehicles subject to non-consent tows under this
subchapter.
   WORKING DAY. Any day that the TCPD conducts normal business, excluding
holidays and weekends.
   WRECKER. A commercial motor vehicle equipped with, or used in combination
with a mechanical device adapted or used to tow, winch or otherwise move a
motor vehicle, which, together with the towed vehicle, has a gross vehicular or
actual weight of 26,000 pounds or less. For purposes of convenience, the term
WRECKER, as used throughout this subchapter, shall be deemed to include both
the defined terms HEAVY-DUTY WRECKER and WRECKER, unless a specific reference
to the term HEAVY-DUTY WRECKER is made.
   WRECKER PERMIT. A tag issued by the TCPD authorizing a specific wrecker to
perform non-consent tows.
   WRECKER SELECTION FORM. The form for selection of wrecker companies,
prepared and used as provided by the city.
(1998 Code, § 126-31)  (Ord. 03-38, passed 10-15-2003; Ord. 03-49, passed 11-5-
2003; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-17-2016)
§ 112.03  APPLICATION PROCESS.
   (A)   General. To obtain a permit for any wrecker, a towing company shall
file a written application with the TCPD. The application shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   Year and make of the wrecker to which the permit will apply;
      (2)   Vehicle identification number (VIN) of the wrecker and copy of
state certificate of title;
      (3)   Current state license plate number for the wrecker;
      (4)   Full business name, address and telephone number for the true
wrecker title owner. A DBA or assumed name shall be accompanied by the name of
the underlying business entity;
      (5)   Full business name, address and telephone number for the towing
company (if different from title owner). A DBA or assumed name shall be
accompanied by the name of the underlying business entity;
      (6)   The operator’s state operator’s license number;
      (7)   The name of the insurance company, the policy number and the
insurance agent’s name and telephone number;
      (8)   A list of the vehicle storage facilities the towing company uses
and that are listed for that wrecker, and which shall be located within the
city limits;
      (9)   The applicant’s original signature;
      (10)   Cab card issued by the state. Full business name on cab card shall
match the full business name on application;
      (11)   Tax ID number for the towing company (for business identification
purposes only);
      (12)   Working phone number listed under towing company, with contact
information of the towing company in the city; and
      (13)   Wrecker shall be owned or leased by the towing company. If the
wrecker is leased, a copy of the lease agreement shall be provided. The lease
agreement shall cover the full period of the permit.
Leased wreckers shall only be used by the towing company making application for
that wrecker. The same wrecker shall not be used by another towing company on
rotation.
   (B)   Accompaniments. The written application form shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   Copies of vehicle registration listing and cab card issued by the
Texas Department of Transportation (TXDOT). Business name on cab card shall be
the same name as on the application;
      (2)   Copy of towing company DBA, partnership agreement or articles of
incorporation, if applicable;
      (3)   Receipt from the County Tax Office showing current registration, or
if the wrecker is registered outside the county, the current registration from
the county where the wrecker is located;
      (4)   Proof designated inspection was passed;
      (5)   Copy of the towing company’s most recent wrecker invoice;
      (6)   Current original business card for the towing company, which shall
include the full business name, business phone number and all addresses and
phone numbers of storage lots to be used by the towing company;
      (7)   Original certificate of insurance for the wrecker being permitted,
with the additional insured named as follows:
      City of Texas City
      1801 9th Avenue North
      Texas City, Texas 77590
      (8)   The application shall be submitted to the TCPD by hand delivery or
by delivery through the United States Postal Service or any private courier
service. Applications or supporting documentation shall not be submitted by
facsimile or electronic mail.
         (a)   Yearly renewal package. Yearly renewal package fee of $450 to
cover all expenses such as two identifications, backgrounds checks, two wrecker
inspections, paper work, and verification of documents.
         (b)   Additional drivers. Additional drivers shall be required to pay
a $25 administration fee for background and driver’s licenses’ verifications.
         (c)   Identification cards. Identification cards shall be issued by
the TCPD and shall be worn above the waist on the outer layer of clothing at
all times by wrecker drivers while on scene during a pick up.
            1.   These identification cards shall be issued to all drivers who
successfully passed a background check.
            2.   The fee shall be the responsibility of the drivers and/or
owners of the wrecker company.
            3.   Any lost identification cards shall cost $25 for replacement.
         (d)   Additional wreckers. Additional wreckers added over the required
minimum of two shall be assessed an additional $25 fee per wrecker, which
includes the wrecker inspection.
         (e)   Fees.
            1.   All application, inspection, and tow truck operator license
fees shall be remitted at the time of submission of the permit application.
            2.   These fees are nonrefundable except where provided by law.
            3.   The TCPD Chief of Police, or his or her designee, may review
the application process to determine if any applicable refund is required;
      (9)   In order to operate a wrecker/tow truck in the city, the following
requirements shall be met:
         (a)   Be at least 18 years of age;
         (b)   Be authorized to work full-time in the United States;
         (c)   Be able to communicate in the English language;
         (d)   Shall not have been convicted of a felony offense in the
preceding five years or a class A or B misdemeanor in the preceding two years.
            1.   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction,
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, or termination
of probation, whichever is later; if the applicant was convicted of a
misdemeanor offense.
            2.   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of
conviction, the date of release from confinement for the conviction, or the
termination of probation or parole, whichever is the latter; if the applicant
was convicted of a felony;
         (e)   Shall not be a convicted sex offender;
         (f)   Each applicant shall have his or her fingerprints taken by the
TCPD at the time the permit application is submitted, and shall be subject to a
background investigation conducted by the TCPD.
      (10)   An applicant for a wrecker permit shall submit the application and
fee to the TCPD; and
      (11)   A copy of the vehicle storage facility permit issued by the state.
   (C)   Issuance. If the TCPD determines that the applicant has satisfied all
requirements under this subchapter, a permit shall be issued.
   (D)   Expiration of permit. All wrecker permits expire annually at midnight
on December 31, regardless of the issue date. To renew a permit, the applicant
shall file a renewal application.
   (E)   Permit renewal.
      (1)   Wrecker permit applications shall be submitted to the TCPD from
October 1 through December 1 for the next calendar year.
         (a)   Permits shall be valid for a period of one year.
         (b)   The deadline for the annual application process shall be
December 1 of the year immediately preceding the effective year of the permit.
         (c)   When the yearly application renewal period closes, new
applications shall not be accepted until the following December.
         (d)   If a wrecker company misses the deadline, TCPD shall accept
applications for the next calendar year.
      (2)   A towing company that fails to renew the permit before it expires
shall be removed from the non-consent tow master list.
      (3)   Operating a wrecker with an expired permit constitutes a violation
of this subchapter.
      (4)   Permits shall be granted to the original applicant only and are
non-transferable. Sale of a business shall require the new business to apply
for a new permit.
      (5)   Permits are not assignable or transferable; except that, a permit
may be transferred to a replacement truck if:
         (a)   The replacement truck belongs to the same towing company and the
original truck shall no longer be used by the towing company on rotation;
         (b)   The towing company obtains written permission from the TCPD;
         (c)   The replacement truck passes the required inspection;
         (d)   Proof of insurance is submitted to the TCPD; and
         (e)   Failure to follow this process constitutes a violation of this
subchapter.
   (F)   Insurance requirements.
      (1)   An applicant shall procure, and keep in full force and effect, a
policy of liability and property damage insurance. Joint insurance with another
company or permit holder shall not be allowed. At the time of initial
registration and upon renewal, the registrant shall file, or cause to be filed,
a certificate of insurance with the TCPD. The certificate shall clarify the
type and amount of insurance coverage and provide for 30 calendar days’ notice
to the TCPD of cancellation of, or material change in the policy. The
certificate shall name the city as an additional insured. Prior to the issuance
of any wrecker permit, the applicant shall file with the TCPD, or cause to be
filed, proof of motor vehicle liability insurance coverage issued by an
insurance company listed as an authorized auto liability lines carrier on the
State Department of Insurance list of authorized insurance companies. Each
policy shall be issued by a casualty insurance company authorized to do
business in the state and that complies with all applicable rules and
regulations of the State Board of Insurance. Proof of insurance shall be
carried in the wrecker at all times.
      (2)   The required insurance for injury to or destruction of property in
any one collision shall be $50,000.
      (3)   A towing company shall maintain insurance for each wrecker it owns
or operates that meets the requirements of all other applicable statutes, in
addition to meeting the insurance requirements set forth in this subchapter. A
law enforcement officer may request proof of insurance from the owner/operator.
      (4)   A towing company shall not perform any non-consent tows if it fails
to provide the required insurance coverage.
(1998 Code, § 126-32)  (Ord. 03-38, passed 10-15-2003; Ord. 03-49, passed 11-5-
2003; Ord. 12-14, passed 5-2-2012; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-17-2016)
§ 112.04  REQUIRED IDENTIFICATION ON WRECKERS.
   Each towing company that has been issued a towing permit shall maintain the
following identification markings on each wrecker it owns or operates:
   (A)   Display on each wrecker used for non-consent tows a permit plate
issued by TXDOT pursuant to Tex. Transportation Code § 502.281, as hereafter
amended or its successor statute;
   (B)   Display on each wrecker used for non-consent tows the permit issued by
the city; and
   (C)   Magnetic and removable signs are not permitted.
(1998 Code, § 126-33)  (Ord. 03-38, passed 10-15-2003; Ord. 03-49, passed 11-5-
2003; Ord. 12-14, passed 5-2-2012; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-17-2016)
§ 112.05  QUALIFICATION FOR PLACEMENT ON NON-CONSENT WRECKER ROTATION LIST.
   (A)   Each wrecker service shall have a minimum of two licensed wreckers per
wrecker company, but no more than five tor the rotation list. This shall ensure
the wrecker service is able to provide adequate service to the citizens it
serves and the TCPD.
   (B)   Only those towing companies that have met the following annual
requirements shall be placed on the non-consent wrecker rotation list:
      (1)   Have submitted and been issued a wrecker business permit under the
provisions of this subchapter;
      (2)   Own or lease, and/or operate, a vehicle storage facility within the
city limits, available for the storage of automobiles which may be removed as a
result of the name of the wrecking company appearing on the non-consent wrecker
rotation list. Only one towing company per vehicle storage facility shall be
allowed. A vehicle storage facility shall be of a size sufficient to allow for
the storage of a wrecker company’s non-consent tows, and shall contain a
minimum of 4,000 square feet. Dealerships acting as towing companies shall be
exempt from the requirement to provide a vehicle storage facility, as provided
by state law;
      (3)   Have deposited with the City Secretary a garagekeeper’s legal
liability policy covering fire, theft and explosion in the vehicle storage
facility in the same minimum amount as is required by state law for consent
tows, and showing the city as an additional insured; and
      (4)   Maintain a 24-hour wrecker service.
(1998 Code, § 126-34)  (Ord. 03-38, passed 10-15-2003; Ord. 03-49, passed 11-5-
2003; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-17-2016)
§ 112.06  USE OF NON-CONSENT WRECKER ROTATION LIST.
   (A)   Upon receiving the first communication that the owner of a vehicle
involved in a collision has failed or refused to designate a wrecker company,
or has specifically designated no preference, the TCPD dispatcher receiving the
communication at police headquarters shall call the first towing company on the
list to tow a disabled vehicle and remove the vehicle from the public streets
of the city. If a towing company does not timely respond with its wrecker
within 30 minutes (absent exigent circumstances), the next towing company on
the rotation list will be called (no show).
   (B)   On each succeeding communication of the failure or refusal of the
owner to designate a wrecker, or where the owner has specifically designated no
preference, the next company on the list shall be called, and so on, calling
each towing company on the master list in rotation, and properly noting each
call on the master list.
   (C)   The city reserves the right to cancel the next-out wrecker, as
warranted by the situation on the scene. If the city cancels the next-out for
any reason other than the company’s failure to arrive within the allocated time
limit, or the equipment does not meet the requirements of the situation, the
company shall be placed on top of the rotation list and shall receive the
subsequent next-out call.
   (D)   If the next-out wrecker on the scene cannot complete the job with the
towing company’s own vehicles or needs additional help, the towing company
shall notify the law enforcement officer in charge at the scene and additional
next-out wreckers shall be called to the scene as warranted. The additional
next-out wreckers may also charge the wrecker fee upon hook-up. The original
next-out wrecker shall be the first entitled to storage of the vehicle and the
storage fees.
(1998 Code, § 126-35)  (Ord. 03-38, passed 10-15-2003; Ord. 03-49, passed 11-5-
2003; Ord. 04-53, passed 11-3-2004; Ord. 05-45, passed 10-5-2005; Ord. 16-01,
passed 2-17-2016)
§ 112.07  RECORDS OF REMOVAL OF VEHICLES REQUIRED; CONTENTS AND RETENTION
PERIOD; INSPECTION BY POLICE.
   (A)   Records of removal of vehicles required. Every towing company
qualified for and whose name appears at its request on the wrecker rotation
list shall maintain, at its storage facility location within the city, records
as to all vehicles it moved after being notified to do so by personnel of the
city in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 126-36)
   (B)   Contents and retention period.
      (1)   The records required to be kept by division (A) above shall contain
the following information:
         (a)   Make, model and vehicle identification number (VIN) of the
disabled automobile moved by the company;
         (b)   Location from which the disabled vehicle was removed, and date
and time of removal;
         (c)   Total amount charged for towing;
         (d)   Storage rate per day;
         (e)   Description of all personal property within the disabled
automobile at the time of its removal; and
         (f)   Name of the driver or owner of the motor vehicle.
      (2)   Records shall be preserved by the towing company for at least three
months from and after the date the company came into possession of the
automobile.
(1998 Code, § 126-37)
   (C)   Inspection by police. The records required to be kept by this 
subchapter shall be made available to the members of the TCPD by the towing
company at any reasonable time upon request.
(1998 Code, § 126-38)
(Ord. 03-38, passed 10-15-2003; Ord. 03-49, passed 11-5-2003; Ord. 16-01,
passed 2-17-2016)
§ 112.08  NON-CONSENT WRECKER RESPONDING TO SCENE OF COLLISION.
   Upon notification from the scene to the TCPD dispatcher for the next-out,
non-consent wrecker to respond to a collision scene, no other wrecker operators
shall arrive at the location for the purpose of soliciting business.
(1998 Code, § 126-39)  (Ord. 03-38, passed 10-15-2003; Ord. 03-49, passed 11-5-
2003; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-17-2016)
§ 112.09  PROCEDURE ON FAILURE OF VEHICLE OWNER TO DESIGNATE WRECKER COMPANY;
MAINTENANCE OF WRECKER NON-CONSENT ROTATION LIST.
   If the owner/operator of a disabled vehicle involved in an accident or
collision fails to designate a towing company, or refuses to designate one, or
is placed under police custody, the investigating officer shall communicate
that fact immediately to the TCPD dispatcher. The TCPD shall keep a master
list, known as the wrecker non-consent rotation list, in alphabetical order, of
all wrecker companies qualifying therefor under the provisions of this
subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 126-42)  (Ord. 03-38, passed 10-15-2003; Ord. 03-49, passed 11-5-
2003; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-17-2016)
§ 112.10  FOLLOWING VEHICLES IN RESPONSE TO COLLISION SCENE.
   No person shall follow in a wrecker any ambulance or police car that is
traveling on a public  roadway in response to a report of an automobile
collision.
(1998 Code, § 126-43)  (Ord. 03-38, passed 10-15-2003; Ord. 03-49, passed 11-5-
2003; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-17-2016)
§ 112.11  INFLUENCE BY POLICE AS TO SELECTION OF WRECKER.
   No TCPD officer investigating or present at the scene or site of any wreck
or collision on a public roadway shall, directly or indirectly, either by word,
gesture, sign or otherwise, recommend to any person the name of any particular
person engaged in the wrecker services or repair business, nor shall any police
officer influence or attempt to influence in any manner the decision of any
person in choosing or selecting a wrecker or repair service.
(1998 Code, § 126-44)  (Ord. 03-38, passed 10-15-2003; Ord. 03-49, passed 11-5-
2003; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-17-2016)
§ 112.12  INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE, FIRE OR EMS.
   All tow truck drivers arriving at any law enforcement scene shall obey all
orders given them by any police officer, firefighter or EMS technician.
(1998 Code, § 126-45)  (Ord. 03-38, passed 10-15-2003; Ord. 03-49, passed 11-5-
2003; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-17-2016)
Statutory reference:
   Interference with certain officers, see Interference with Public Duties
(Tex. Penal Code § 38.15)
§ 112.13  DUTY OF OWNER OR DRIVER TO NOTIFY POLICE OF ACCIDENT.
   The fact that no police officer of the TCPD is present at a law enforcement
scene when a tow truck arrives shall not constitute an exception to any
requirement of this subchapter, and it shall be the duty of any tow truck owner
or tow truck driver desiring to tow or haul any wrecked or disabled vehicle
from the scene of an accident or collision to notify the TCPD of the occurrence
of the accident or collision, and to await the arrival of the TCPD police
officers and the completion of their investigation.
(1998 Code, § 126-46)  (Ord. 03-38, passed 10-15-2003; Ord. 03-49, passed 11-5-
2003; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-17-2016)
§ 112.14  REMOVAL OF VEHICLE WITHOUT PERMISSION OR BEFORE ACCIDENT
INVESTIGATION.
   A tow truck driver shall not remove any wrecked or disabled vehicle from the
location where the accident or collision has occurred, or attach his or her tow
truck to the wrecked or disabled vehicle, until the driver of the vehicle has
given permission and until the TCPD police officers have completed their
investigation.
(1998 Code, § 126-47)  (Ord. 03-38, passed 10-15-2003; Ord. 03-49, passed 11-5-
2003; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-17-2016)
§ 112.15  NON-CONSENT TOWS AT POLICE DIRECTION.
   All tow truck owners who perform non-consent tows at the direction of the
TCPD shall store towed motor vehicles at a vehicle storage facility, located
within the city limits, licensed by the Texas Department of Licensing and
Regulation (TDLR), unless otherwise directed by the police officer authorizing
the tow.
(1998 Code, § 126-48)  (Ord. 03-38, passed 10-15-2003; Ord. 03-49, passed 11-5-
2003; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-17-2016)
§ 112.16  AUTHORITY OF PEACE OFFICER.
   (A)   The peace officer in charge at an accident site or at the location of
a disabled vehicle on a public roadway may, if the safety of the public
requires it, take any steps needed to ensure public safety.
   (B)   A peace officer may, for any purpose, direct that any vehicle shall be
taken to an impound lot or location owned or used by the city.
   (C)   This subchapter does not limit the authority of the city to remove
vehicles from public roadways in any manner the city deems appropriate.
   (D)   Except as provided in rules under this subchapter, a towing company or
its employees or tow trucks shall not enter an accident or collision scene, or
other site under a peace officer’s control, without the permission of the
investigating officer.
(1998 Code, § 126-49)  (Ord. 03-38, passed 10-15-2003; Ord. 03-49, passed 11-5-
2003; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-17-2016)
§ 112.17  TOW SERVICE AND OPERATING PROCEDURES.
   No person shall participate in a non-consent tow unless the following
operation and safety requirements are met.
   (A)   The wrecker being used shall be equipped as follows:
      (1)   Brakes that meet braking performance requirements under all loading
conditions;
      (2)   A power winch, winch line and boom, with factory-rated lifted
capacity of not less than 8,000 pounds single-line capacity, or a hydraulic and
mechanical wheel lift with a lifting capacity of not less than 3,000 pounds;
      (3)   A tow sling or hydraulic lift sufficient to prevent swinging of any
equipment and/or vehicle being transported and/or towed. This division (A)(3)
does not apply to a vehicle carrier or rollback unless the wheels of a vehicle
being towed are in contact with the ground. In the event that a self-contained
non-propelled towing device, or some other form of auxiliary device is used,
the vehicle to which that device is attached and which is providing the motive
and braking forces, does not need to provide this equipment;
      (4)   Five-sixteenths-inch link steel safety chains for wreckers, with a
gross vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds or less, and three-eighths-inch highest
steel chains or their equivalent for wreckers, with a gross vehicle weight over
10,000 pounds. These links are minimums;
      (5)   A ten-pound BC fire extinguisher or two five-pound BC fire
extinguishers. All fire extinguishers shall be properly filled, operable, and
located so as to be readily accessible for use. Fire extinguishers shall meet
the minimum requirements of the most recent edition of NFPA 10, the Standard
for Portable Fire Extinguishers established by the National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA), and shall be labeled by a recognized, national testing
laboratory;
      (6)   One crowbar or wrecking bar that is not less than 36 inches in
length, with a wedge head;
      (7)   One broom of a type designed for pushing with an 18-inch head, and
a handle of not less than 36 inches;
      (8)   One flat-edge shovel of at least nine inches, with a handle of not
less than 36 inches;
      (9)   A box or bucket to carry glass and/or debris removed from
collision/accident scenes;
      (10)   Rope or wire suitable for securing doors, hoods, trunks and the
like;
      (11)   A functioning spotlight or flashlight;
      (12)   Outside rearview mirrors on both sides of the truck;
      (13)   Permanently mounted emergency lightbar;
      (14)   Three portable red emergency triangle reflectors, orange cones at
least 18 inches tall, or flares;
      (15)   Auxiliary tow lights;
      (16)   A high mounted stop lamp shall be mounted on any wrecker if its
overall width is less than 80 inches, or its gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR)
is 10,000 pounds or less, and is manufactured on or after 9-1-1993; and
      (17)   Work lights shall be wired to a separate switch and shall not be
illuminated while the wrecker is in motion. These lights must be steady burning
white lights that project light to the rear of the wrecker.
   (B)   Shall arrive at the accident or collision scene within 30 minutes
after having been notified by the TCPD, absent exigent circumstances
(hurricane, flood and the like). Failure to do so shall be considered a no
show.
   (C)   Before leaving the site, remove from the site of an accident all
wreckage and debris, excluding hazardous waste. This duty specifically includes
the removal of broken glass and metal fragments, and the spilled load of any
vehicle. Such debris shall be disposed of in a manner which will keep it out of
gutters, storm sewers, streams, public rights-of-way and property not owned by
the tow truck operator.
   (D)   No tow truck operators shall store any vehicle or tow truck on public
roadways or public rights-of-way in the city.
   (E)   Tow truck operators shall use reasonable care in towing and in the
storage of vehicles so as to minimize any possibility of further damage or
theft.
   (F)   Tow truck operators shall comply with all federal and state laws, all
rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to federal and state laws, and all
city ordinances, including zoning, health and fire prevention ordinances.
   (G)   All tow truck operators shall inform the TCPD of all non-consent tows
within 45 minutes of the completion of such tows. The information shall include
the vehicle identification number, license plate number, a brief description of
the vehicle, the location where the vehicle was picked up, and the location
where the vehicle is being stored.
   (H)   No person shall use or operate a wrecker to tow a motor vehicle
without using auxiliary tow lights, unless the towed vehicle is loaded on a
rollback wrecker.
   (I)   No person shall equip a permitted wrecker with a two-way radio or
scanner or with any two-way radio that can transmit on any law enforcement
frequency, or tow using a wrecker equipped with any such devices. Any operator
or towing company found transmitting on any law enforcement frequency shall be
subject to suspension or revocation of their permit.
   (J)   No person shall equip a permitted wrecker with any device designed to
detect or monitor radar, laser or any other speed-measuring instrument, or
perform a non-consent tow using a wrecker so equipped.
   (K)   No person shall perform a non-consent tow without using safety chains.
   (L)   No person shall operate a permitted wrecker with a slip-in bed or
operate a repo-rig.
   (M)   No person shall use a permitted wrecker to lift more than its factory-
rated lifting capacity allows.
   (N)   No operator shall possess nor allow any prohibited weapon, firearm or
alcoholic beverage in or around a wrecker when operating the wrecker. This
provision does not prohibit a peace officer as defined by Tex. Code of C.C.P.
Ch. 2, Art. 2.12, or a person possessing a valid concealed handgun permit
issued by the Texas Department of Public Safety (DPS) from carrying a firearm
while operating or riding in a wrecker.
   (O)   An operator shall ensure that, while lifting a motor vehicle in
preparation for a non-tow, all non-essential people are at a safe distance from
the wrecker and motor vehicle. A SAFE DISTANCE is at least twice the distance
between the end of the boom and the point of hook-up on the motor vehicle being
winched, or twice the distance the motor vehicle is being lifted, whichever is
greater. If a hydraulic lift is being used, a SAFE DISTANCE is twice the
distance to which the lift arm is extended. An operator is responsible for
maintaining safe conditions around the wrecker during any preparation for
towing and winching of the motor vehicle.
   (P)   If a wrecker or motor vehicle to be towed is in a lane of traffic, the
operator shall ensure that the flow of traffic is diverted. An operator shall
not place or operate a wrecker cable across a lane or lanes of traffic, unless
the traffic is stopped or diverted by a law enforcement officer to permit safe
winching or lifting of the motor vehicle to be towed.
   (Q)   A towing company operating permitted wreckers and operators of such
wreckers shall maintain and keep in good working order all safety mechanisms of
the wrecker, including, but not limited to, all headlights, tail lights, turn
signals, brakes, brake lights, hazard lights, flashing warning lights,
windshield wipers, wiper blades, door handles, window cranks, and tires.
   (R)   All permitted wreckers shall operate within the applicable recommended
towed vehicle manufacturer’s safety policies and procedures.
   (S)   When towing a vehicle more than 2,500 feet, no wrecker performing a
non-consent tow shall use a tow bar with pins of any kind, or any other method
of attachment. At 2,500 feet or less, the operator shall drop the vehicle and
re-hook it following all safety procedures established by the towed motor
vehicle’s manufacturer.
   (T)   Each permitted wrecker shall meet the safety requirements of all other
applicable statutes, in addition to meeting the safety requirements of this
subchapter.
   (U)   Non-consent towed vehicles from any law enforcement scene shall be
taken to an approved vehicle storage facility prior to the loading of any other
vehicle.
   (V)   The following rules apply to law enforcement scenes.
      (1)   Except in an emergency or at the direction of a law enforcement
officer, an operator shall park the wrecker at least 300 feet from a law
enforcement scene. An operator shall only use beacon lights as directed by
state law.
      (2)   The operator shall park the wrecker on the same side of the road as
the damaged motor vehicle.
      (3)   The owner of a motor vehicle, or his or her representative, will be
allowed to determine who will remove the vehicle and any connected trailer and
its associated load from a law enforcement scene, unless the owner is under
arrest or in police custody, or the vehicle is an immediate traffic hazard, as
determined by law enforcement.
      (4)   If a motorist in need of aid summons a police officer and is in
need of a tow, the police officer shall use the same procedure as in a
collision situation. If the vehicle owner/operator has no preference for a
wrecker company, the next-out shall be called.
      (5)   All wreckers are subject to an inspection by TCPD personnel
designated as wrecker inspectors.
      (6)   Once a wrecker has hooked up to a motor vehicle, the wrecker
company may charge as authorized by this subchapter. A wrecker company shall
have hooked-up when the wrecker is in position to secure and tow the vehicle,
and any part of the wrecker’s securing attachments are touching the vehicle.
      (7)   No wrecker operator without a current, valid permit, shall be
allowed to load a vehicle for a non-consent tow.
(1998 Code, § 126-50)  (Ord. 03-38, passed 10-15-2003; Ord. 03-49, passed 11-5-
2003; Ord. 12-14, passed 5-2-2012; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-17-2016)  Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 112.18  ADDITIONAL SPECIAL RULES FOR HEAVY-DUTY ROTATION.
   (A)   The following are special rules:
      (1)   Shall own or lease a heavy-duty wrecker, as defined;
      (2)   Shall have a vehicle storage facility located in the city;
      (3)   Response time must be within one hour after notification;
      (4)   Shall have insurance in the minimum amounts as set by the state for
heavy-duty consent tows. The city must be named as an additional insured; and
      (5)   Shall have a permit and comply with all other provisions of this
chapter that are not in conflict with this section. Operation of a regular
wrecker on rotation is not required to operate on heavy-duty rotation.
   (B)   If no heavy-duty wrecker is available to respond through the heavy-
duty rotation list, the city may contract with any available heavy-duty wrecker
service.
(1998 Code, § 126-51)  (Ord. 03-38, passed 10-15-2003; Ord. 03-49, passed 11-5-
2003; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-17-2016)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.19  CONDUCT OF OPERATORS.
   (A)   The TCPD shall establish and maintain a formal complaint system to be
used by members of the public wishing to file a formal complaint on a tow
truck/wrecker company or driver. The creation, maintenance, and investigation
of these complaints lie within the authority of the TCPD. In addition, all
permitted towing companies shall notify the TCPD of any and all complaints
received within five business days of receiving the complaint.
   (B)   Upon receiving a complaint from any source claiming damages, loss to a
vehicle, or its contents, while being towed or stored by a tow truck/wrecker
operator, the operator or owner shall submit a written report to the TCPD Chief
of Police, or his or her designee, within five business days of receipt of the
complaint. These reports shall contain all facts pertinent to the claim or
complaint presented.
   (C)   The TCPD Chief of Police, or his or her designee, shall be notified in
writing within 48 hours of any arrest or criminal conviction of the owner of a
wrecker company, or of any wrecker driver employed by a wrecker company.
   (D)   Operators shall maintain proper conduct at all times when performing a
non-consent tow, and shall not fight, assault, threaten use of force, use
profanity or exhibit disorderly conduct. Towing companies shall be responsible
for the conduct of their operators. Improper conduct of an operator shall be
grounds for suspension or revocation of the towing company’s permit for the
calendar year. Additionally, towing companies shall prohibit operators who are
convicted of a felony, a crime involving moral turpitude, or a crime involving
disorderly conduct or assault, associated with conduct performing a non-consent
tow or otherwise, subsequent to the issuance of a permit, from performing
further non-consent tows for the city. The towing company shall have an
affirmative duty to disclose to the TCPD if any of its operators have been
convicted as stated above, subsequent to the issuance of a permit.
(1998 Code, § 126-52)  (Ord. 03-38, passed 10-15-2003; Ord. 03-49, passed 11-5-
2003; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-17-2016)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.20  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A PERMIT.
   Grounds for suspension or revocation of a permit may include the following:
   (A)   Failure at any time to meet or keep any of the requirements of this
subchapter, including conduct of operators and interfering with police, fire
and EMS;
   (B)   Operating a tow truck in such a manner as to endanger any person or
property;
   (C)   Failure to adhere to the TCPD’s rules and regulations;
   (D)   Violation of any federal or state law, or any rules or regulations
promulgated pursuant to federal or state law, or any other city ordinances
related to the operation of a tow truck or vehicle storage business; and/or
   (E)   Failure to arrive within the specified response time limit (as defined
for a no show).
(1998 Code, § 126-53)  (Ord. 03-38, passed 10-15-2003; Ord. 03-49, passed 11-5-
2003; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-17-2016)
§ 112.21  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION PROCEDURES; APPEALS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any provision of this subchapter, the TCPD Chief of
Police, or his or her designee, shall be authorized to suspend or revoke any
permit for a violation of any of those items listed as grounds for suspension
or revocation. The TCPD Chief of Police, or his or her designee, may
immediately suspend a permit for up to 15 calendar days if there is substantial
evidence of a violation that constitutes an imminent danger to the public, and
the permit holder is unable or unwilling to correct the violation. Otherwise,
before any permit may be suspended or revoked, the TCPD Chief of Police, or his
or her designee, shall hold a hearing at which evidence of such violation may
be presented and rebutted. A hearing may be scheduled by the TCPD Chief of
Police, or his or her designee, after receiving a complaint charging a
violation or, at his or her discretion, upon his or her investigation and
review. Notice of the hearing, the administrative action proposed to be taken,
and the grounds therefor, shall be given to the permit holder at least ten
calendar days prior to the hearing. Mailing such notice by certified mail to
the last known business address of the permit holder, not less than ten
calendar days prior to the hearing, shall constitute adequate notice. If the
TCPD Chief of Police, or his or her designee, suspends or revokes a permit, he
or she shall notify the permit holder in writing of the reasons for the
suspension or revocation, the effective date of the suspension or revocation,
the date of reinstatement, if any, and the conditions that must be satisfied
for reinstatement. Such notification shall advise the permit holder that he or
she may appeal the decision to the Mayor. Mailing such notification by
certified mail to the last known business address of the permit holder within
ten calendar days of the hearing shall be deemed sufficient. No person whose
permit has been revoked shall be eligible to apply for a new permit until the
next renewal period. The TCPD Chief of Police, or his or her designee, in
determining whether to suspend or revoke a permit, may consider prior
suspensions.
      (1)   If a permit holder has only two vehicles and one has a mechanical
failure, and the owner notifies both the TCPD wrecker coordinator and TCPD
dispatcher of the mechanical failure, the permit holder shall be removed from
the city rotation list for the reasonable amount of time necessary for the
permit holder to perform the repairs.
      (2)   The owner must show proof of such mechanical failure in writing
(repair bill) to the TCPD wrecker coordinator before they are placed back on
rotation.
      (3)   Any proof of mechanical failure shall be presented, Monday through
Friday, from 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
      (4)   Once placed back on rotation, the permit holder will be placed at
the bottom of the list.
   (B)   If an owner and/or driver of a wrecker company shall have any felony
criminal charges filed against him or her during the previous year, then he or
she will not be eligible for a wrecker permit the following year, unless the
charges have since been dismissed or resulted in a verdict of not guilty.
(1998 Code, § 126-54)  (Ord. 03-38, passed 10-15-2003; Ord. 03-49, passed 11-5-
2003; Ord. 04-53, passed 11-3-2004; Ord. 05-45, passed 10-5-2005; Ord. 16-01,
passed 2-17-2016)
§ 112.22  PERMISSIBLE FEES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   A tow truck under this subchapter shall not charge any fees in excess
of rates established by the TCPD and confirmed by the City Commission. If a
situation occurs where rates established by the state apply and those rates are
in conflict with city rates, the towing company shall comply with state
regulations. The permitted towing service rate schedule is as determined by
City Commission. The bill for towing any motor vehicle shall be itemized to
reflect the services performed, labor, and/or other materials required and/or
any other applicable charges. A copy shall be provided to the TCPD within ten
calendar days, when requested.
      (1)   The maximum base towing charge for a non-consent tow shall be $150.
The maximum towing base charge for a non-consent heavy-duty tow shall be $250,
plus $ 150 per hour after the first hour, or portion thereof, on the scene, not
including tow time to destination. The maximum towing base charge for vehicles
in the water is $250. The maximum towing base charge for vehicles over the
rocks on the Texas City Dike is $250. If a heavy-duty wrecker is requested, the
charge shall be in accordance with the following fee schedule.
 
STANDARD SERVICES MAXIMUM FEE
Standard Tow - Light- or Medium- Duty $150
Motorcycle Tow                     $175
Heavy-Duty Tow                        $250 + $150 per hour (or portion
(single vehicle, combination or       thereof) after first hour on scene, not
trailer)                              including tow time to destination
                                      Light-Duty: $200
Submerged/Partially Submerged Vehicle Heavy-Duty: $250 + $150 per hour after
(any type)                            first hour (or portion thereof) on
                                      scene, not including tow time to
                                      destination
Trailer, Light- or Medium-Duty (no    $150
vehicle)
Vehicle + Trailer (light- and medium- $150
duty)
Boat or other item (with or without   $150
trailer)
SPECIAL SERVICES
Dolly fee                             $45 + Standard Tow*
Ditch or Sand Pull                    $65 + Standard Tow*
Rollover                              $85 + Standard Tow*
Shift Transmission Under Car          $20 + Standard Tow*
Remove Drive Shaft                    $30 + Standard Tow*
Replace Tire (standard vehicle or     $15 + Standard Tow*
trailer)
EXTRA FEES
No Keys                               $35 + Standard Tow*
Extra Cost (All Accidents)            $35 + Standard Tow*
                                      $5 to $20 per day or portion of day for
Storage Fee                           vehicles under 25 feet;
                                      $35 per day or portion of day for
                                      vehicles over 25 feet (per statute)
SERVICES NOT LISTED                   Heavy-Duty: $150 per hour
                                      All Others: $75 per hour
 
      (2)   IN THE WATER shall mean any vehicle in which all four wheels are
covered by more than six inches of water. IN THE WATER shall not mean street
flooding, water on public streets, city rights-of-ways or drainage ditches of
four feet or less in depth.
   (B)   Wrecker companies will be allowed to charge an additional $5 surcharge
per tow. This additional charge is to help offset the additional cost to comply
with Tex. Occupations Code § 2303.159(a), which requires the operator of a
vehicle storage facility to accept payment by an electronic check, debit card
or credit card for any charge associated with delivery or storage of a vehicle.
   (C)   The city shall review the towing charges on an annual basis and
solicit input from all towing companies on rotation.
(1998 Code, § 126-55)  (Ord. 03-38, passed 10-15-2003; Ord. 03-49, passed 11-5-
2003; Ord. 04-08, passed 4-21-2004; Ord. 04-53, passed 11-3-2004; Ord. 05-45,
passed 10-5-2005; Ord. 12-14, passed 5-2-2012; Ord. 16-01, passed 2-17-2016)
§ 112.23  REPOSSESSIONS; PRIVATE PROPERTY TOWS.
   Tow truck drivers shall notify the TCPD officer (dispatcher) prior to their
attempt to repossess or remove private property tows. The notification shall
consist of the tow truck driver’s name, company name and phone number, location
from which the vehicle will be removed, and the vehicle description (year,
make, model, color, license plate number and state of issuance). Upon leaving
the scene, the tow truck driver shall immediately notify the TCPD dispatcher
whether the pick-up was successful or not successful.
(Ord. 16-01, passed 2-17-2016)
BUS SERVICE
§ 112.35  DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUS SERVICE. Any use of any street in the city by any automobile, tour
vehicle, motor bus, truck or other trackless vehicle, which is held out or
announced by sign, voice, writing device, advertisement or otherwise to be run
or operated to and from any particular or designated termini, zones or
territories, or over any particular or designated route or line of travel, for
the carriage of passengers for hire or for a gratuity or donation, however the
gratuity or donation may be received. BUS SERVICE is distinguished from taxicab
service in that bus service operates over fixed routes or between fixed termini
and passengers do not direct the route of travel.
(1998 Code, § 126-311)  (Ord. 93-74, passed 1-19-1994)
§ 112.36  LICENSE OR FRANCHISE REQUIRED; APPLICABILITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bus service in the city
without having first obtained either a franchise granted by the City Commission
pursuant to
Art. XVII of the Charter or a license granted pursuant to the provisions of
this subchapter. This subchapter shall not apply to any person who operates a
bus service pursuant to franchise, nor shall it apply to any person operating a
bus service directly for the city pursuant to contract.
(1998 Code, § 126-312)  (Ord. 93-74, passed 1-19-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.37  LICENSING GENERALLY.
   (A)   Application. Any person desiring to engage in bus service in the city
shall make application to the Chief of Police or his or her designated director
for a license pursuant to this subchapter, and such application shall contain
the following information:
      (1)   Name, business and residence address of the applicant;
      (2)   Make, style and/or other description of the vehicles to be used,
including the state motor vehicle license tag number, if any; and
      (3)   Routes over which vehicles will run, and their termini.
   (B)   Fee. A non-refundable application fee of $150 shall accompany the
application. An annual permit can be renewed if qualifications are met and $150
renewal fee paid.  The holder of an annual permit shall pay the city a permit
fee of $100 a year for each bus authorized by the permit. The City Commission
shall periodically by acclamation or other order, at its discretion, set annual
license fees which shall be paid by each licensee or applicant for a license,
including the times for payment and method of collecting and accounting for
such fees.
   (C)   Issuance. Upon presentation of such application and after
investigation of such application, if in the exercise of good discretion the
interests of the public so require, the Chief of Police or his or her
designated director may grant the applicant a license to conduct a bus service
in the city as authorized by this subchapter.
   (D)   Privileges granted by license. Upon issuance of the license, it shall
be lawful for the person named in the license to operate, in accordance with
the terms thereof, such vehicle in a bus service unless such license has
expired or is suspended or revoked.
   (E)   Term; transfer. All licenses granted under this subchapter shall be
valid for one year from date of issue, unless suspended or revoked sooner. No
license granted under the terms of this subchapter shall be transferable.
   (F)   Driver qualifications.  Drivers must meet the qualifications as set
out in §
113.056 below.
(1998 Code, § 126-313)  (Ord. 93-74, passed 1-19-1994; Ord. 13-16, passed 6-19-
2003)
§ 112.38  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   Reasons. The permit granted under this subchapter is a privilege and
not a right under the law, and the city may suspend or revoke any license or
permit issued by the Chief of Police or his or her designated director under
this subchapter for any one or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   Non-compliance. A failure to comply with the regulations pertaining
to such business as established by this subchapter;
      (2)   Inefficient and unsafe service. A failure to give efficient service
or to protect the safety of passengers and the public in accordance with the
laws of the state and the ordinances of the city;
      (3)   Violation of penal law. Violation of any penal law of the United
States, any law of the state or any ordinance of the city by the licensee or
any person operating a vehicle in a bus service for the licensee; and
      (4)   Failure to maintain insurance or safe vehicles. Failure to maintain
insurance required by this subchapter, or maintaining vehicles which do not
pass safety inspections.
   (B)   Hearing. No license granted under the terms of this subchapter shall
be revoked, except after a hearing at which the licensee shall have an
opportunity to be heard.
   (C)   Appeals. The licensee shall have the right to appeal to the Chief
Executive Officer from any order of revocation or suspension by the Chief of
Police or his or her designated director. Until such appeal is acted on by the
Chief Executive Officer, such suspension or revocation shall remain in effect.
During the period of such suspension or after such revocation, it shall be
unlawful for such person to operate any vehicle in a bus service unless and
until the suspension is removed or a new license is granted, with the exception
as stated in §
112.39 of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 126-314)  (Ord. 93-74, passed 1-19-1994; Ord. 13-16, passed 6-19-
2003)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.39  INSURANCE.
   Every licensee holding a license to operate a bus service pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter shall maintain in full force and effect at all
times a policy, naming the city as additional insured, of public liability and
property damage insurance, covering each vehicle so used, in an amount not less
than $250,000 for injury to or death of one person, $500,000 per occurrence and
$100,000 for damage or destruction of property. The licensee shall furnish
proof of such coverage by filing with the City Secretary a valid certificate of
insurance or, in lieu thereof, a true multiple original of any such policy. The
policy shall contain a clause requiring that 30-days’ notice be given to the
city prior to cancellation. If such notice of cancellation is given by the
insurance company, the licensee shall obtain new insurance before the
expiration of the 30-day period; if the licensee fails to do so his or her
license may be revoked after a hearing as provided for in §
112.38(B) of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 126-315)  (Ord. 93-74, passed 1-19-1994)
§ 112.40  ROUTES.
   The Director of Transportation and Planning shall fix the routes of travel
between and over which vehicles in a bus service shall run or apply their
business, and it shall be unlawful for any licensee to operate a bus service
over any routes not approved by the Director of Transportation and Planning.
(1998 Code, § 126-316)  (Ord. 93-74, passed 1-19-1994; Ord. 13-16, passed 6-19-
2003)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.41  DRIVERS TO HAVE BUS OPERATOR’S LICENSE; DISPLAY OF DRIVER
INFORMATION.
   (A)   The driver shall lawfully hold an operator’s license to operate a bus.
   (B)   There shall be displayed at all times, in the interior of the bus, a
framed, glass-covered photograph of the driver driving the bus, plainly showing
the driver’s features, name and driver’s license number.
(1998 Code, § 126-317)  (Ord. 93-74, passed 1-19-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.42  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to transport alcoholic beverages, not owned and
in the exclusive possession and control of a fare-paying passenger, in the bus,
or for any bus driver to have on his or her possession any alcoholic beverages
while driving and/or operating while in service.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any driver and/or passenger of any bus to
drink any type of alcoholic beverages while inside the bus.
(1998 Code, § 126-318)  (Ord. 93-74, passed 1-19-1994)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.43  VEHICLES AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The vehicle shall have the bus name and the city license number posted
on the side. The Chief of Police or his or her designated director shall have
the authority to promulgate rules and regulations requiring periodic safety
inspection of all vehicles used in a bus service, and no licensee shall be
authorized to operate any such vehicle unless it satisfactorily passes such
inspection.
   (B)   The vehicle interior and exterior shall remain in a clean and orderly
condition at all times.
(1998 Code, § 126-319)  (Ord. 93-74, passed 1-19-1994; Ord. 13-16, passed 6-19-
2003)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.44  APPEALS.
   An aggrieved licensee shall have the right to appeal the reasonableness of
any decision, rule or regulation of the Chief of Police or his or her
designated director in the same manner as set forth in §
112.38(C) of this chapter, but pendency of any appeal shall not stay the
effectiveness of any such decision, rule or regulation.
(1998 Code, § 126-321)  (Ord. 93-74, passed 1-19-1994; Ord. 13-16, passed 6-19-
2003)
CHAPTER 113:  TAXICABS
Section
General Provisions
   
113.001   Policy
   
113.002   General authority and duties of Director
   
113.003   Exemptions
   
113.004   Definitions
Administration and Enforcement
   
113.020   Inspections
   
113.021   Surrender of license, insignia and equipment
   
113.022   Enforcement by Police Department
   
113.023   Order to correct violation
   
113.024   Service of notices
Operating Authority
   
113.035   Required
   
113.036   Transfer
   
113.037   Approval by Chief of Police or his or her designated director
required; service requirements
   
113.038   Qualifications
   
113.039   Filing and contents of application; application fee
   
113.040   Investigation and findings of fact; hearing on application
   
113.041   Renewal of annual permit
   
113.042   Amendment, suspension or revocation
   
113.043   Permit fees
   
113.044   Incorporation of special provisions in grant of operating authority
Driver’s Permit
   
113.055   Required
   
113.056   Qualifications
   
113.057   Application
   
113.058   Investigation of applicant
   
113.059   Issuance or denial
   
113.060   Duration; voidance upon suspension or revocation of state driver’s
license
   
113.061   Duplicate permit
   
113.062   Suspension by Chief of Police or his or her designated director
   
113.063   Suspension or revocation by Chief of Police or his or her designated
director
   
113.064   Appeals
   
113.065   Falsifying permit, badge or emblem
   
113.066   Notification of change in mailing address of permittee
Operating Authority Holder’s and Driver’s Regulations
   
113.080   Generally
   
113.081   Holder’s duty to enforce compliance by drivers
   
113.082   Insurance
   
113.083   Apparel and appearance of drivers
   
113.084   Driver’s daily manifest
   
113.085   Holder’s records and reports
Service Regulations
   
113.100   Citywide taxicab service required; response to calls; dispatching
station
   
113.101   Representation of availability of taxicab
   
113.102   Refusal to convey passengers
   
113.103   Passenger limitations
   
113.104   Drivers to carry passengers by most direct route
   
113.105   Solicitation of passengers
   
113.106   Use of taxicab stands
   
113.107   Conduct of drivers
   
113.108   Return of property left in taxicab
   
113.109   Establishment of taxicab stands
   
113.110   Service regulations for business establishments requesting taxicabs
for customers
Vehicles and Equipment
   
113.125   False representation as taxicab
   
113.126   Vehicle requirements and inspections
   
113.127   Required equipment
   
113.128   Display receptacle; display of driver and company information
   
113.129   Decals
   
113.130   Not-for-hire status of taxicabs
   
113.131   Removal of equipment
   
113.132   Fares
   
113.133   Misdemeanor to overcharge
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.001  POLICY.
   It is the policy of the city to provide for and to promote adequate and
efficient taxicab service in the city. To this end, this chapter provides for
the regulation of taxicab rates and services, to be carried out in a manner
that protects the public health and safety, promotes the public convenience and
necessity, and respects the concept of free enterprise.
(1998 Code, § 126-131)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 113.002  GENERAL AUTHORITY AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.
   The Chief of Police or his or her designated director who shall implement
and enforce this chapter and may, by written order, establish such rules or
regulations, not inconsistent with this chapter, as he or she determines are
necessary to discharge his or her duty under or to effect the policy of this
chapter.
(1998 Code, § 126-132)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005; Ord. 13-16, passed 6-19-
2013)
§ 113.003  EXEMPTIONS.
   This chapter does not apply to:
   (A)   The transportation of a person by taxicab licensed by another
governmental entity from a point outside the city to a destination inside the
city, if the taxicab leaves the city without receiving a passenger inside the
city;
   (B)   A taxicab service operated under state or federal authority unless the
service is subject to the city’s regulatory authority; or
   (C)   A motor vehicle used to transport persons for hire that is regulated
by other city ordinance.
(1998 Code, § 126-134)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005; Ord. 13-16, passed 6-19-
2013)
§ 113.004  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANNUAL PERMIT. Permission granted by the city to a person to operate a
taxicab service inside the city for a period of one year, renewable under the
provisions of this chapter.
   CONVICTED SEX OFFENDER. A person that has received a rendition of an order
by a court imposing a punishment of incarceration, probation or fine for a
crime of aggravated sexual assault, aggravated sexual assault of a child,
aggravated sexual assault 65 years or older, aggravated kidnaping (violate/
abuse victim sexually), indecency with child-sexual contact, sexual assault,
sexual assault of a child, sexual performance of child, prohibited sexual
conduct, compelling prostitution, possession/promotion of child pornography,
indecency with a child - exposure, kidnaping with victim under 17 years of age,
unlawful restraint with victim under 17 years of age, aggravated kidnaping
(with no sexual intent and victim under 17 years of age), indecent exposure-
second conviction, preparatory offense - attempt, conspiracy and solicitation
to commit any sexual offense. Also included is a conviction of any statute from
another state, regardless of title, that the elements of which meet the above
offenses.
   CONVICTION. A conviction in a federal court or a court of any state or
foreign nation or political subdivision of a state or foreign nation that has
not been reversed, vacated or pardoned.
   DEPARTMENT. The Police Department.
   DIRECTOR. The Police Chief’s designee assigned to enforce and administer
this chapter, and includes representatives, agents or department employees
designated by the Director.
   DRIVER. An individual who drives or operates a taxicab.
   HOLDER. A person who is granted an annual permit.
   LEGAL RESIDENT. A citizen of the United States or a person residing in the
United States in accordance with federal immigration laws.
   OPERATE. To drive or to be in control of a taxicab.
   OPERATING AUTHORITY. A annual permit granted under this chapter.
   OPERATOR. The driver of a taxicab, the owner of a taxicab or the holder of a
taxicab operating authority.
   OWNER. The person to whom state license plates for a vehicle were issued.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, government or governmental subdivision,
or agency, trust or partnership, or two or more persons having a joint or
common economic interest.
   TAXICAB. A chauffeured motor vehicle with a rated passenger capacity of
eight or less, used to transport persons for hire, that typically operates on
irregular routes, irregular schedules and a call and demand basis.
   TAXICAB DRIVER’S PERMIT. A permit issued to an individual by the Chief of
Police or his or her designated director authorizing that person to operate a
taxicab in the city.
   TAXICAB SERVICE. A passenger transportation service operated for hire that
uses taxicabs in the operation of the service, and includes, but is not limited
to, a facility from which the service is operated, taxicabs used in the
operation, and a person who owns, controls or operates the service.
   TAXICAB STAND. A public place reserved exclusively for use by taxicabs.
(1998 Code, § 126-135)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005; Ord. 13-16, passed 6-19-
2013)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 113.020  INSPECTIONS.
   The Director may inspect a taxicab service operating under this chapter to
determine whether the service complies with this chapter, regulations
established under this chapter, or other applicable law.
(1998 Code, § 126-151)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 113.021  SURRENDER OF LICENSE, INSIGNIA AND EQUIPMENT.
   Whenever a holder’s operating authority or a taxicab driver’s permit is
suspended, revoked or denied, or whenever a vehicle fails to pass inspection as
a taxicab, the Director may remove or require the surrender of all evidence of
authorization as a holder, taxicab driver or taxicab, including, but not
limited to, removal or surrender of operating authority, licenses, decals,
signs, insignia, radios and toplights.
(1998 Code, § 126-152)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 113.022  ENFORCEMENT BY POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Officers of the Police Department shall assist in the enforcement of
this chapter.
   (B)   A police officer, upon observing a violation of this chapter or the
regulations established by the Director, shall take necessary enforcement
action to ensure effective regulation of taxicab service, either by citation or
arrest.
(1998 Code, § 126-153)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 113.023  ORDER TO CORRECT VIOLATION.
   (A)   (1)   If the Director determines that a holder violates this chapter,
terms of its operating authority, a regulation established by the Director or
other law, the Director may notify the holder in writing of the violation and
by written order direct the holder to correct the violation within a reasonable
period of time.
      (2)   In setting the time for correction, the Director shall consider the
degree of danger to the public health or safety and the nature of the
violation.
      (3)   If the violation involves equipment that is unsafe or functioning
improperly, the Director shall order the holder to immediately cease use of the
equipment.
   (B)   If the Director determines that a violation constitutes an imminent
and serious threat to the public health or safety, the Director shall order the
holder to correct the violation immediately and, if the holder fails to comply,
the Director shall promptly take or cause to be taken such action as he or she
considers necessary to enforce the order immediately.
   (C)   The Director shall include in a notice issued under this section
identification of the violation, the date of issuance of the notice and time
period within which the violation must be corrected, a warning that failure to
comply with the order may result in suspension or revocation of operating
authority or imposition of a fine or both, and a statement indicating that the
order may be appealed to the Chief of Police.
(1998 Code, § 126-154)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 113.024  SERVICE OF NOTICES.
   (A)   The holder or the dispatcher shall be designated as the representative
to receive service of notice required under this chapter to be given a holder
and to serve notice required under this chapter to be given a driver employed
by a holder.
   (B)   Notices required under this chapter shall be given as follows:
      (1)   Notice required under this chapter to be given a holder must be
personally served by the Director on the holder or the dispatcher; and
      (2)   Notice required under this chapter to be given a driver licensed by
the city under §§
113.055 through
113.066 of this chapter must be personally served or sent by certified United
States certified mail, five-day return receipt requested, to the address, last
known to the Director, of the person to be notified, or to the dispatcher.
   (C)   Notice required under this chapter to be given a person other than a
driver licensed under §§
113.055 through
113.066 of this chapter or a holder may be served in the manner prescribed by
division (B)(2) above.
   (D)   Service executed in accordance with this section constitutes notice to
the person to whom the notice is addressed. The date of service for notice that
is mailed is the date received.
   (E)   This section does not apply to notice served under §
113.062(A) of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 126-155)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)
OPERATING AUTHORITY
§ 113.035  REQUIRED.
   A person may not operate a taxicab service inside the city without operating
authority granted under this subchapter, nor may a person transport a passenger
for hire inside the city by taxicab unless the person driving the taxicab or
another who employs or contracts with the driver has been granted operating
authority under this subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 126-171)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 113.036  TRANSFER.
   An annual permit may not be transferred to another unless the holder files a
written application for the transfer in the manner and containing the
information prescribed by the Director, and the transfer application is
approved by the City Commission.
(1998 Code, § 126-172)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 113.037  APPROVAL BY CHIEF OF POLICE OR HIS OR HER DESIGNATED DIRECTOR
REQUIRED; SERVICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Before an annual permit is granted, the application for the annual
permit must be approved by the Chief of Police or his or her designated
director. The granting of an annual permit is in the discretion of the Chief of
Police or his or her designated director, but it will not be granted unless:
      (1)   The proposed taxicab service is required by the public convenience
and necessity; and
      (2)   The applicant qualifies for operating authority under §
113.038 of this chapter and is otherwise fit, willing and able to operate the
taxicab service in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, rules and
regulations of the Chief of Police or his or her designated director,
provisions of the franchise or annual permit and other applicable laws.
   (B)   The holder of an annual permit must provide taxicab service to the
entire city with a minimum of three taxicabs.
   (C)   The holder of an annual permit must provide taxicab service as
specified in the permit with a maximum of 25 taxicabs.
(1998 Code, § 126-173)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005; Ord. 13-16, passed 6-19-
2013)
§ 113.038  QUALIFICATIONS.
   To qualify for operating authority, an applicant must:
   (A)   Be at least 19 years of age;
   (B)   Be currently authorized to work full time in the United States;
   (C)   Be able to communicate in the English language;
   (D)   Not have been convicted of a felony offense in the preceding five
years or a Class A or B misdemeanor in the preceding two years. For which:
      (1)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction, the
date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, or termination of
probation whichever is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a
misdemeanor offense; and/or
      (2)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction, the
date of release from confinement for the conviction, or the termination of
probation or parole whichever is the later date, if the applicant was convicted
of a felony offense.
   (E)   Not be a convicted sex offender; and/or
   (F)   Each applicant must have his or her fingerprints taken by the Police
Department of the city at the time of submission of the application.
(1998 Code, § 126-174)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 113.039  FILING AND CONTENTS OF APPLICATION; APPLICATION FEE.
   (A)   To obtain an annual permit, a person shall make application to the
Chief of Police or his or her designated director in the manner prescribed by
this section. The applicant must be the person who will own, control or operate
the proposed taxicab service. An applicant shall file with the Chief of Police
or his or her designated director a written, verified application statement, to
be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee of $150, containing the
following:
      (1)   The form of business of the applicant and, if the business is a
corporation or association, a copy of the documents establishing the business
and the name, address and citizenship of each person with a direct interest in
the business;
      (2)   Name, address and verified signature of the applicant;
      (3)   Income statement and balance sheet showing the assets, liabilities
and equity of the business;
      (4)   A description of any past business experience of the applicant,
particularly in providing passenger transportation services, and identification
and description of any revocation or suspension of a franchise or permit held
by the applicant or business before the date of filing the application;
      (5)   Number of vehicles and description of the vehicles the applicant
proposes to use in the operation of the taxicab service, and a description of
the operation of the proposed taxicab service and location of the fixed
facilities to be used in the operation;
      (6)   A description of the proposed insignia and color scheme for the
applicant’s taxicabs and a description of the distinctive item of apparel or
item placed on the apparel to be worn by the applicant’s taxicab drivers;
      (7)   Documentary evidence from an insurance company, authorized to do
business in the state, indicating a willingness to provide liability insurance
as required by this chapter;
      (8)   Documentary evidence of payment of ad valorem taxes on the property
to be used in connection with the operation of the proposed taxicab service;
      (9)   Proof of a permanent and established place of business within the
city, the location of which complies with the city’s Development Code, from
which the proposed taxicab service will be operated;
      (10)   Such additional information as the applicant desires to include to
aid in the determination of whether the requested operating authority should be
granted; and
      (11)   Such additional information as the Chief of Police or his or her
designated director or City Commission considers necessary to assist or promote
the implementation or enforcement of this chapter or the protection of the
public safety.
   (B)   A holder shall notify the Chief of Police or his or her designated
director in writing of any change of address or change in ownership or
management of a taxicab service not less than ten days prior to the change.
   (C)   The business administration office of the company providing these
services must be kept open from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays, other than
recognized holidays, and must be staffed and equipped to receive telephone
calls during all business hours.
(1998 Code, § 126-175)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005; Ord. 13-16, passed 6-19-
2013)
§ 113.040  INVESTIGATION AND FINDINGS OF FACT; HEARING ON APPLICATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for an annual permit, the Chief of
Police or his or her designated director shall conduct an investigation and
make findings of fact concerning public convenience and necessity and other
relevant factors, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   The number of taxicabs presently in operation in the city;
      (2)   The public transportation needs of the city and the adequacy of
existing transportation services, including existing holders, to meet those
needs;
      (3)   Whether existing holders can render the proposed additional taxicab
service more efficiently or effectively than the applicant;
      (4)   The effect of the proposed additional taxicab service on traffic
conditions, taxicab drivers’ working conditions and wages and existing holders
and public mass transportation services; and
      (5)   The character, experience and fiscal responsibilities of the
applicant.
   (B)   The applicant for an annual permit has the burden of proving that the
public convenience and necessity require the proposed taxicab service and that
the applicant is qualified and financially able to provide the service proposed
in the application.
   (C)   Within a reasonable time following the date of application, the Chief
of Police or his or her designated director shall report in writing his or her
findings of fact and recommendation to the chief executive officer for decision
as to whether an annual permit should be granted.
(1998 Code, § 126-176)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005; Ord. 13-16, passed 6-19-
2013)
§ 113.041  RENEWAL OF ANNUAL PERMIT.
   An annual permit can be renewed if the holder meets qualifications set forth
in this chapter, including the payment of the $150 renewal fee.
(1998 Code, § 126-180)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 113.042  AMENDMENT, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   Amendment. An annual permit is amendable at any time by the Chief of
Police or his or her designated director.
   (B)   Suspension or revocation of permit. The following regulations apply to
the suspension or revocation of an annual permit:
      (1)   The Chief of Police or his or her designated director may suspend
or revoke a permit if the Director determines that the holder:
         (a)   Failed to comply with a correction order issued to the holder by
the Chief of Police or his or her designated director, within the time
specified in the order;
         (b)   Intentionally or knowingly impeded the Department or other law
enforcement agency in the performance of its duty or execution of its
authority;
         (c)   Failed to comply with this chapter;
         (d)   Does not qualify for operating authority under §
113.038 of this chapter;
         (e)   Has been convicted of a violation of another city, state or
federal law, which violation reflects unfavorably on the fitness of the holder
to perform a public transportation service;
         (f)   Is under indictment for or has been convicted of any felony
offense or a Class A or B misdemeanor while holding taxicab operating
authority;
         (g)   Failed to pay city ad valorem taxes on any property of the
holder used directly or indirectly in connection with the taxicab service; and/
or
         (h)   Failed to pay a permit fee at the time it was due.
      (2)   A suspension of a permit does not affect the expiration date of the
permit.
      (3)   After revocation of a permit, a holder is not eligible for a permit
for a period up to two years.
   (C)   Appeal of suspension. After suspension of a permit, a holder may file
an appeal with the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police or his or her
designated director shall inspect the operation of the suspended holder to
determine if the deficiency causing the suspension has been corrected by the
holder. After inspection, the Chief of Police or his or her designated director
shall submit his or her recommendation, together with supporting facts, to the
Chief of Police. The Chief of Police may, as he or she determines appropriate,
reinstate the permit or deny reinstatement.
(1998 Code, § 126-181)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005; Ord. 13-16, passed 6-19-
2013)
§ 113.043  PERMIT FEES.
   A holder of an annual permit shall pay the city a permit fee of $60 a year
for each taxicab authorized by the permit. A permit fee is payable at the time
prescribed by the permit.
(1998 Code, § 126-183)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 113.044  INCORPORATION OF SPECIAL PROVISIONS IN GRANT OF OPERATING AUTHORITY.
   This chapter governs the operation of taxicabs and taxicab service under
each form of operating authority. This chapter, however, is not a limitation on
the power of the City Commission to incorporate in a grant of operating
authority special provisions relating to the operation of the taxicab service
under the grant. To the extent that a special provision conflicts with this
chapter, the special provision controls.
(1998 Code, § 126-184)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)
DRIVER’S PERMIT
§ 113.055  REQUIRED.
   (A)   A person may not operate a taxicab inside the city without a valid
taxicab driver’s permit issued to the person under this subchapter.
   (B)   A holder or taxicab owner may not employ or contract with a driver or
otherwise allow a person to drive for hire a taxicab owned, controlled or
operated by the holder or taxicab owner unless the person has a valid taxicab
driver’s permit issued under this subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 126-201)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 113.056  QUALIFICATIONS.
   To qualify for a taxicab driver’s permit, an applicant must:
   (A)   Have a place of residence;
   (B)   Be at least 19 years of age;
   (C)   Be currently authorized to work full-time in the United States;
   (D)   Hold a valid driver’s license issued by the state;
   (E)   Be able to communicate in the English language;
   (F)   Not be afflicted with a physical or mental disease or disability that
is likely to prevent the applicant from exercising ordinary and reasonable
control over a motor vehicle or that is likely to otherwise endanger the public
health or safety;
   (G)   Not have been convicted of more than three moving traffic violations
arising out of separate transactions, or involved in more than two automobile
accidents in which it could be reasonably determined that the applicant was at
fault, within a 12-month period directly preceding application;
   (H)   Not have been convicted of a felony offense in the preceding five
years or a Class A or B misdemeanor in the preceding two years. For which:
      (1)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction, the
date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, or termination of
probation whichever is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a
misdemeanor offense; and/or
      (2)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction, the
date of release from confinement for the conviction, or the termination of
probation or parole whichever is the later date, if the applicant was convicted
of a felony offense.
   (I)   Each applicant must have his or her fingerprints taken by the Police
Department of the city at the time of submission of the application;
   (J)   Be subject to no outstanding warrants;
   (K)   Be sanitary and well groomed in dress and person in compliance with §
113.083(A) of this chapter;
   (L)   Having successfully completed within the preceding 12 months a
defensive driving course approved by the National Safety Commission and be able
to present proof of completion. An exception may be made for new employees. A
30-day grace period may be granted at which time the owner will deliver to the
Police Department proof of successful completion of a defensive driving course,
or paperwork showing termination of the employee. Failure to comply by the
thirtieth day will be a violation of the chapter and punishable by a fine of
not less than $25, nor more than $500; and
   (M)   Not be a convicted sex offender.
(1998 Code, § 126-202)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 113.057  APPLICATION.
   To obtain a taxicab driver’s permit or renewal of a taxicab driver’s permit,
a person must file with the Department a non-refundable application fee of $10
and a completed written application on a form provided for the purpose. The
Director shall require each application to state such information as he or she
considers necessary to determine whether an applicant is qualified.
(1998 Code, § 126-203)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 113.058  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.
   (A)   For the purpose of determining qualification under §
113.056(F) of this chapter, the Chief of Police or his or her designated
director may require an applicant to submit to a physical examination at the
applicant’s expense conducted by a licensed physician and to furnish to the
Chief of Police or his or her designated director a statement from the
physician which certifies that the physician has examined the applicant and
that, in the physician’s professional opinion, the applicant is qualified under
§
113.056(F) of this chapter.
   (B)   Upon request of the Chief of Police or his or her designated director,
the Police Department shall investigate each applicant and furnish the Director
a report concerning the applicant’s qualification under §
113.056(G) of this chapter. The Municipal Court shall furnish the Chief of
Police or his or her designated director a copy of the applicant’s motor
vehicle driving record and a list of any warrants of arrest for the applicant
which might be outstanding.
   (C)   The Chief of Police or his or her designated director may conduct such
other investigation as he or she considers necessary to determine whether an
applicant for a taxicab driver’s permit is qualified.
(1998 Code, § 126-204)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005; Ord. 13-16, passed 6-19-
2013)
§ 113.059  ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.
   (A)   If the Chief of Police or his or her designated director determines
that an applicant is qualified, the Chief of Police or his or her designated
director shall issue a taxicab driver’s permit to the applicant.
   (B)   The Chief of Police or his or her designated director shall delay
until final adjudication the approval of the application of any applicant who
is under indictment for or has charges pending for:
      (1)   A felony offense; and/or
      (2)   Any Class A or B misdemeanor.
   (C)   The Director may deny the application for a taxicab driver’s permit if
the applicant:
      (1)   Is not qualified under §
113.056 of this chapter;
      (2)   Refuses to submit to or does not pass a medical or written
examination authorized under §
113.058 of this chapter; and/or
      (3)   Makes a false statement in his or her application for taxicab
driver’s permit.
   (D)   If the Chief of Police or his or her designated director determines
that a permit should be denied the applicant, the Chief of Police or his or her
designated director shall notify the applicant in writing that his or her
application is denied and include in the notice the reason for denial and a
statement informing the applicant of his or her right to appeal.
(1998 Code, § 126-205)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005; Ord. 13-16, passed 6-19-
2013)
§ 113.060  DURATION; VOIDANCE UPON SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF STATE DRIVER’S
LICENSE.
   (A)   Except in the case of probationary and provisional permits, a taxicab
driver’s permit expires on December 31of the year of issuance unless revoked
under this chapter.
   (B)   If a permittee’s state driver’s license is suspended or revoked by the
state, his or her taxicab driver’s permit automatically becomes void. A
permittee shall notify the Chief of Police or his or her designated director
and the holder for whom he or she drives within three days of a suspension or
revocation of his or her driver’s license by the state and shall immediately
surrender his or her taxicab driver’s permit to the Chief of Police or his or
her designated director.
(1998 Code, § 126-206)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005; Ord. 13-16, passed 6-19-
2013)
§ 113.061  DUPLICATE PERMIT.
   If a taxicab driver’s permit is lost or destroyed, the Director shall issue
the permittee a duplicate permit upon payment to the city of a duplicate permit
fee of $10.
(1998 Code, § 126-209)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 113.062  SUSPENSION BY CHIEF OF POLICE OR HIS OR HER DESIGNATED DIRECTOR.
   (A)   If a representative designated by the Chief of Police or his or her
designated director to enforce this chapter determines that a permittee under
this subchapter has failed to comply with this chapter (except §
113.056 of this chapter) or a regulation established under this chapter, the
representative may suspend the taxicab driver’s permit for a period of time not
to exceed three days by personally serving the permittee with a written notice
of the suspension. The written notice must include the reason for suspension,
the date the suspension begins, the duration of the suspension and a statement
informing the permittee of his or her right of appeal.
   (B)   The Chief of Police or his or her designated director may order an
expedited hearing under this section, to be held as soon as possible after the
permittee requests an appeal. The Chief of Police or his or her designated
director may affirm, reverse or modify the order of the representative. The
decision of the Chief of Police or his or her designated director is final.
(1998 Code, § 126-210)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005; Ord. 13-16, passed 6-19-
2013)
§ 113.063  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION BY CHIEF OR POLICE OR HIS OR HER DESIGNATED
DIRECTOR.
   (A)   If the Chief of Police or his or her designated director determines
that a permittee under this subchapter has failed to comply with this chapter
(except §
113.056 of this chapter) or a regulation established under this chapter, the
Chief of Police or his or her designated director may suspend the taxicab
driver’s permit for a definite period of time not to exceed 60 days.
   (B)   If, at any time, the Chief of Police or his or her designated director
determines that a permittee is not qualified under §
113.056 of this chapter, or is under indictment or has charges pending for any
offense involving a Class A or B misdemeanor or a felony offense. The Chief of
Police or his or her designated director shall suspend the taxicab driver’s
permit until such time as the Chief of Police or his or her designee determine
that the permittee is qualified or that the charges against the permittee have
been finally adjudicated.
   (C)   A permittee whose taxicab driver’s permit is suspended shall not drive
a taxicab inside the city during the period of suspension.
   (D)   The Chief of Police or his or her designated director shall notify the
permittee and the holder in writing of a suspension under this section and
include in the notice the reason for the suspension, the date the Chief of
Police or his or her designated director orders the suspension to begin, the
duration of suspension or if it is under division (B) above, and a statement
informing the permittee of a right of appeal. The period of suspension begins
on the date specified by the Chief of Police or his or her designated director
or, in the case of an appeal, on the date ordered by the appeal Hearing
Officer.
   (E)   The Chief of Police or his or her designated director may revoke a
taxicab driver’s permit if the Director determines that the permittee:
      (1)   Operated a taxicab inside the city during a period in which the
taxicab driver’s permit was suspended;
      (2)   Made a false statement on an application for a taxicab driver’s
permit;
      (3)   Engaged in conduct that constitutes grounds for suspension under
division (E)(1) above, and received either a suspension in excess of three days
or a conviction for violation of this chapter two times within the 12-month
period preceding the occurrence of the conduct or three times within the 24-
month period preceding the occurrence of the conduct;
      (4)   Engaged in conduct that could reasonably be determined to be
detrimental to the public safety; or
      (5)   Was convicted of any felony offense or Class A or B misdemeanor
while holding a taxicab driver’s permit.
   (F)   A person whose taxicab driver’s permit is revoked shall not:
      (1)   Apply for another taxicab driver’s permit before the expiration of
12 months from the date the Chief of Police or his or her designated director
revokes the permit or, in the case of an appeal, the date the appeal Hearing
Officer affirms the revocation; or
      (2)   Drive a taxicab inside the city.
   (G)   The Chief of Police or his or her designated director shall notify the
permittee in writing of a revocation and include in the notice the reason for
the revocation, the date the Chief of Police or his or her designated director
orders the revocation, and a statement informing the permittee of his or her
right of appeal.
   (H)   After receipt of a notice of suspension, revocation or denial of
permit renewal, the permittee shall, on the date specified in the notice,
surrender his or her taxicab driver’s permit to the Chief of Police or his or
her designated director and discontinue driving a taxicab inside the city.
(1998 Code, § 126-211)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005; Ord. 13-16, passed 6-19-
2013)
§ 113.064  APPEALS.
   (A)   Right of appeal; request for appeal. A person may appeal a denial of a
taxicab driver’s permit application, suspension of a taxicab driver’s permit
under §
113.063 of this chapter, revocation of a taxicab driver’s permit, if he or she
requests an appeal in writing, delivered to the Chief of Police not more than
ten business days after notice of the Director’s action is received.
   (B)   Conduct of hearing. The Chief of Police shall act as the Appeal
Hearing Officer in an appeal hearing under this section. The Hearing Officer
shall give the appealing party an opportunity to present evidence and make
argument in his or her behalf. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an
appeal hearing under this section, and the Hearing Officer shall make his or
her ruling on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the
hearing.
   (C)   Decision by Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer may affirm, modify or
reverse all or part of the action of the Director being appealed. The decision
of the Hearing Officer is final.
(1998 Code, § 126-212)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 113.065  FALSIFYING PERMIT, BADGE OR EMBLEM.
   A person commits an offense if he or she:
   (A)   Forges, alters or counterfeits a taxicab driver’s permit, badge,
sticker or emblem required by law; and/or
   (B)   Possesses a forged, altered or counterfeited taxicab driver’s permit,
badge, sticker or emblem required by law.
(1998 Code, § 126-213)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 113.066  NOTIFICATION OF CHANGE IN MAILING ADDRESS OF PERMITTEE.
   An individual issued a taxicab driver’s permit shall maintain a current
mailing address on file with the Police Department. The permittee shall notify
the Chief of Police or his or her designated director of any change in this
mailing address within five business days of the change.
(1998 Code, § 126-214)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005; Ord. 13-16, passed 6-19-
2013)
OPERATING AUTHORITY HOLDER’S AND DRIVER’S REGULATIONS
§ 113.080  GENERALLY.
   (A)   Holders. In the operation of a taxicab service, a holder shall comply
with the terms and conditions of the holder’s operating authority and, except
to the extent expressly provided otherwise by the operating authority, shall
comply with this chapter, regulations established under this chapter and other
law applicable to the operation of a taxicab service.
   (B)   Drivers. While on duty, a driver shall comply with this chapter,
regulations established under this chapter, other law applicable to the
operation of a motor vehicle in the state, and orders issued by the holder
employing or contracting with the driver in connection with the holder’s
discharging of its duty under its operating authority and this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 126-231)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.081  HOLDER’S DUTY TO ENFORCE COMPLIANCE BY DRIVERS.
   (A)   A holder shall establish policy and take action to discourage, prevent
or correct violations of this chapter by drivers who are employed by or
contracting with the holder.
   (B)   A holder shall not permit a driver who is employed by or contracting
with the holder to drive a taxicab if driver has failed to comply with this
chapter, the rules and regulations established by the Director or other
applicable law.
(1998 Code, § 126-232)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.082  INSURANCE.
   (A)   Filing; naming of city as additional named insured. Before any permit
shall be issued under this chapter to any owner of a taxicab, or before any
renewal of a permit shall be granted, the owner shall file with the City
Secretary, and thereafter keep in full force and effect, a policy of public
liability insurance approved by the Director or his or her designated
representative, and executed by an insurance company duly authorized to do
business in the state, and performable in the county, insuring the public
against any loss or damage that may result to any person or property from the
operation of the taxicab covered or to be covered by the permit. Such insurance
policies shall name the city as an additional named insured, and such policies
shall provide for prior notice of cancellation to the city as provided in this
chapter.
   (B)   Minimum amount of coverage. The amount of insurance required by this
chapter shall not be less than the following sums:
      (1)   For the injury or death of any one person in any one accident:
$20,000;
      (2)   For total liability in any one accident or personal injuries or
death: $40,000; and
      (3)   For injury or destruction of property in any one accident: $15,000.
   (C)   Minimum liability. The minimum amount of insurance liability shall
never be less than the amount established by the statutes of the state under
the Safety Responsibility Act, as may be amended.
   (D)   Persons protected. The public liability insurance required by this
subchapter shall be for the protection of the passengers of the insured taxicab
and for the public, but shall not cover personal injuries sustained by the
servants, agents or employees of the person filing the insurance.
   (E)   Provision for continuing liability. All policies of public liability
insurance required by this subchapter shall contain a provision for a
continuing liability thereon up to the full amount thereof, notwithstanding any
recovery thereon.
   (F)   Self-insurance. A holder may be self-insured in the manner prescribed
by the State Motor Vehicle Safety-Responsibility Act (Tex. Transportation Code
§§ 601.001 et seq.) if the Director determines that the holder can furnish
protection of the same character and amount as if the insurance were carried by
an insurance company. In considering authorization of self-insurance, the
Director shall consider the financial fitness and the past record of management
responsibility of the holder and may establish maximum coverage limits for
which the holder may self-insure. If, at any time, the Director determines that
a self-insured holder is unable to provide adequate self-insurance, the
Director by written notice shall order the holder to acquire insurance from an
insurance company, and the holder shall comply with the order not more than 30
days after the notice is served.
   (G)   Cancellation.
      (1)   If any insurer desires to be released from any insurance filed
under this subchapter, it may give written notice of the desire to the Director
at least 30 days before it desires its liability released, he or she must also
furnish new assurance by the expiration of the 30-day period provided for in
this division (G), and shall discharge the first insurer from any liability
which shall accrue after the time of approval of the new policy, or shall
discharge the first insurer after the expiration of the 30-day period.
      (2)   If any policy is so canceled upon the request of the insurer, and
no new insurance policy is filed before the cancellation of the original
insurance, the license to operate taxicabs granted to the insured shall be
automatically revoked.
   (H)   City not liable for solvency of insurer; owner’s liability not
affected; suits on policy. Neither the city, nor any officer of the city, shall
be held liable for the pecuniary responsibility or solvency of any insurer
under the provisions of this subchapter, or in any manner become liable for any
sum on account of any claim or act or omission relating to the insured vehicle,
nor shall the liability of the owner of any vehicle be in any manner limited or
changed by reason of the provisions of this subchapter, but the judgment
creditors having causes of action secured thereby shall be authorized to sue
directly on such policy of insurance without impleading the city, and all
persons known to any insurer to have been injured or damaged in the same
accident and claiming damages thereunder may be made parties without priority
of claim on payment in any suit had or instituted on account of such matters.
(1998 Code, § 126-234)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 113.083  APPAREL AND APPEARANCE OF DRIVERS.
   (A)   Each holder shall have company dress standards for drivers employed by
or contracting with the holder.
   (B)   These standards must be kept on file with the Director and must
include the following:
      (1)   A driver may not wear:
         (a)   Cutoffs or shorts;
         (b)   Tank tops or halter tops; or
         (c)   Outer apparel made of fishnet or undergarment material.
      (2)   Shoes must be worn at all times in the manner for which they were
designed. A driver may not wear shoes or sandals without socks or hosiery and
may not wear beach or shower thongs.
      (3)   A driver and the driver’s clothing must conform to basic standards
of hygiene and be neat, clean and sanitary at all times.
      (4)   A driver’s hair must be clean and neatly groomed. Facial hair must
be neatly trimmed.
      (5)   A holder shall specify and require an item of apparel or an item
placed on the apparel to be worn by drivers employed by the holder, which item
must be of such distinctive and uniform design as to readily identify the
holder’s taxicab service and must bear the name of the holder’s taxicab
service. The item specified by each holder must be approved by the Director to
ensure that the drivers of one holder may be easily distinguished from the
drivers of another and to ensure the neat appearance of drivers.
      (6)   While on duty, a driver shall wear the item specified by the holder
who employs or contracts with the driver and shall comply with such other
identification regulations prescribed by the holder’s operating authority.
(1998 Code, § 126-235)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.084  DRIVER’S DAILY MANIFEST.
   (A)   Each holder shall provide its drivers with forms, approved by the
Director, for maintaining a daily manifest. The form must include appropriate
spaces for recording:
      (1)   Taxicab number, driver’s name, date, hours of operation, total
miles, paid miles, units, trips and extras;
      (2)   Time, place, origin and destination of each trip;
      (3)   Number of passengers and amount of fare and other charges; and
      (4)   Other information required by the Director to aid in the discharge
of these duties.
   (B)   Each driver shall complete a manifest on a separate form for each tour
of duty. The driver shall provide the information required by the form and
shall record the information with regard to trips at the end of each trip. The
driver shall return completed manifest forms to the holder at the end of his or
her shift.
(1998 Code, § 126-236)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.085  HOLDER’S RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   (A)   Each holder shall maintain, at a single location, business records of
its taxicab service. The method used in maintaining the records must be
approved by the Director, and the Director may require maintenance of certain
records which he or she determines are necessary for monitoring the activities,
operations, service and safety record of a holder.
   (B)   A holder shall make its records available for inspection by the
Director at reasonable times upon request.
(1998 Code, § 126-237)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)
SERVICE REGULATIONS
§ 113.100  CITYWIDE TAXICAB SERVICE REQUIRED; RESPONSE TO CALLS; DISPATCHING
STATION.
   Except as otherwise provided by the holder’s operating authority, a holder
shall:
   (A)   Provide taxicab service to the general public to and from any point
inside the city that is accessible by public street (this provision does not
require a holder to subject a taxicab to mob violence or destruction);
   (B)   Answer each call received for service inside the city as soon as
practicable and, if the service cannot be rendered within a reasonable time,
the holder shall inform the caller of the reason for the delay and the
approximate time required to answer the call; and
   (C)   Maintain a single station for the purpose of receiving calls and
dispatching taxicabs that is operational 24 hours each day.
(1998 Code, § 126-251)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.101  REPRESENTATION OF AVAILABILITY OF TAXICAB.
   A driver may not represent that his or her taxicab is engaged when it is in
fact vacant or vacant when it is in fact engaged.
(1998 Code, § 126-252)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.102  REFUSAL TO CONVEY PASSENGERS.
   (A)   While operating a taxicab, a driver shall not refuse to convey a
person who requests service unless:
      (1)   The person is disorderly;
      (2)   The driver is engaged in answering a previous request for service;
      (3)   The driver has reason to believe that the person is engaged in
unlawful conduct; or
      (4)   The driver is in fear of his or her personal safety.
   (B)   While operating a taxicab, a driver shall not refuse service requested
by a radio dispatch when the location for pickup is within a reasonable
distance from the location of the taxicab.
(1998 Code, § 126-253)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.103  PASSENGER LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   While operating a taxicab, a driver on duty may carry only a person
who is a paying passenger, unless the passenger is an employee of the taxicab
service that employs or contracts with the driver, or a governmental inspector
acting in an official capacity, or unless it is authorized by the holder’s
operating authority.
   (B)   A driver may not carry at the same time more passengers than the
designed seating capacity of the taxicab.
   (C)   The driver once engaged is considered out of service and not available
for other occupants until the discharge of his or her fare, unless the fare
agrees to the additional pickup.
   (D)   The driver may only collect one fare regardless of the number of
passengers in the party taken to the same destination.
(1998 Code, § 126-254)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.104  DRIVERS TO CARRY PASSENGERS BY MOST DIRECT ROUTE.
   A driver shall carry a passenger to his or her destination by the most
direct and expeditious route available unless otherwise directed by the
passenger.
(1998 Code, § 126-255)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.105  SOLICITATION OF PASSENGERS.
   A driver may not solicit passengers.
(1998 Code, § 126-256)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.106  USE OF TAXICAB STANDS.
   (A)   While using a taxicab stand, a driver shall not:
      (1)   Go beyond 25 feet of his or her taxicab, except to assist a
passenger as reasonably necessary after being engaged;
      (2)   Interfere with the orderly progression of taxicabs from the rear to
the front of the taxicab stand;
      (3)   Perform or allow to be performed repairs or maintenance on a
taxicab while parked on the taxicab stand;
      (4)   Assign or sell his or her position in a taxicab stand to another;
or
      (5)   Interfere with a taxicab entering a taxicab stand on which there is
a vacant space.
   (B)   A person shall not park a taxicab on a taxicab stand unless the
taxicab is for hire.
   (C)   A taxicab left unattended in a taxicab stand is illegally parked and
may be removed from the taxicab stand and impounded.
(1998 Code, § 126-257)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.107  CONDUCT OF DRIVERS.
   A driver shall:
   (A)   Act in a reasonable, prudent and courteous manner;
   (B)   Maintain a sanitary and well-groomed appearance in compliance with §
113.083(A) of this chapter;
   (C)   Not respond to a radio dispatch call assigned to another driver;
   (D)   Not consume an alcoholic beverage, drug or other substance that could
adversely affect the driver’s ability to drive a motor vehicle;
   (E)   Not monitor the radio frequency of a taxicab company other than the
driver’s own, nor respond to a call for service dispatched to another taxicab;
   (F)   Not possess a radio capable of receiving the frequency of a taxicab
company other than the driver’s own;
   (G)   Not interfere with the Director in the performance of the Director’s
duties; and
   (H)   Comply with lawful orders of the Director issued in the performance of
his or her duties.
(1998 Code, § 126-258)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.108  RETURN OF PROPERTY LEFT IN TAXICAB.
   All drivers of taxicabs shall promptly attempt to return property left in
their vehicles by passengers. If attempts are unsuccessful, the driver shall
deliver to the Police Department of the city or to his or her employers all
property left in the vehicles by passengers. If a driver delivers the articles
to his or her employer, the employer shall deliver them to the Police
Department.
(1998 Code, § 126-259)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.109  ESTABLISHMENT OF TAXICAB STANDS.
   (A)   Subject to the approval of the Director of Transportation and
Planning, taxicab stands may be established of such character, number and
location as he or she determines are required by the public convenience and
necessity.
   (B)   A holder desiring the establishment of a taxicab stand must file a
written request with the Director of Transportation and Planning.
(1998 Code, § 126-260)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005; Ord. 13-16, passed 6-19-
2013)
§ 113.110  SERVICE REGULATIONS FOR BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS REQUESTING TAXICABS
FOR CUSTOMERS.
   An employee of a business establishment, other than a taxicab service, who
acts as an agent in obtaining taxicab service for prospective taxicab
passengers shall not:
   (A)   Solicit or accept payment from a driver or holder in return for giving
preferential treatment in directing passengers to a driver’s taxicab; or
   (B)   Interfere with the orderly progression of taxicabs from the rear to
the front of a taxicab stand.
(1998 Code, § 126-261)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT
§ 113.125  FALSE REPRESENTATION AS TAXICAB.
   (A)   A person may not represent that a vehicle is a taxicab if the vehicle
is not in fact a taxicab authorized by operating authority granted under this
chapter.
   (B)   A person may not drive a vehicle in the city that is not a taxicab if
the vehicle is marked, painted or equipped in a way that is likely to result in
mistaking the vehicle for a taxicab.
(1998 Code, § 126-281)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.126  VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Director may, by regulation, establish requirements for size, age,
condition and accessories of taxicabs used by a taxicab holder, owner or
driver.
   (B)   The Director shall inspect each taxicab for compliance with this
chapter and regulations of the Director before it is placed in service, and at
other times determined necessary by the Director.
   (C)   A holder, owner or driver shall make a taxicab available for
inspection when ordered by the Director or any member of the Police Department.
   (D)   If a holder, owner or driver fails to make a taxicab available for
inspection or if the Director determines that a taxicab is not in compliance
with this chapter or regulations of the Director, the Director may order the
taxicab removed from service until it is made available for inspection and
brought into compliance.
   (E)   If the Director determines that inspection of the mechanical condition
or safety equipment of a taxicab by an expert mechanic or technician is
necessary, the holder, owner or driver shall pay the cost of the inspection.
   (F)   When a taxicab is removed from service and placed back in service
within 15 days by the same owner, the owner shall have the vehicle re-inspected
by the Director.
   (G)   Before any taxicab will be approved for service, the Director shall be
provided with a copy of the registration for the vehicle with the state, or a
bill of sale if the vehicle is new and has not yet been registered, showing the
name of the individual or holder owning the vehicle. The owner shown on the
registration or bill of sale provided to the Director shall notify the Director
of any change in ownership of the taxicab within ten business days.
(1998 Code, § 126-282)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.127  REQUIRED EQUIPMENT.
   Unless otherwise specified in the operating authority under which a taxicab
is operated or by regulation of the Director and, in addition to other
equipment required by this chapter, a holder, owner or driver shall provide and
maintain in good operating condition the following equipment for each taxicab:
   (A)   Seat belts for each passenger, the number of which is determined by
the designed seating capacity of the taxicab;
   (B)   A heater and air conditioner in good operating condition;
   (C)   A chemical-type fire extinguisher, of at least one-quart capacity,
conveniently located in the taxicab and readily accessible for immediate use,
and which has been inspected in the previous 12 months;
   (D)   Equipment to indicate when a taxicab is operating for hire and when it
is not for hire;
   (E)   Toplight;
   (F)   Two-way radio on the holder’s dispatch frequency;
   (G)   A decal complying with §
113.129 of this chapter; and
   (H)   A taxicab display receptacle.
(1998 Code, § 126-283)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.128  DISPLAY RECEPTACLE; DISPLAY OF DRIVER AND COMPANY INFORMATION.
   (A)   Every taxicab must have a display receptacle approved by the Director
securely affixed to a conspicuous place on the dashboard. A display receptacle
shall be at least six and one-quarter inches by ten inches in area, constructed
of a rigid material and designed to accommodate the following information in
accordance with the required dimensions:
      (1)   Driver’s permit; and
      (2)   The company name in block letters not less than one-half inch high
with at least a one-eighth-inch stroke, with the taxicab number placed under it
in block numbers and letters not less than three-fourths inch high with at
least a  three-sixteenths inch stroke, which must be laminated as a single unit
not less than three inches by two and one-half inches in size.
   (B)   A holder, owner or driver of a taxicab commits an offense if he or she
operates or allows operation of a taxicab that is equipped with:
      (1)   No required display receptacle;
      (2)   A display receptacle that does not contain required information; or
      (3)   A display receptacle that contains insufficient or incorrect
information.
(1998 Code, § 126-284)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.129  DECALS.
   (A)   The holder and/or owner of a taxicab shall obtain a decal, indicating
the taxicab’s authority to operate, from the Director each year. A decal must
be attached to the driver’s side rear window at the bottom.
   (B)   A person commits an offense if he or she:
      (1)   Operates a taxicab with an expired decal or with no decal affixed
to it;
      (2)   Attaches a decal to a vehicle not authorized to operate as a
taxicab;
      (3)   Forges, alters or counterfeits a taxicab decal required by this
section;
      (4)   Possesses a forged, altered or counterfeited taxicab decal required
by this section; or
      (5)   Displays more than one taxicab decal issued by the city on a
vehicle at the same time.
   (C)   A taxicab decal assigned to one vehicle is not transferable to
another.
(1998 Code, § 126-285)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.130  NOT-FOR-HIRE STATUS OF TAXICABS.
   (A)   Each taxicab is presumed to be on duty and ready to serve the general
public for hire.
   (B)   If a driver is not for hire and does not intend to provide taxicab
service, the driver shall comply with the following requirements.
      (1)   The driver shall place a sign, to be provided by the holder, in the
taxicab indicating the words “NOT FOR HIRE” printed in letters not less than
three inches in height with a stroke of not less than three-eighths inch. The
letters shall be on a backing of sufficient thickness to not easily bend.
      (2)   When a driver is not for hire, the driver shall display the sign in
an upright position in the front window on the right side of the taxicab so as
to be easily seen and read from outside of the taxicab.
(1998 Code, § 126-286)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.131  REMOVAL OF EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Whenever a vehicle is removed from service or is no longer authorized
to operate as a taxicab, the holder and or owner shall remove from the vehicle
all taxicab signs, markings and equipment that would distinguish the vehicle as
a taxicab, including, but not limited to, radios, toplights and decals.
   (B)   A holder, owner or driver of a taxicab shall not sell or transfer to a
driver any radio, toplight, meter or other equipment that would distinguish a
vehicle as a taxicab.
(1998 Code, § 126-287)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.132  FARES.
   (A)   The City Commission shall have the right to change or establish the
rates and fares to be charged by taxicabs in the city at any time it deems
necessary by ordinance.
   (B)   Until otherwise changed by the City Commission, or by regulation of
the Chief of Police or his or her designated director, the following taxicab
rates and fares shall be effective in the city.
      (1)   The rate of fare for one or more passengers picked up from the same
point and delivered to a common destination shall not exceed $5 for a pickup
and $0.20 for each additional one-tenth mile.
      (2)   Waiting time consumed by the taxicab at the instance of the
passengers shall be at a rate not to exceed $5 for the first five minutes and
$0.50 for each additional minute.
      (3)   If two or more passengers are going to the same destination, the
driver shall collect only one fare, if the passengers are going to different
destinations, the driver shall proceed to the next destination as though it
were a completely new trip. Other destinations shall be treated likewise.
(1998 Code, § 126-288)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005; Ord. 13-16, passed 6-19-
2013)
§ 113.133  MISDEMEANOR TO OVERCHARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, driver or operator of any taxicab to
refuse to convey a passenger over the most direct route practical or to demand
or receive an amount in excess of the rates displayed on the rate cards
displayed in the taxicab and/or the rate shown on the meter. Voluntary tips are
excepted.
(1998 Code, § 126-289)  (Ord. 05-19, passed 7-6-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 114:  JUNK DEALERS
Section
General Provisions
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Regulations to be posted at place of business
   
114.03   Record of purchases required; contents
   
114.04   Inspection of record of purchases
   
114.05   Evidence as to ownership to be obtained from sellers
   
114.06   Holding period prior to sale or disposition of merchandise
   
114.07   Purchases from intoxicated persons or minors
   
114.08   Inspection of merchandise
   
114.09   Screening wall or fence
Licenses
   
114.20   Required
   
114.21   Filing and contents of application
   
114.22   Approval of application
   
114.23   Fee
   
114.24   Issuance; numbering
   
114.25   Display
   
114.26   Duration
   
114.27   Cancellation
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   JUNK. Clothing, household items, scrap iron, tin, brass, copper, lead, zinc
and all metallic substances, secondhand watches, knives, guns, cameras,
jewelry, fishing equipment and similar items, handled, purchased, received or
offered for sale by dealers in junk, and shall mean and include secondhand
plumbing and electric fixtures, wires, globes, brass pipe, lead pipe and pipe
of other metals, melted metals of any kind, parts of machinery or machines that
may be identified as such, any fixture pertaining to a residence, business
house or other house of any kind, automobile accessories, including horns,
hubcaps, prestolite tanks, tires and all detached and detachable parts of any
automobile, motorcycle, bicycle or motor vehicle of any kind or any vehicle of
any kind, hydrants, faucets, lawn hose, lawn sprinklers, gas fixtures, fittings
and appliances, garden tools, mechanical tools of every description, harness,
rags, rubber, rope, bottles and utensils of every description. The enumeration
of the articles in this definition shall not be held to exclude other articles
that may be reasonably included under the general definition of JUNK when given
its usual trade meaning.
   JUNK DEALER. Any person primarily engaged in collecting, handling, buying or
selling any of the articles defined as “junk” or otherwise engaged in the
business of buying or selling secondhand articles or as a trading post.
(1998 Code, § 94-31)  (Ord. 11-11, passed 4-20-2011)
§ 114.02  REGULATIONS TO BE POSTED AT PLACE OF BUSINESS.
   Every junk dealer and dealer in secondhand material shall keep a copy of the
regulations prescribed by this chapter posted in a conspicuous place at his or
her place of business.
(1998 Code, § 94-32)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.03  RECORD OF PURCHASES REQUIRED; CONTENTS.
   (A)   Each junk dealer, dealer in secondhand material or person who shall
purchase any kind of junk or secondhand material shall keep an accurate daily
record of each article purchased, and the time when purchased, and also an
accurate description of the person selling the article, giving his or her name,
color, sex, age and residence. All such entries shall be made at the time of
the purchase.
   (B)   Every junk dealer is hereby required to keep and maintain a record,
used exclusively for this purpose, in which at the time of the transaction and
coincident therewith shall be explicitly, plainly and intelligently written in
ink and in the English language, without alterations or erasure, the name,
residence and street number of the person or the agent, messenger or drayman of
the person, and the race of the person from whom the junk was purchased or
obtained, and the nature of the junk and, if the junk is a finished product or
several parts of a finished product, then each of the parts shall be separately
listed and described, including the serial number if any and any other
descriptive marks or symbol. There shall also be recorded the day of the week,
month and year when the purchase was made, and whether or not the person from
which the junk was obtained was male or female. Such record shall further
contain the source and place from which the junk came or was obtained.
   (C)   When any junk dealer shall receive junk from any common carrier from a
point without the limits of the city, the record required to be kept by junk
dealers shall be sufficient if it shows the name of the common carrier, the
nature of the material received, the license number and a complete description
of the common carrier, the driver’s license number and a complete description
of the driver of the carrier and gives the name and address of the person from
whom the junk was received.
(1998 Code, § 94-33)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.04  INSPECTION OF RECORD OF PURCHASES.
   The record specified in §
114.03 of this chapter shall be accessible at all times to police officers and
other peace officers and all police officers and peace officers shall have the
right at all times to examine the records when searching or looking for lost or
stolen articles or in determining whether or not the provisions of this chapter
are being faithfully kept and observed. Any person who refuses to permit any
officer to inspect the records shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1998 Code, § 94-34)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.05  EVIDENCE AS TO OWNERSHIP TO BE OBTAINED FROM SELLERS.
   Before any junk dealer shall purchase junk of any description, he or she
shall secure from the person selling the junk evidence showing how the junk
came into the possession of the seller.
(1998 Code, § 94-35)
§ 114.06  HOLDING PERIOD PRIOR TO SALE OR DISPOSITION OF MERCHANDISE.
   No junk shall be sold or removed from the place of business of any junk
dealer within seven days after the junk has been purchased or acquired, and all
junk received shall be kept separate and apart from all other articles for
seven days after the junk is received so that the junk may be identified. If a
dealer desires to sell or dispose of merchandise that has not been in his or
her possession for a full seven days, he or she shall secure from the purchaser
the same information and identification that is required by this chapter from
persons that sell to the dealer.
(1998 Code, § 94-36)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.07  PURCHASES FROM INTOXICATED PERSONS OR MINORS.
   No junk dealer shall receive or purchase any junk from any intoxicated
person or from any person under the age of 18 years, except upon the written
consent of the parent or guardian of the minor, and such written consent shall
be preserved by the junk dealer for a period of not less than six months
thereafter for public inspection. When any purchase is made from any minor with
consent, a notation of the purchase with consent shall be made in the book or
register required by §
114.03 of this chapter to be kept by the dealer.
(1998 Code, § 94-37)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.08  INSPECTION OF MERCHANDISE.
   Every junk dealer shall, at all times, allow the Chief of Police or some
other police officer the privilege of examining all articles of junk he or she
may have received, whether at his or her place of business or elsewhere, for
the purpose of ascertaining whether or not the articles are lost or stolen
property.
(1998 Code, § 94-38)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.09  SCREENING WALL OR FENCE.
   Junkyards with open storage for wrecked or salvaged automobiles, machinery,
appliances or other used commodities and equipment must be screened by the
construction of a wall or fence around the yard, of masonry or of a concrete or
metal frame or base which supports a permanent type wall material, the surface
of which does not contain openings and which surface shall constitute a visual
barrier. The wall or fence shall be constructed to a height of eight feet above
the ground surface. No openings shall be permitted for access unless a solid
gate equaling the height of the wall is provided. The gate shall remain closed
at all times, except when in actual use.
(1998 Code, § 94-39)  Penalty, see §
10.99
LICENSES
§ 114.20  REQUIRED.
   No person shall transact or engage in business as a junk dealer within the
corporate limits of the city until he or she shall have secured an annual
license therefor, issued by the Police Department.
(1998 Code, § 94-61)  (Ord. 11-11, passed 4-20-2011)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.21  FILING AND CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   An applicant for a junk dealer’s license shall make request therefor
in writing, addressed to the Chief of Police, which application shall contain
the name, residence and street number of the applicant. In the case of a firm
or partnership, the application shall show the individual members of the firm
or partnership and, if a corporation, the names of the officers thereof. The
application shall contain the following words: “The license hereby applied for
shall be subject to all the provisions and regulations of the ordinances of the
City of Texas City relating to junk and junk dealers.”
   (B)   The application for a junk dealer’s license shall be signed and sworn
to by the person applying therefor, before some officer authorized by law to
administer oaths, or in the case of a partnership or corporation by one member
of the firm or officer or agent of the corporation. The application shall be
filed with the Chief of Police.
(1998 Code, § 94-62)
§ 114.22  APPROVAL OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   Action by Chief of Police. Upon receipt of an application for a
license required by this subchapter, the Chief of Police shall carefully
examine the facts of the application and approve or disapprove the application.
Grounds for denial shall include the following:
      (1)   The application contains a materially false or fraudulent
statement; and
      (2)   The applicant, or an officer, partner or employee thereof, has been
convicted of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the
five years immediately preceding the date of the application.
   (B)   Action by City Commission.
      (1)   If the Chief of Police disapproves the application, the applicant
may request that the application be referred by the Chief of Police to the City
Commission.
      (2)   The Commission shall then either approve or disapprove the
application; provided that, before a disapproval, the Commission shall give the
applicant an opportunity to be heard and give him or her written notice of the
time and place of the hearing at least five days prior thereto, at which time
the applicant may appear and be heard. After the hearing, if the City
Commission finds the applicant to be an unsafe and improper person to engage in
business as a junk dealer, it may, in its discretion, disapprove the
application.
(1998 Code, § 94-63)  (Ord. 11-11, passed 4-20-2011)
§ 114.23  FEE.
   Before issuing the license, the Police Department shall collect from the
applicant an annual license fee in the amount of $200.
(1998 Code, § 94-64)  (Ord. 11-11, passed 4-20-2011)
§ 114.24  ISSUANCE; NUMBERING.
   Upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter and upon the approval of
the application by the City Commission or the Police Department, the Police
Department shall issue the license provided for in this subchapter and shall
number all licenses consecutively.
(1998 Code, § 94-65)  (Ord. 11-11, passed 4-20-2011)
§ 114.25  DISPLAY.
   Every junk dealer who is issued a license by the city shall display the
license in a conspicuous place at his or her business location.
(1998 Code, § 94-66)
§ 114.26  DURATION.
   Every license issued under this subchapter shall expire on December 31 next
after its issuance.
(1998 Code, § 94-67)
§ 114.27  CANCELLATION.
   Conviction of any person licensed under this subchapter for violating any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be sufficient cause for the cancellation
of the license, within the discretion of the City Commission.
(1998 Code, § 94-68)
CHAPTER 115:  SOLICITATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
115.001   Revocation of license or permit not to bar prosecution
   
115.002   Prohibited where notice posted
Peddlers
   
115.015   Definitions
   
115.016   Vehicle insurance; route; operation of business generally
   
115.017   Permit required; fee
   
115.018   Permit transfer
   
115.019   Permit application; prerequisites for issuance
   
115.020   Chief of Police shall maintain applications
   
115.021   Permit revocation authorized; grounds
   
115.022   Hearing on permit revocation; notice to permittee; conduct of
hearing; failure to appear; findings and order by Hearing Officer
   
115.023   Driver’s permit required; exceptions
   
115.024   Driver’s permit qualifications
   
115.025   Driver’s permit application; fee
   
115.026   Investigation of applicant
   
115.027   Driver’s permit issuance or denial
   
115.028   Duration; voidance upon suspension or revocation of state driver’s
license
   
115.029   Duplicate permit
   
115.030   Suspension of driver’s permit by city’s designated representative
   
115.031   Driver’s permit revocation; surrender of permit
   
115.032   Appeals
   
115.033   Forging or altering permit, badge or emblem
   
115.034   Notification of change in mailing address
Itinerant Vendors
   
115.045   Definitions
   
115.046   Enforcement
   
115.047   Exemptions
   
115.048   Sale of certain products by transient vendors prohibited
   
115.049   License required
   
115.050   License application
   
115.051   License fee
   
115.052   License issuance
   
115.053   License contents
   
115.054   Duration
   
115.055   License transfer
   
115.056   License display
   
115.057   Separate license required for each location
Charitable Solicitations
   
115.070   Permit required
   
115.071   Permit application
   
115.072   Permit issuance or denial; records
   
115.073   Permit duration
   
115.074   Permit transfer
   
115.075   Permit revocation
   
115.076   Solicitation in roadway or median
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 115.001  REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT NOT TO BAR PROSECUTION.
   The revocation of any license or permit for violation of any provision of
this chapter shall not preclude a criminal prosecution for the violation.
(1998 Code, § 86-1)
§ 115.002  PROHIBITED WHERE NOTICE POSTED.
   As to §§
115.015 through
115.034 and
115.070 through
115.076, it shall be unlawful for any person to go upon any residential
premises for the purpose of solicitation and ring the doorbell, knock upon the
door, or create any sound for the purpose of attracting the attention of the
occupants of the residence if there is placed on such premises, in a
conspicuous place, upon or near the main entrance to the residence, a
weatherproof sign or card, not less than two inches by four inches in size,
bearing the words “no solicitation,” “no peddlers,” “no trespassing,” or any
form of the word solicit, peddle or trespass.  The letters on such cards shall
be not less than one-half of an inch in height.
   (Ord. 13-36, passed 10-2-2013)
PEDDLERS
§ 115.015  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONVICTED SEX OFFENDER. A person that has received a rendition of an order
by a court imposing a punishment of incarceration, probation or fine for a
crime of aggravated sexual assault, aggravated sexual assault of a child,
aggravated sexual assault 65 years or older, aggravated kidnapping (violate/
abuse victim sexually), indecency with child sexual-contact, sexual assault,
sexual assault of a child, sexual performance of child, prohibited sexual
conduct, compelling prostitution, possession/promotion of child pornography,
indecency with child-exposure, kidnaping with victim under 17 years of age,
unlawful restraint with victim under 17 years of age, aggravated kidnaping
(with no sexual intent and victim under 17 years of age), indecent exposure-
second conviction, preparatory offense-attempt, conspiracy and solicitation to
commit any sexual offense. Also included herein is a conviction involving the
violations of any statute from another state regardless of title, that the
elements of which meet the above offenses.
   PEDDLER. A person who goes from place to place soliciting orders to sell,
offering for sale or selling goods, wares or merchandise, including, but not
limited to, food items, clothing, novelties and toys.
(1998 Code, § 86-31)  (Ord. 05-18, passed 6-15-2005)
§ 115.016  VEHICLE INSURANCE; ROUTE; OPERATION OF BUSINESS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Vehicle insurance. The insurance required per vehicle for operating a
business from a motor vehicle shall be as prescribed by the city.
   (B)   Route. The route shall be:
      (1)   Limited to those areas of the city zoned residential, excluding
those residential areas where such activities are precluded in the deed
restrictions;
      (2)   Prohibited on multi-lane roadways. The term MULTI-LANE, as used in
this division (B)(2), shall mean any street with three or more lanes;
      (3)   Prohibited from within one block of school grounds on school days
during school hours and one hour before and after school hours; and
      (4)   Prohibited on the Texas City Dike and/or Skyline Drive.
   (C)   Display of permit. The permit shall be in the permittee’s possession
and prominently displayed at all times.
   (D)   Creation of noise. The vendor shall not cause any continuous auditory
sound or noise (music boxes or bells) in residential areas of the city.
Intermittent noise is permitted between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
   (E)   Operation in or around city property. The vendor shall not solicit on
streets in or around city-owned properties where “no soliciting” signs are
posted.
   (F)   Parking. The vendor shall, when stopping for customers, park only as
permitted by law.
   (G)   Hours. Door to door solicitations shall take place only between the
hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
   (H)   City approved events. Peddlers/vendors are prohibited in city parks
during any city authorized event.
   (I)   Dike permit locations. Peddler/vendor locations on the Texas City Dike
are by special Dike permit only. Peddling is allowed on the Dike only in
designated vending areas. Areas are posted as “vendor” followed by a numerical
character. The number of vendors will be limited to the number of designated
vending areas available. There will be one vendor allowed at each designated
vendor location on a daily first come basis.
   (J)   Dike allowable items. Merchandise which may be sold by Dike peddler/
vendors are limited to the following: food and food products, clothing and
accessories, beach wear, umbrellas, sandals, balloons, toys and cosmetics, such
as skin lotions and sun creams.
   (K)   Dike prohibited items. The sale of alcoholic beverages, fishing bait,
fishing equipment, fishing tackle and bagged ice by Dike peddler/vendors are
strictly prohibited.
   (L)   Dike vendor requirements. All sales by Dike peddler/vendors conducted
while traveling to and from the designated vending locations are prohibited. To
qualify for a special Dike permit, a vendor must also hold an annual city
peddler/vendor permit. Vendors holding a special Dike permit must adhere to all
other ordinances and rules that apply on the Texas City Dike.
(1998 Code, § 86-32)  (Ord. 05-18, passed 6-15-2005; Ord. 10-20, passed 9-15-
2010; Ord. 11-04, passed 3-2-2011)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.017  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.
   (A)   No person shall solicit in the city without first having obtained a
permit as required by this subchapter. City peddler/vendor permit fees shall
be:
      (1)   For a period of three consecutive days: $25;
      (2)   Each calendar year: $500; and
      (3)   Special Dike permit, each calendar year: $500.
   (B)   The vendor must have a current one-year city peddler/vendor permit
prior to issuance of special Dike permit.
   (C)   All yearly permits will be in effect from the day of issuance and
expire on December 31 of each calendar year.
(1998 Code, § 86-51)  (Ord. 05-18, passed 6-15-2005; Ord. 10-20, passed 9-15-
2010; Ord. 11-04, passed 3-2-2011; Ord. 13-36, passed 10-2-2013)
§ 115.018  PERMIT TRANSFER.
   Permits issued under this subchapter shall be non-transferable.
(1998 Code, § 86-52)  (Ord. 05-18, passed 6-15-2005)
§ 115.019  PERMIT APPLICATION; PREREQUISITES FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Applicants for a permit under this subchapter must successfully
complete the required application and comply with the rules and regulations
prescribed by the city.
   (B)   Before the permit is issued, the applicant shall:
      (1)   Successfully complete the required application and comply with the
rules and regulations as prescribed by the city;
      (2)   Provide proof of liability insurance as prescribed by the city;
      (3)   Provide proof of sales tax number;
      (4)   If applicable, provide the original (no copies) of the county
health permit, which shall be posted in the vehicle;
      (5)   Have not been convicted of a felony offense in the preceding five
years or a Class A or B misdemeanor in the past two years, for which:
         (a)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction,
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction or termination
of probation whichever is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a
misdemeanor offense;
         (b)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction,
the date of release from confinement for the conviction or the termination of
probation or parole whichever is the later date, if the applicant was convicted
of a felony offense; or
         (c)   A convicted sex offender.
      (6)   Each applicant must have his or her fingerprints taken by the
Police Department of the city at the time of submission of the application; and
      (7)   Supply two passport sized color photographs.
(1998 Code, § 86-53)  (Ord. 05-18, passed 6-15-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.020  CHIEF OF POLICE SHALL MAINTAIN APPLICATIONS.
   All applications shall be submitted to the Police Department. The Police
Chief’s designee shall conduct a background check on each applicant. If it is
determined that the applicant meets all requirements, a permit will be issued.
If an applicant does not meet all requirements, the applicant shall be notified
in writing as to the reason(s) for disqualification.
(1998 Code, § 86-54)  (Ord. 05-18, passed 6-15-2005)
§ 115.021  PERMIT REVOCATION AUTHORIZED; GROUNDS.
   A permit issued under this subchapter may be revoked in accordance with the
procedures set out in §
115.022 of this chapter if it is found that:
   (A)   The permittee has violated any provision of this subchapter;
   (B)   Any person required to be listed on the application for the permit
has, since the permit was granted, been convicted or plead guilty or nolo
contendre to any federal, state or local law (other than traffic violations)
for any activity done while conducting business under the permit, after such
permit was granted; and/or
   (C)   Any statements made in the application for the permit were known to be
false or should have been known to be false by any person required to sign the
application.
(1998 Code, § 86-55)  (Ord. 05-18, passed 6-15-2005)
§ 115.022  HEARING ON PERMIT REVOCATION; NOTICE TO PERMITTEE; CONDUCT OF
HEARING; FAILURE TO APPEAR; FINDINGS AND ORDER BY HEARING OFFICER.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Whenever the city receives reliable information that grounds for
revocation of a permit exist under §
115.021 of this chapter, the city shall investigate the facts. If the city
finds there are probable grounds for revocation of a permit, the city shall
give written notice to the permittee by personal service or by certified mail,
return receipt requested. Such notice shall set forth:
         (a)   The specific grounds upon which the permit in question may be
revoked;
         (b)   There will be a hearing before the city’s designated
representative in which the city will seek the revocation of the permit;
         (c)   The date, time and place of such hearing; and
         (d)   The permittee may appear in person and/or be represented by an
attorney and may present testimony and may examine all witnesses.
      (2)   The notice shall be mailed to the last known address of the vendor
if a notice which has been mailed is returned undelivered, service shall be
deemed executed.
(1998 Code, § 86-56)
   (B)   Conduct of hearing.
      (1)   All permit revocation hearings under this subchapter shall be held
by the city’s designated representative. Such officer shall be referred to as
the Hearing Officer.
      (2)   All hearings shall be conducted under rules consistent with the
nature of the proceedings, and only evidence presented before the Hearing
Officer at such hearing may be considered in rendering the final order.
(1998 Code, § 86-57)
   (C)   Failure of permittee to appear at hearing. If the permittee fails to
appear at a permit revocation hearing at the date and time specified, the city
shall introduce evidence to establish a prima facie case showing that grounds
exist for revocation of the permit.
(1998 Code, § 86-58)
   (D)   Findings and order by Hearing Officer.
      (1)   After completion of the presentation of evidence by all parties
appearing at a permit revocation hearing, the Hearing Officer shall make
written findings in an order as to whether or not there are grounds for
revocation of the permit, and if there are such grounds setting forth in such
written findings the specific facts supporting such grounds. If the Hearing
Officer finds that grounds do exist for revocation of the permit, he or she
shall revoke the permit for such grounds.
      (2)   A true and accurate copy of the Hearing Officer’s order shall be
personally delivered or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the permittee.
      (3)   The Hearing Officer’s decision is final.
(1998 Code, § 86-59)
(Ord. 05-18, passed 6-15-2005)
§ 115.023  DRIVER’S PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   A person may not operate a peddler/vendor vehicle inside the city
without a valid peddler/ vendor driver’s permit issued to the person under this
subchapter.
   (B)   A peddler/vendor may not employ or contract with a driver or otherwise
allow a person to drive a vehicle owned, controlled or operated by the peddler/
vendor unless the person has a valid peddler/vendor driver’s permit issued
under this subchapter.
   (C)   The only persons eligible to sell/work or in any way facilitate any
sales transactions must have either a vendor’s permit or vendor’s driver’s
permit issued to their person.
(1998 Code, § 86-71)  (Ord. 05-18, passed 6-15-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.024  DRIVER’S PERMIT QUALIFICATIONS.
   To qualify for a peddler/vendor driver’s permit, an applicant must:
   (A)   Have a place where he or she can be contacted or given notice by mail;
   (B)   Be at least 18 years of age;
   (C)   Be currently authorized to work full-time in the United States;
   (D)   Hold a valid driver’s license issued by the state;
   (E)   Be able to communicate in the English language;
   (F)   Not be afflicted with a physical or mental disease or disability that
is likely to prevent the applicant from exercising ordinary and reasonable
control over a motor vehicle or that is likely to otherwise endanger the public
health or safety;
   (G)   Not have been convicted of more than three moving traffic violations
arising out of separate transactions, or involved in more than two automobile
accidents in which it could be reasonably determined that the applicant was at
fault, within the 12-month period preceding the application;
   (H)   Not have been convicted of a felony offense in the preceding five
years or a Class A or B misdemeanor in the previous two years. For which:
      (1)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction, the
date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, or termination of
probation whichever is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a
misdemeanor offense;
      (2)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction, the
date of release from confinement for the conviction, or the termination of
probation or parole whichever is the later date, if the applicant was convicted
of a felony offense; or
      (3)   A convicted sex offender.
   (I)   Subject to no outstanding warrants of arrest; and
   (J)   Successfully completed a state approved defensive driving course
within the previous 12 months.
(1998 Code, § 86-72)  (Ord. 05-18, passed 6-15-2005)
§ 115.025  DRIVER’S PERMIT APPLICATION; FEE.
   To obtain a peddler/vendor driver’s permit or renewal of a peddler/vendor
driver’s permit, a person must file with the Department a non-refundable
application fee of $10 and a completed written application on a form provided
for the purpose. The city shall require each application to state such
information as considered necessary to determine whether an applicant is
qualified.
(1998 Code, § 86-73)  (Ord. 05-18, passed 6-15-2005)
§ 115.026  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.
   (A)   For the purpose of determining qualification under §
115.024 of this chapter, the city may require an applicant to submit to a
physical examination at the applicant’s expense conducted by a licensed
physician and to furnish to the city a statement from the physician which
certifies that the physician has examined the applicant and that in the
physician’s professional opinion the applicant is qualified under §
115.024 of this chapter.
   (B)   The Police Chief’s designee shall investigate each applicant
concerning the applicant’s qualification under §
115.024 of this chapter. The Municipal Court shall furnish the Police
Department a copy of the applicant’s motor vehicle driving record and a list of
any warrants of arrest for the applicant which might be outstanding.
   (C)   The Police Chief’s designee may conduct such other investigation as
considered necessary to determine whether an applicant for a peddler/vendor
driver’s permit is qualified.
   (D)   Each applicant must have his or her fingerprints taken by the Police
Department of the city at the time of submission of the application and supply
two passport size color photographs.
(1998 Code, § 86-74)  (Ord. 05-18, passed 6-15-2005)
§ 115.027  DRIVER’S PERMIT ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.
   (A)   If the Police Chief’s designee determines that an applicant for a
peddler/vendor driver’s permit is qualified, the city shall issue a permit to
the applicant.
   (B)   The city shall delay until final adjudication the approval of the
application of any applicant who is under indictment for or has charges pending
for:
      (1)   A felony offense or criminal attempt to commit any felony offense;
or
      (2)   A Class A or B misdemeanor.
   (C)   The city may deny the application for a peddler/vendor driver’s permit
if the applicant:
      (1)   Is not qualified under §
115.024 of this chapter; and/or
      (2)   Makes a false statement on/in his or her application for a peddler/
vendor driver’s permit.
   (D)   If the city determines that a permit should be denied, the city shall
notify the applicant in writing that his or her application is denied and
include in the notice the reason for denial and a statement informing the
applicant of his or her right of appeal.
(1998 Code, § 86-75)  (Ord. 05-18, passed 6-15-2005)
§ 115.028  DURATION; VOIDANCE UPON SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF STATE DRIVER’S
LICENSE.
   (A)   A peddler/vendor driver’s permit expires on December 31 of each year,
unless revoked under this subchapter.
   (B)   If a permittee’s state driver’s license is suspended or revoked by the
state, his or her peddler/vendor driver’s permit automatically becomes void. A
permittee shall notify the city and the peddler/vendor for whom he or she
drives within three days of a suspension or revocation of his or her driver’s
license by the state and shall immediately surrender his or her peddler/vendor
driver’s permit to the city.
(1998 Code, § 86-76)  (Ord. 05-18, passed 6-15-2005)
§ 115.029  DUPLICATE PERMIT.
   If a peddler/vendor driver’s permit is lost or destroyed, the city shall
issue the permittee a duplicate permit upon payment to the city of a duplicate
permit fee of $10.
(1998 Code, § 86-77)  (Ord. 05-18, passed 6-15-2005)
§ 115.030  SUSPENSION OF DRIVER'S PERMIT BY CITY’S DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE.
   (A)   If a representative designated by the Chief of Police to enforce this
subchapter determines that a permittee under this subchapter has failed to
comply with this subchapter (except §
115.024 of this chapter) or a regulation established under this subchapter. The
representative must notify the permittee by personally serving the permittee
with a written notice of the suspension. The written notice must include the
reason for suspension, the date the suspension begins, the duration of the
suspension and a statement informing the permittee of his or her right of
appeal.
   (B)   A suspension under this section may be appealed to the city if the
permittee requests an appeal in writing at the time the representative serves
notice of suspension. When appeal is requested, the suspension may not take
effect until a hearing is provided by the Chief of Police.
   (C)   The Chief of Police may order an expedited hearing under this section,
to be held as soon as possible after the permittee requests an appeal. The
Chief of Police may affirm, reverse or modify the order of the representative.
The decision of the Chief of Police is final.
(1998 Code, § 86-78)  (Ord. 05-18, passed 6-15-2005)
§ 115.031  DRIVER’S PERMIT REVOCATION; SURRENDER OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The city may revoke a peddler/vendor driver’s permit if the city
determines that the permittee:
      (1)   Operated a peddler/vendor vehicle inside the city during a period
in which the peddler/vendor driver’s permit was suspended;
      (2)   Made a false statement on an application for a peddler/vendor
driver’s permit;
      (3)   Engaged in conduct that constitutes a ground for suspension under
this division (A) and received either a suspension in excess of three days or a
conviction for violation of this subchapter;
      (4)   Engaged in conduct that could reasonably be determined to be
detrimental to the public safety; or
      (5)   Was convicted of any felony offense while holding a peddler/vendor
driver’s permit.
   (B)   A person whose peddler/vendor driver’s permit is revoked shall not:
      (1)   Apply for another peddler/vendor driver’s permit before the
expiration of 12 months from the date the city revokes the permit or, in the
case of an appeal, the date the appeal Hearing Officer affirms the revocation;
or
      (2)   Drive a peddler/vendor vehicle inside the city.
   (C)   The city shall notify the permittee in writing of a revocation and
include in the notice the reason for the revocation, the date the city orders
the revocation and a statement informing the permittee of his or her right of
appeal.
   (D)   After receipt of notice of suspension, revocation or denial of permit
renewal, the permittee shall, on the date specified in the notice, surrender
his or her peddler/vendor driver’s permit to the city and discontinue driving a
peddler/vendor vehicle inside the city.
   (E)   Notwithstanding divisions (B)(2) and (D) above, if the permittee
appeals the suspension or revocation under this section, the permittee may
continue to drive a peddler/vendor vehicle pending the appeal unless:
      (1)   The peddler/vendor driver’s permit of the permittee is suspended
pursuant to §
115.030 of this chapter, or revoked pursuant to division (A)(5) above;
      (2)   The city determines that continued operation by the permittee would
impose an immediate threat to public safety;
      (3)   The permittee has violated any provision of this subchapter; or
      (4)   Any person required to be listed on the application for the permit
has, since the permit was granted, been convicted or plead guilty or nolo
contendre to any federal, state or local law (other than traffic violations)
for any activity done while conducting business under the permit, after such
permit was granted.
(1998 Code, § 86-79)  (Ord. 05-18, passed 6-15-2005)
§ 115.032  APPEALS.
   (A)   Request for appeal. A person may appeal a denial of a peddler/vendor
driver’s permit application, suspension of a peddler/vendor driver’s permit
under §
115.030 of this chapter, or revocation of a peddler/vendor driver’s permit, if
he or she requests an appeal in writing, delivered to the Chief of Police not
more than ten business days after notice of the city’s action is received.
   (B)   Conduct of hearing. The Chief of Police shall act as the Appeal
Hearing Officer in an appeal hearing under this section. The Hearing Officer
shall give the appealing party an opportunity to present evidence and make
argument in his or her behalf. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an
appeal hearing under this section, and the Hearing Officer shall make his or
her ruling on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the
hearing.
   (C)   Action by Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer may affirm, modify or
reverse all or part of the action of the city being appealed. The decision of
the Hearing Officer is final.
(1998 Code, § 86-80)  (Ord. 05-18, passed 6-15-2005)
§ 115.033  FORGING OR ALTERING PERMIT, BADGE OR EMBLEM.
   A person commits an offense if the person:
   (A)   Forges, alters or counterfeits a peddler/vendor driver’s permit,
badge, sticker or emblem required by law; or
   (B)   Possesses a forged, altered or counterfeited peddler/vendor driver’s
permit, badge, sticker or emblem required by law.
(1998 Code, § 86-81)  (Ord. 05-18, passed 6-15-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.034  NOTIFICATION OF CHANGE IN MAILING ADDRESS.
   An individual issued a peddler/vendor driver’s permit shall maintain a
current mailing address on file with the city. The permittee shall notify the
city of any change in this mailing address within five business days of the
change.
(1998 Code, § 86-82)  (Ord. 05-18, passed 6-15-2005)
ITINERANT VENDORS
§ 115.045  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ITINERANT VENDOR. All persons, as well as their agents and employees, who,
from a location on private property in the city, engage in the temporary or
transient business of selling or offering for sale any goods, services, wares
or merchandise, including but not limited to plants, lumber, agricultural
products, photographs, produce, poultry, stock, fruit, or other foods or food
products, and magazines; provided, however, that the term ITINERANT VENDOR
shall not include anyone engaged in interstate commerce, or anyone upon whom
the provisions of this chapter would impose a direct and unlawful burden on
interstate commerce.
   TEMPORARY. Any business transacted or conducted from a non-permanent, code
compliant, structure, in the city.
   TRANSIENT. Any business of any itinerant vendor which may be operated or
conducted by persons or their agents or employees who reside away from the city
or who have fixed places of business in places other than the city, or who move
stocks of the products listed under the definition of “itinerant vendor” in
this section or samples thereof into the city with the intention of selling the
stock and returning to a place other than the city, or who so move the products
into the city with the purpose or intention of removing them or the unsold
portion thereof away from the city before the expiration of 90 days.
(1998 Code, § 86-101)  (Ord. 05-20, passed 7-6-2005; Ord. 10-20, passed 9-15-
2010; Ord. 13-36, passed 10-2-2013)
§ 115.046  ENFORCEMENT.
   The duly constituted authorities of the city, including the Police
Department, Tax Assessor and Collector and others having the duty of enforcing
the provisions of this subchapter and other ordinances of the city, shall
enforce the provisions of this subchapter and allow no itinerant vendor to
conduct his or her business without full compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 86-102)  (Ord. 05-20, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 115.047  EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not be held to be applicable to the
following:
   (A)   Commercial travelers or wholesale produce firms who sell or exhibit
for sale goods, wares and merchandise wholesale to retail merchants;
   (B)   Vendors of farm produce, poultry, stock or agricultural products,
which farm produce, poultry, stock or agricultural product has been grown or
raised by the person selling it upon his own land or land rented or leased by
him or her; provided the vendor furnishes the Police Chief's designee a signed
statement from the county agent certifying that the farm produce, poultry,
stock or agricultural product was grown or raised by the vendor upon his or her
land or land rented or leased by him or her;
   (C)   Rummage sales or other sales conducted by local church and charitable
organizations;
   (D)   Sales of milk and milk products by dairies, milk companies or plants,
or individuals which have duly complied with, or may in the future comply with,
all laws relating thereto and have permits to engage in the operations under
the authority of the law; and
   (E)   Garage sales conducted at a private residence by the owner or resident
(1998 Code, § 86-103)  (Ord. 05-20, passed 7-6-2005; Ord. 10-20, passed 9-15-
2010; Ord. 13-36, passed 10-2-2013)
§ 115.048  SALE OF CERTAIN PRODUCTS BY TRANSIENT VENDORS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any transient vendor to sell, offer for sale,
exhibit for sale or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for sale thereof
any food or food products such as, but without limitation, poultry, stock or
agricultural products which have not been grown or raised by the person selling
the products upon his or her own land or land rented or leased by him or her,
or any other food or food products.
(1998 Code, § 86-104)  (Ord. 05-20, passed 7-6-2005)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.049  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any itinerant vendor to sell, offer for sale,
exhibit for sale or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for the sale
thereof any goods, services, wares, merchandise, farm produce, poultry, stock,
magazines, plants, lumber or agricultural products in the city without first
obtaining a license therefor.
(1998 Code, § 86-121)  (Ord. 05-20, passed 7-6-2005; Ord. 10-20, passed 9-15-
2010)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.050  LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   (1)   Any person desiring a license required by the provisions of this
subchapter shall make application therefor to the Police Chief’s designee at
least ten days prior to the date of his or her contemplated sale or exhibit to
be held in the city.
      (2)   The application shall be in the form of an affidavit stating the
full name and address of the itinerant vendor, the location of his or her
principal office and place of business, the names and addresses of the officers
if the itinerant vendor is a corporation, and the partnership name and the
names and addresses of all partners if the itinerant vendor is a firm.
   (B)   Before the license shall be issued, the application therefor must be
accompanied by:
      (1)   A statement showing the kind and character of the goods, services,
wares, merchandise, farm produce, poultry, stock, magazines, plants, lumber or
agricultural products to be sold, offered for sale or exhibited and the method
of distribution to be used;
      (2)   Two passport size color photographs of the itinerant vendor or of
his or her agent;
      (3)   A certified copy of the charter of the corporation if the itinerant
vendor is a corporation incorporated under the laws of the state; and
      (4)   A certified copy of its permit to do business in the state if the
itinerant vendor is a corporation incorporated under the laws of some other
state.
(1998 Code, § 86-122)  (Ord. 05-20, passed 7-6-2005; Ord. 10-20, passed 9-15-
2010)
§ 115.051  LICENSE FEE.
   Before any license shall be issued under the provisions of this subchapter,
the applicant therefor shall pay to the city a fee in the amount of $125 (90
consecutive days) or $25 (three consecutive days). This fee shall be for the
purpose of partially defraying the expenses of enforcing the provisions of this
subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 86-124)  (Ord. 05-20, passed 7-6-2005; Ord. 13-36, passed 10-2-
2013)
§ 115.052  LICENSE ISSUANCE.
   Upon the compliance by the applicant with all the provisions of this
subchapter, the Police Chief’s designee shall issue the license required by
this subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 86-125)  (Ord. 05-20, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 115.053  LICENSE CONTENTS.
   Every license issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall
contain and bear a number and a photograph of the applicant or his or her
agent.
(1998 Code, § 86-126)  (Ord. 05-20, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 115.054  DURATION.
   The license required by the provisions of this section shall be valid so
long as the sale or exhibit authorized thereby is continuously held in the
city, a minimum of five days each week, but in no event shall it continue for
more than 90 days from the date of its issuance.  No person or persons,
company, corporation or organization may operate under an itinerant vendor
permit to exceed a total of 180 days in a calendar year.  A person, company,
corporation or organization operating under an itinerant vendor permit from a
premises that is not open to the general public are not limited to the 180 days
requirement in a calendar year.
(1998 Code, § 86-127)  (Ord. 05-20, passed 7-6-2005; Ord. 13-36, passed 10-2-
2013)
§ 115.055  LICENSE TRANSFER.
   The license required by the provisions of this subchapter shall not be
transferable and shall not give authority to more than one person to conduct a
business as an itinerant vendor, but any person having obtained the license may
have the assistance of one or more persons in conducting the business.
(1998 Code, § 86-128)  (Ord. 05-20, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 115.056  LICENSE DISPLAY.
   Every itinerant vendor to whom a license is issued in accordance with the
terms of this subchapter shall, while exhibiting, offering for sale or selling
any goods, services, wares, merchandise, farm produce, poultry, stock,
magazines, plants, lumber or agricultural products, have his or her license
displayed in a conspicuous place.
(1998 Code, § 86-129)  (Ord. 05-20, passed 7-6-2005; Ord. 10-20, passed 9-15-
2010)
§ 115.057  SEPARATE LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EACH LOCATION.
   Each separate location or conveyance used in any manner which shall cause
the location or conveyance to come under the provisions of this subchapter
shall be deemed a separate business and shall require a separate license,
though owned by the same person.
(1998 Code, § 86-130)  (Ord. 05-20, passed 7-6-2005)
CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
§ 115.070  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit funds or gifts for any
purpose within the city without first receiving a permit from the Police
Chief’s designee to make the solicitation. This section shall not be construed
to mean that membership organizations cannot solicit funds from their own
members at any time or any place they may desire.
(1998 Code, § 86-171)  (Ord. 10-20, passed 9-15-2010)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.071  PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Each applicant for a permit to solicit funds in the city shall submit to the
Police Chief’s designee a statement sworn to and containing the following
information:
   (A)   Name and address of the organization;
   (B)   Name and address of the officers of its governing board;
   (C)   The amount to be solicited;
   (D)   The net proceeds anticipated for the purpose solicited for; and
   (E)   The officials of the organization for whose support the permit is
asked.
(1998 Code, § 86-172)  (Ord. 10-20, passed 9-15-2010)
§ 115.072  PERMIT ISSUANCE OR DENIAL; RECORDS.
   The Police Chief’s designee shall grant or refuse a permit to solicit funds,
being governed in his or her decisions by the terms of this subchapter. Any
decision rendered by the Police Chief’s designee in granting or refusing a
permit to solicit funds shall be final; except that, appeal may be taken to the
City Commission. The Police Chief’s designee shall keep each application on
file and a record of his or her action thereon, subject to the inspection by
any person at any reasonable time.
(1998 Code, § 86-173)  (Ord. 10-20, passed 9-15-2010)
§ 115.073  PERMIT DURATION.
   Permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall be valid
for the period specified thereon and no longer. In no case shall they exceed a
period of 30 days after the date of issuance; provided, however, the permit may
be renewed in due course by the Police Chief’s designee.
(1998 Code, § 86-174)  (Ord. 10-20, passed 9-15-2010)
§ 115.074  PERMIT TRANSFER.
   Permits issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be deemed
personal to the permittee and shall not be transferable.
(1998 Code, § 86-175)  (Ord. 10-20, passed 9-15-2010)
§ 115.075  PERMIT REVOCATION.
   The issuance of a permit pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall
not operate as a grant or a privilege or mature into a right of the permittee.
The permit may be revoked at any time by the Police Chief’s designee for the
violation of any applicable provision of this code of ordinances, state law or
city ordinance, rule or regulation, or for any other good cause shown.
(1998 Code, § 86-176)  (Ord. 10-20, passed 9-15-2010)
§ 115.076  SOLICITATION IN ROADWAY OR MEDIAN.
   (A)   A person may not stand in a roadway or adjacent median to solicit a
ride, contribution, employment or business from an occupant of a vehicle;
except that, a person may stand in a roadway or median to solicit a charitable
contribution if authorized by the city according to Tex. Transportation Code §
552.0071.
   (B)   The MEDIAN shall be defined as the inner grassy or paved area that
divides a roadway, and shall not include the sidewalks on the outer edge of the
roadway.
   (C)   Notwithstanding division (A) above, the sale of newspapers in
accordance with the right of freedom of the press is not impaired.
(1998 Code, § 86-191)  (Ord. 07-27, passed 8-1-2007)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 116:  AUCTIONS
Section
   
116.01   Exemptions
   
116.02   Compliance; applicability
   
116.03   Hours
§ 116.01  EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to judicial sales or sales
made by executors or administrators, nor shall it apply to sales made by or in
behalf of a licensed pawnbroker.
(1998 Code, § 26-31)
§ 116.02  COMPLIANCE; APPLICABILITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, dispose of or offer for sale in
the city at a public auction, or cause or permit to be sold, disposed of or
offered for sale at a public auction in the city, jewelry, diamonds or other
precious or semiprecious stones, watches, clocks, gold or silverware or plated
ware, stationery, glassware, porcelain, bric-a-brac or any like articles,
whether the sale, disposition or offering for sale shall be by and through
agents or employees or others, without complying with this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 26-32)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 116.03  HOURS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, dispose of or offer for sale in
the city at public auction, or cause or permit to be sold, disposed of or
offered for sale in the city at public auction, any goods or merchandise of any
kind or description:
   (A)   In districts zoned D, Neighborhood Service, and E, General Business,
by the zoning ordinance of the city, within buildings between the hours of 12:
00 midnight and 4:00 a.m. daily; but, if not within buildings, between 7:00
p.m. and 4:00 a.m. the following morning; and
   (B)   In all other districts provided by the zoning ordinance of the city,
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. the following morning.
(1998 Code, § 26-33)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 117:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
117.01   Definitions
   
117.02   Permit required; posting
   
117.03   Application for permit
   
117.04   Duration of permit; renewal
   
117.05   Issuance or denial of permit; appeals
   
117.06   Transfer of permit
   
117.07   Revocation or suspension of permit
   
117.08   Permit valid only for specified location; forging or altering permit;
cancellation of permit
   
117.09   Visibility of merchandise and activities; exterior appearance and
painting
   
117.10   Signs
   
117.11   Admission of persons under 18 years of age
   
117.12   Service of notices; notices to Director
 
   
117.99   Penalty
Charter reference:
   City Commission, see
Art. II, §§ 1 et seq.
   Creation and jurisdiction of court, see
Art. X, §§ 1 et seq.
   Incorporation, powers and territory, see
Art. I
   Police Department, see
Art. XII
   Power of city to enforce ordinances, see
Art. XVIII, § 10
§ 117.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACHROMATIC. Colorless, lacking in saturation or hue. Without limitation,
gray shall be included, but white and black shall be excluded from the
definition of ACHROMATIC.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment whose major business is the offering to
customers of books, magazines, films or videotapes (whether for viewing off-
premises or on-premises by use of motion picture machines or other image-
producing devices), periodicals or other printed or pictorial materials which
are intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such
customers and which are distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT CABARET. An establishment whose major business is the offering to
customers of live entertainment which is intended to provide sexual stimulation
or sexual gratification to such customers and which is distinguished by or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT ENCOUNTER PARLOR. An establishment whose major business is the
provision of premises where customers either congregate, associate or consort
with employees who engage in specified sexual activities with or in the
presence of such customers or who display specified anatomical areas in the
presence of such customers with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or
sexual gratification to such customers.
   ADULT LOUNGE. An adult cabaret which is a permitted or licensed premises,
pursuant to the State Alcoholic Beverage Code, where alcoholic beverages may be
served or sold.
   ADULT MODELING STUDIO. An establishment whose major business is the
provision to customers of figure models, who are so provided with the intent of
providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and who
engage in specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical areas
while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured,
photographed or otherwise depicted by such customers.
   ADULT MOVIE THEATER. An establishment, containing a room with tiers or rows
of seats facing a screen or projection area, whose major business is the
exhibition to customers of motion pictures which are intended to provide sexual
stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and which are
distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
   APPLICANT. The applicant for a permit shall be the intended operator of the
enterprise.
   CHURCH. A building, whether situated within the city or not, in which
persons regularly assemble for religious worship, intended primarily for
purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of
religious belief.
   COMMERCIAL MULTI-UNIT CENTER. A building or structure (including a shopping
mall or strip shopping center) containing three or more separate premises, each
of which is offered by lease or otherwise for separate occupancy or control and
each of which occupies an enclosed area having its own door or entranceway
opening onto public property, a public way or a common area.
   CONDUCT ANY BUSINESS IN AN ENTERPRISE. Any person who does any one of the
following shall be deemed to be CONDUCTING BUSINESS IN AN ENTERPRISE:
      (1)   Operates a cash register, cash drawer or other depository on the
enterprise premises where cash funds or records of credit card or other credit
transactions generated in any manner by the operation of the establishment or
the activities conducted therein are kept;
      (2)   Displays or takes orders from any customer for any merchandise,
goods, entertainment or other services offered on the enterprise premises;
      (3)   Delivers or provides to any customer any merchandise, goods,
entertainment or other services offered on the enterprise premises;
      (4)   Acts as a door attendant to regulate entry of customers or other
persons into the enterprise premises; and
      (5)   Supervises or manages other persons in the performance of any of
the activities mentioned in this definition on the enterprise premises.
   CUSTOMER. Any person who:
      (1)   Is allowed to enter a regulated establishment in return for the
payment of an admission fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity;
      (2)   Enters a regulated establishment and purchases, rents or otherwise
partakes of any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered
therein; or
      (3)   Is a member of and on the premises of a regulated establishment
operating as a private club.
   DIRECTOR. The Chief of Police and such employees of the Police Department as
he or she may designate to perform the duties of the Director under this
chapter.
   DISPLAY SURFACE. The entire surface of a sign, on one side, devoted to
exhibiting advertising. The DISPLAY SURFACE shall not include the sign frame
and incidental supports thereto.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who renders any service whatsoever to the customers of
a regulated establishment or who works in or about a regulated establishment
and who receives compensation for such service or work from the operator or
owner of the regulated establishment or from the customers therein.
   ENTERPRISE. An adult cabaret, adult encounter parlor, adult lounge, adult
modeling studio or any establishment whose major business is the offering to
customers of a product or service which is intended to provide sexual
stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and which is
distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas. The term ENTERPRISE shall not be construed to include:
      (1)   Any adult bookstore or adult movie theater, as those terms are
defined in this section;
      (2)   Any business operated by or employing licensed psychologists,
licensed physical therapists, licensed athletic trainers, licensed
cosmetologists or licensed barbers performing functions authorized under the
licenses held;
      (3)   Any business operated by or employing licensed physicians or
licensed chiropractors engaged in practicing the healing arts; and
      (4)   Any retail establishment whose major business is the offering of
wearing apparel for sale to customers.
   ENTERTAINMENT. Any act or performance such as a play, skit, reading, revue,
pantomime, scene, song, dance, musical rendition or striptease, whether
performed by employees, agents, contractors or customers. The term
ENTERTAINMENT shall also mean bartenders, waiters, waitresses or other
employees exposing specified anatomical areas or engaging in specified sexual
activities in the presence of customers.
   EXTERIOR PORTION. Any part of the physical structure of a regulated
establishment, including a wall, veneer, door, fence, roof, roof covering or
window, which is visible from any public way or public property.
   LICENSED DAY CARE CENTER. A facility licensed by the state, whether situated
within the city or not, that provides care, training, education, custody,
treatment or supervision for more than 12 children under 14 years of age, where
such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or
operator of the facility, for less than 24 hours a day, regardless of whether
or not the facility is operated for a profit or charges for the services it
offers.
   OPERATOR. The manager or other natural person principally in charge of a
regulated establishment.
   OWNER. The proprietor if a sole proprietorship, all partners (general and
limited) if a partnership, or all officers, Directors and persons holding 10%
or more of the outstanding shares if a corporation. The term OWNER shall not
include any such person who has given to the operator a statement under oath
that he or she does not desire to be listed on the permit application and that
he or she waives any right to any notice that is required or permitted to be
given under this chapter.
   PERMIT. A current, valid permit issued by the Director pursuant to the terms
of this chapter to an operator for an enterprise.
   REGULATED ESTABLISHMENT. Any enterprise, adult bookstore or adult movie
theater, as defined in this section.
   RESIDENTIAL. Pertaining to the use of land, whether situated within the city
or not, for premises such as homes, townhomes, patio homes, mobile homes,
duplexes, condominiums and apartment complexes, which contain habitable rooms
for non-transient occupancy and which are designed primarily for living,
sleeping, cooking and eating therein; such land shall be deemed to be
residential in character unless it is actually occupied and used exclusively
for other purposes. Hotels, motels, boardinghouses, nursing homes, hospitals
and nursery schools shall not be considered to be RESIDENTIAL.
   SCHOOL. A building, whether situated within the city or not, where persons
regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education, together with
the playgrounds and other structures or grounds used in conjunction therewith.
The term is limited to:
      (1)   Public and private schools used for primary or secondary education
in which any regular kindergarten or grades 1 through 12 classes are taught;
and
      (2)   Special education facilities in which students who have physical or
learning disabilities receive specialized education in lieu of attending
regular classes in kindergarten or any of grades 1 through 12.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. A sex parlor, nude studio, modeling studio, love
parlor, adult bookstore, adult movie theater, adult video arcade, adult movie
arcade, adult video store, adult motel, or other commercial enterprise the
primary business of which is the offering of a service or the selling, renting,
or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual
stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer.
   SIGN. Any display, design, pictorial or other representation which shall be
constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened or manufactured in
any manner whatsoever so that such representation is visible from the outside
of a regulated establishment and which is used to seek the attraction of the
public to any goods, services or merchandise available at such regulated
establishments. The term SIGN shall also include such representations painted
on or otherwise affixed to any exterior portion of a regulated establishment,
as well as such representations painted on or otherwise affixed to any part of
the tract upon which such a regulated establishment is situated.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
         (a)   Human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair;
         (b)   Buttocks;
         (c)   Female breast or breasts below a point immediately above the top
of the areola; and
         (d)   Any combination of the area described in this definition.
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
      (1)   Human genitals in a discernible state of sexual stimulation or
arousal;
      (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
      (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region
or pubic hair, buttocks or female breast or breasts; or
      (4)   Any combination of the activities described in this definition.
   TRACT. A contiguous parcel of land under common ownership, whether situated
within the city or not.
(1998 Code, § 26-61)
§ 117.02  PERMIT REQUIRED; POSTING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate or conduct any
business in an enterprise located within the city unless there is a permit for
the enterprise.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate or conduct any
business or enterprise located within the city unless the permit is posted at
or near the principal public entrance to the enterprise in such a manner that
it will be conspicuous to patrons who enter the premises.
   (C)   In any prosecution under division (A) above, it shall be presumed that
there was no permit at the time of the alleged offense unless a permit was then
posted as provided in division (B) above.
(1998 Code, § 26-62)  Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.03  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Application for a permit, whether original or renewal, must be made to
the Director by the intended operator of the enterprise. Applications must be
submitted by hand delivery to the office of the Captain of the Vice Division of
the Police Department during regular working hours (8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday, city holidays excepted). Application forms shall be
supplied by the Director. The intended operator shall be required to give the
following information on the application form:
      (1)   The name, and any and all aliases, street address (and mailing
address if different) and state driver’s license number of the intended
operator;
      (2)   The name and street address (and mailing address if different) of
the owner;
      (3)   The name under which the enterprise is to be operated and a general
description of the services to be provided;
      (4)   The telephone number of the enterprise and/or owner;
      (5)   The address and legal description of the parcel of land on which
the enterprise is to be located;
      (6)   The date on which the owner acquired the enterprise for which the
permit is sought and the date on which the enterprise began operations as an
enterprise at the location for which the permit is sought; and
      (7)   A list of all employees or contractors involved in providing the
services to be provided by the enterprise.
   (B)   (1)   The application shall be accompanied by the following:
         (a)   Payment in full of a fee shall be made by certified check,
cashier’s check or money order, which fee shall not be refunded under any
circumstances. The amount shall be:
            1.   Three hundred fifty dollars for an original application; or
            2.   One hundred dollars for a renewal application.
         (b)   A certified copy of the assumed name certificate filed in
compliance with the Assumed Business or Professional Name Act (Tex. Business
and Commerce Code §§ 36.01 et seq.) if the enterprise is to be operated under
an assumed name;
         (c)   If the enterprise is a state corporation, a certified copy of
the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto;
         (d)   If the enterprise is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of
the certificate of authority to transact business in the state, together with
all amendments thereto;
         (e)   If the enterprise is a limited partnership formed under the laws
of the state, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership,
together with all amendments thereto, filed in the office of the Secretary of
State under the State Limited Partnership Act (Tex. Business and Commerce Code
Ch. 153); and
         (f)   If the enterprise is a foreign limited partnership, a certified
copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents,
together with all amendments thereto, filed in the office of the Secretary of
State under the State Limited Partnership Act (Tex. Business and Commerce Code
Ch. 153).
      (2)   The items listed in divisions (B)(1)(b) through (B)(1)(f) above
shall not be required for a renewal application if the applicant states that
the documents previously furnished the Director with the original application
or previous renewals thereof remain correct and current.
   (C)   The application shall contain a statement under oath that:
      (1)   The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained
in the application and that the information contained therein is true and
correct; and
      (2)   The applicant has read the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   A separate application and permit shall be required for each
enterprise.
(1998 Code, § 26-63)
§ 117.04  DURATION OF PERMIT; RENEWAL.
   Each permit shall be valid for a period of one year and shall expire on the
anniversary of its date of issuance, unless sooner revoked or surrendered. Each
permit shall be subject to renewal as of its expiration date by the filing of a
renewal application with the Director. Renewal applications must be filed at
least 20 days prior to the expiration date of the permit that is to be renewed.
(1998 Code, § 26-64)
§ 117.05  ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT; APPEALS.
   (A)   Within 20 days of receipt of any completed application, either
original or renewal, the Director shall grant or deny the requested permit and
give written notice to the applicant as to the decision.
   (B)   The Director shall issue a permit to the applicant unless one or more
of the following conditions exist:
      (1)   The applicant’s enterprise is located within 2,500 feet of any
school, regular place of religious worship, residential neighborhood, licensed
day care center or park. Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the
property line of the applicant’s enterprise to the nearest point on the
property line of such school, regular place of religious worship, residential
neighborhood, licensed day care center or park;
      (2)   The applicant’s enterprise is located within 2,500 feet of any
other enterprise for which there is a permit. Measurements shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest point on the property line of the applicant’s enterprise to the nearest
point on the property line of any other enterprise;
      (3)   Seventy-five percent or more of the tracts within a circular area,
as described in this division (B)(3), are residential in character. The radius
of such circular area shall be 2,500 feet, and the center of such circular area
shall correspond to the midpoint of a line joining the two most distant points
on the boundary of the tract on which the enterprise is located;
      (4)   The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on
the application;
      (5)   The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful
information on the application;
      (6)   The applicant’s enterprise is not in compliance with §§
117.09 and
117.10 of this chapter;
      (7)   The application or the enterprise does not meet any other
requirement of this chapter;
      (8)   The applicant has not fully complied with all state, federal and
local laws or regulations affecting the conduct of its business; or
      (9)   The operator has had a permit revoked for the same enterprise
within the 180-day period next preceding the date that the application was
filed.
   (C)   Property uses and distances for original applications shall be
determined as of the time that the application is filed. If a renewal
application is timely filed as provided in §
117.04 of this chapter, the property uses and measurements for the renewal
application shall be determined as of the time that the original application
for the enterprise was filed. If not timely filed, renewal applications shall
be subject to the same fees and shall be treated in the same manner in all
respects as original applications.
   (D)   If the Director determines that an applicant is not eligible for a
permit (in accordance with divisions (B)(1) through (B)(9) above), the
applicant shall be given notice in writing of the reasons for the denial within
20 days of the receipt of its application by the Director. An applicant may
appeal the decision of the Director regarding such denial by filing a written
request for a hearing with the Director within 15 days after he or she is given
notice of such denial. The Director’s decision on the application shall be
final unless an appeal is timely filed. An appeal shall not stay the Director’s
decision on the issuance of a permit. The applicant’s written request for a
hearing shall set out the grounds on which the denial is challenged. The
hearing shall be conducted by a Hearing Official to be designated by the
Director. The Hearing Official shall not have participated in any investigation
or decision relating to the denial of the permit. At the hearing, the Hearing
Official shall receive oral and written testimony regarding the application.
Hearings shall be conducted under rules issued by the Director, which shall be
consistent with the nature of the proceedings and shall ensure that each party
may present evidence, cross-examine witnesses and be represented by legal
counsel.
   (E)   The Hearing Official shall conduct the hearing within 30 days after
receipt of the applicant’s written request for a hearing, unless the applicant
requests an extension in writing. The Hearing Official shall render a written
decision and issue notice thereof to the applicant within five days after the
conclusion of the hearing. The written decision of the Hearing Official shall
be final unless an appeal is filed to the City Commission pursuant to division
(F) below.
   (F)   The applicant may appeal the decision of the Hearing Official to the
City Commission by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Secretary
within 30 days after the applicant is given notice of the Hearing Official’s
decision. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum or other
writing which sets forth fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in
support thereof. The Director may submit a memorandum in response to the appeal
filed by the applicant on appeal to the City Commission. After reviewing such
memoranda, as well as the Hearing Official’s written decision and the exhibits
introduced at the hearing before the Hearing Official, the City Commission
shall vote to either uphold or overrule the Hearing Official’s decision. Such
vote shall be taken within 30 calendar days after the date on which the City
Secretary receives the notice of appeal. However, all parties shall be required
to comply with the Hearing Official’s decision during the pendency of the
appeal. The decision of the City Commission shall be final.
   (G)   Failure of the Director to give timely notice of his or her action on
an application, or failure of the Hearing Official to timely conduct or give
notice of his or her decision on an appeal from the Director’s decision, or
failure of the City Commission to vote on an appeal from the decision of the
Hearing Official within the limitations of time specified in division (F)
above, shall entitle the applicant to the issuance of a temporary permit, upon
written demand therefor filed by the applicant with the Director. Such a
temporary permit shall only be valid until the third day after the Director
gives notice of his or her action on the application or the Hearing Official
gives notice of his decision on the appeal or the City Commission votes on the
appeal, as applicable.
(1998 Code, § 26-65)  (Ord. 94-10, passed 6-8-1994)
§ 117.06  TRANSFER OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A permit is personal to the owner and operator designated in the
application; provided, however, it may be transferred pursuant to this section.
A transfer application must be filed by the tenth day next following any change
of the owner or operator designated on the application. If a transfer
application is not timely filed, then the permit shall be invalid for any
purpose relating to the operation of the enterprise, and any transfer shall
require and be treated in all respects as an original permit application. For
purposes of measurements between enterprises under §
117.05(B)(2) of this chapter, an establishment for which the permit has become
invalid by operation of this section shall be treated as though it had a permit
until the permit is revoked pursuant to §
117.07 of this chapter and any appeal therefrom to the City Commission has been
concluded.
   (B)   (1)   The Director shall prescribe a form on which permit transfer
applications shall be made. The form shall include a statement under oath that
the original application remains correct as previously submitted in all
respects, except those that are amended pursuant to this section.
      (2)   The transfer application shall contain a statement under oath that
the individual signing the transfer application has personal knowledge of the
information contained therein and that the information is true and correct, and
the application shall not be complete unless accompanied by a non-refundable
transfer fee of $100. Transfer applications shall be filed in the same place
and at the same time as original applications, and the fee shall be payable in
the same manner as for original applications, as provided in §
117.03 of this chapter.
   (C)   Transfers shall be reviewed, issued and subject to appeal in the same
manner as original applications pursuant to §
117.05 of this chapter; except that, §
117.05(B)(1), (B)(2) and (B)(3) of this chapter shall not apply, and the
transfers shall be issued for the remaining term of the permit to be
transferred.
(1998 Code, § 26-66)
§ 117.07  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The Director shall have the authority to revoke a permit for any one
or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   The owner or operator of the permitted enterprise knowingly allowed
a person under 21 years of age to enter an enterprise;
      (2)   The permitted enterprise does not conform to the provisions of §§
117.09 and
117.10 of this chapter;
      (3)   Three or more cumulative violations of any of the offenses
contained in Tex. Penal Code §§ 21.01 et seq., or Tex. Penal Code §§ 43.01 et
seq., or Tex. Penal Code §§ 22.011 or 22.021, or of the offenses contained in
this chapter, have occurred on the premises of the permitted enterprise. These
violations must have occurred in a consecutive period of 12 months, and the
owner or operator must have knowingly allowed such violations to occur or did
not make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of such violations;
      (4)   The operator of the permitted enterprise gave materially false,
fraudulent or untruthful information on the original, renewal or transfer
application form;
      (5)   The enterprise has been closed for business for a period of 30
consecutive days, unless such closure is due to circumstances beyond the
control of the owner and the owner is proceeding with due diligence, given all
attendant circumstances, to reopen the establishment;
      (6)   There was a change of owner or operator for which a transfer
application was not timely filed pursuant to §
117.06 of this chapter; and
      (7)   The permit should not have been issued pursuant to the criteria of
§
117.05 of this chapter.
   (B)   Prior to revocation of a permit, the Director shall investigate the
grounds alleged to determine whether probable cause for revocation may exist
and, if so, shall notify the owner and operator in writing of the reasons for
the proposed revocation and grant such owner and operator the opportunity to
appear before a Hearing Official to be designated by the Director at a time and
place specified within such notice. The Hearing Official designated shall not
have participated in any investigation of the alleged grounds for the
revocation. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days after the notice
is given. Hearings shall be conducted under rules issued by the Director. Such
rules shall be consistent with the nature of the proceedings and shall ensure
that each party may present evidence, cross examine witnesses and be
represented by legal counsel. If, after the hearing, the Hearing Official finds
that the permit should be revoked, he or she shall issue a written order
revoking such permit, which shall be effective on the third day after notice
thereof is given to the operator. If the Hearing Officer determines, based upon
the nature of the violation, that the ends of justice would be served by a
suspension in lieu of a revocation, he or she may suspend the operation of the
permit for a period of time to be stated in the order of suspension, not to
exceed two months; however, a suspension may not be ordered if the grounds are
based upon divisions (A)(6) or (A)(7) above.
   (C)   The owner or operator shall have the right to appeal an order of the
Hearing Official revoking a permit to the City Commission in accordance with
the procedure set forth in §
117.05(F) of this chapter by delivering notice of appeal to the City Secretary
within 15 days after notice is given to the owner and operator of the order.
The filing of an appeal of a revocation to the City Commission shall not have
the effect of superseding or suspending the order of the Director. Orders
suspending permits shall not be subject to any appeal.
   (D)   An enterprise shall be treated as having a permit for purposes of
measurements under §
117.05(B)(2) of this chapter pending the date for filing an appeal of a permit
revocation and, if an appeal is filed, pending the disposition of the appeal by
the City Commission. An establishment holding a suspended permit shall be
treated as having a permit for the purpose of measurements made under §
117.05(B)(2) of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 26-67)
§ 117.08  PERMIT VALID ONLY FOR SPECIFIED LOCATION; FORGING OR ALTERING PERMIT;
CANCELLATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A permit is valid only at the location for which it is issued.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit, forge, change,
deface or alter a permit.
   (C)   A permit may be canceled upon written request of the owner or operator
and surrender of the permit itself to the Director. Permits shall be
surrendered at the same place and at the same time as permit applications, as
provided in §
117.03 of this chapter. The surrender of a permit shall be effective upon its
filing in the office of the Captain of the Vice Division.
(1998 Code, § 26-68)  Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.09  VISIBILITY OF MERCHANDISE AND ACTIVITIES; EXTERIOR APPEARANCE AND
PAINTING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a regulated
establishment to allow the merchandise or activities of the regulated
establishment to be visible from any point outside such regulated
establishment.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a regulated
establishment to allow the exterior portions of the regulated establishment to
have flashing lights or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes,
drawings or pictorial representations of any manner, except to the extent
permitted by the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a regulated
establishment to allow exterior portions of the regulated establishment to be
painted any color other than a single achromatic color. This provision shall
not apply to any regulated establishment if the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The regulated establishment is a part of a commercial multi-unit
center; and
      (2)   The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial
multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the regulated
establishment, are painted the same color as one another or are painted in such
a way so as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of
the commercial multi-unit center.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the painting of
an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of a regulated establishment.
(1998 Code, § 26-69)  Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.10  SIGNS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding Ch. 160 of this code of ordinances pertaining to
buildings and building regulations, or any other city ordinance, code or
regulation to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of
any regulated establishment or any other person to erect, construct or maintain
any sign for the regulated establishment other than one primary sign and one
secondary sign as provided in this section.
   (B)   Primary signs shall have no more than two display surfaces. Each
display surface shall:
      (1)   Not contain any flashing lights;
      (2)   Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
      (3)   Not exceed 75 square feet in area; and
      (4)   Not exceed ten feet in height or ten feet in length.
   (C)   Primary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or
pictorial representations of any manner and may contain only:
      (1)   The name of the regulated establishment; and/or
      (2)   One or more of the following phrases:
         (a)   Adult bookstore;
         (b)   Adult encounter parlor;
         (c)   Adult cabaret;
         (d)   Adult lounge;
         (e)   Adult novelties;
         (f)   Adult entertainment; and
         (g)   Adult modeling studio.
   (D)   Each letter forming a word on a primary sign shall be of a solid
color, and each such letter shall be the same print type, size and color. The
background behind such lettering on the display surface of a primary sign shall
be of a uniform and solid color.
   (E)   Secondary signs shall have only one display surface. Such display
surface shall:
      (1)   Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
      (2)   Not exceed 20 square feet in area;
      (3)   Not exceed five feet in height and four in width; and
      (4)   Be affixed or attached to any wall or door of the establishment.
   (F)   The provisions of divisions (B)(1), (C) and (D) above shall also apply
to secondary signs.
(1998 Code, § 26-70)  Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.11  ADMISSION OF PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than 18 years of
age to enter or be on the premises of a regulated establishment at any time
that the regulated establishment is open for business.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the operator of each regulated establishment
to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the
regulated establishment at all times during such regulated establishment’s
regular business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to not allow any
person under the age of 18 years to enter the regulated establishment. It shall
be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of 18 unless such
attendant asked for and was furnished:
      (1)   A valid operator’s, commercial operator’s or chauffeur’s driver’s
license; or
      (2)   A valid personal identification certificate issued by the State
Department of Public Safety reflecting that such person is 18 years of age or
older.
(1998 Code, § 26-71)  Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.12  SERVICE OF NOTICES; NOTICES TO DIRECTOR.
   (A)   Any notice required or permitted to be given by the Director or any
other city office, division, department or other agency under this chapter to
any applicant, operator or owner of an enterprise may be given either by
personal delivery or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return
receipt requested, addressed to the most recent address as specified in the
application for the permit or transfer application which has been received by
the Director or any notice of address change which has been received by the
Director. Notices mailed as provided in this division (A) shall be deemed given
upon their deposit in the United States mail. If any notice given by mail is
returned by the postal service, the Director shall cause it to be posted at the
principal entrance to the establishment.
   (B)   Any notice required or permitted to be given to the Director by any
person under this chapter shall not be deemed given until and unless it is
received in the office of the Captain of the Vice Division at the time and in
the manner provided for filing of applications in §
117.03 of this chapter.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of each owner who is designated on the permit
application and each operator to furnish notice to the Director in writing of
any change of residence or mailing address.
(1998 Code, § 26-72)
§ 117.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of any provision of this chapter that is not otherwise
punishable pursuant to Tex. Local Gov’t Code §§ 243.001 et seq., as amended,
shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $150 and not more than $200.
Each day any violation continues shall constitute and be punishable as a
separate offense.
(1998 Code, § 26-73)
   (B)   The City Attorney is hereby authorized to file suit to enjoin the
violation of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 26-74)
CHAPTER 118:  AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
118.001   Public exhibitions or entertainments in tents or in the open
   
118.002   Bond or liability insurance for operation of amusement rides
   
118.003   Carnivals
   
118.004   Carnival permit
   
118.005   Miscellaneous provisions
   
118.006   Approval or denial of application; revocation
Coin-Operated Machines
   
118.020   Definitions
   
118.021   Occupation tax levied
   
118.022   Payment of occupation tax; receipt to be attached to machine
   
118.023   Exemptions
   
118.024   Illegal machines not authorized
   
118.025   Skill or pleasure coin-operated machines and amusement redemption
machines prohibited near schools, churches or hospitals, in accordance with
state law
   
118.026   Amusement redemption machines and game rooms
Dances and Dancehalls
   
118.040   Definitions
   
118.041   Applicability
   
118.042   Enforcement
   
118.043   Maintenance of dancehall premises
   
118.044   Prohibited conduct; intoxicated persons
   
118.045   Authority of police to order premises to be vacated
   
118.046   Remedies cumulative
   
118.047   License required
   
118.048   License application; fee
   
118.049   Recommendation by Chief of Police
   
118.050   Inspection; approval by city officials; issuance
   
118.051   License contents; posting
   
118.052   License transfer
   
118.053   License duration
   
118.054   License suspension and/or revocation
   
118.055   Persons under 17 permitted in adult dancehalls
   
118.056   Persons 17 and over prohibited in juvenile dancehalls
   
118.057   Hours of operation of juvenile dancehalls
Pool Halls
   
118.070   Definitions
   
118.071   Hours of operation
   
118.072   License required
   
118.073   Filing of license application
   
118.074   Contents of license application
   
118.075   Falsifying license application
   
118.076   Display of license
   
118.077   Inspections
   
118.078   Revocation of license or permit not to bar prosecution
   
118.079   Revocation authorized; grounds
   
118.080   Hearing on revocation; notice to permittee
   
118.081   Same; conduct of hearing
   
118.082   Same; failure of permittee to appear at hearing
   
118.083   Findings and order by Hearing Officer
 
   
118.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Coin-operated services, see Tex. Occupations Code Ch. 2153
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 118.001  PUBLIC EXHIBITIONS OR ENTERTAINMENTS IN TENTS OR IN THE OPEN.
   For the preservation and protection of the public peace, morals, health and
safety, and to reduce the hazards of fire, it is hereby declared unlawful for
any person, or his or her agent or employees, to exhibit within the corporate
limits of the city any show, circus, wild west show, bronco-busting
performance, wax-works show, side show, acrobatic performance, sleight-of-hand
performance, medicine show, vaudeville show, play, dramatic performance,
operatic performance, musical entertainment, motion picture show or other
public exhibition or entertainment of any nature, whether specifically named in
this section or not, when any of the things specified in this section shall be
exhibited, done, operated or performed in a tent or in the open or partly in a
tent or partly in the open, or when not exhibited, done, operated or performed
in a building or in a structure of a permanent nature, constructed and
maintained in compliance with the building ordinances of the city; provided,
however, that, the provisions of this section shall not apply to the giving of
any exhibition or entertainment that may be given solely and entirely for
civic, charitable, benevolent, educational or religious purposes.
(1998 Code, § 14-1)  (Ord. 03-12, passed 4-2-2003)  Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.002  BOND OR LIABILITY INSURANCE FOR OPERATION OF AMUSEMENT RIDES.
   No person shall conduct, operate, manage or sponsor any activity permitted
by §
118.001 of this chapter without first filing with the Chief of Police or his or
her designee, to be forwarded to the City Secretary a certificate of general
liability insurance in the amounts of combined single limits of $1,000,000,
naming the city as an additional insured and indemnifying the public against
damages sustained by reason of the operation. The certificate of insurance
shall be subject to approval by the City Attorney. This section shall apply to
all persons, whether or not a license is required by any other provision of
this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 14-2)  (Ord. 03-12, passed 4-2-2003; Ord. 13-17, passed 6-19-
2013)  Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.003  CARNIVALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to show or exhibit any carnival within
the city limits, except in strict compliance with the requirements of this
chapter, as well as other applicable federal, state and local laws and
regulations.
(1998 Code, § 14-3)  (Ord. 03-12, passed 4-2-2003)  Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.004  CARNIVAL PERMIT.
   (A)   Permit required. No carnival shall be permitted without first
obtaining a permit issued by the city, as evidenced by the signature of the
Chief of Police or his or her designee.
   (B)   Application. Each application for a carnival permit shall include the
name of the person, or entity applying for the carnival permit. Each
application shall include the name of the carnival’s sponsor, organizer and
promoter, if applicable.
   (C)   Time. Applications must be submitted to the Chief of Police or his or
her designee at least 30 calendar days prior to the commencement of the
carnival. Permits shall be valid for not more than ten calendar days.
   (D)   Review process. Applications for carnival permits shall be filed with
the Chief of Police or his or her designee. The Chief of Police or his or her
designee shall review the application and shall forward it to the Building
Official and Fire Departments for review. City Inspectors and the Fire Marshal
or designee shall inspect the facilities and equipment. Upon satisfactory
completion of the review by all parties, the application shall be forwarded to
the Chief of Police, or designee, for issuance of the permit. The application
signed off by all reviewing parties shall not be considered as the permit or
any approval.
   (E)   Additional permissions. Granting of a carnival permit by the city does
not include the right to encumber or exclusively use city property or right-of-
way. If the carnival is to be situated using city property or right-of-way,
additional permission must be obtained from the city.
   (F)   Authorized use of premises. The applicant shall state the area of
operation of the carnival. Applicant shall submit proof that the applicant has
full authority to use or occupy the premises for the purpose stated in the
application. A copy of the applicant’s lease or permission shall accompany the
application.
   (G)   Sponsor. The applicant shall submit a statement signed by the sponsor
of the carnival, if any, that such sponsor has engaged or permitted the
applicant to conduct the event.
   (H)   Permit fee. The application shall include a fee of $250 for each
permit request. The fee shall apply regardless of whether the applicant is a
profit or non-profit organization.
   (I)   Details of operations. Explicit details of the operation of the
carnival are required to be stated in the permit application. Requests for
dates or times that conflict with previously scheduled events will not be
considered; however, the applicant may revise the request to apply for a
different date or time.
   (J)   Mobile amusement rides. Applicants of carnivals that will have mobile
amusement rides shall permit the Building Inspector, or designee, to inspect
the daily inspection records of each ride.
   (K)   Deposits and insurance.
      (1)   All costs for clean-up during and after the event are the
responsibility of the applicant. Every applicant, upon approval of the
application shall post a cash deposit or surety with the Chief of Police or his
or her designee in an amount set by the Mayor. However, in no event, shall such
amount be less than $1,000. The deposit requirement shall apply regardless of
whether the applicant or the event is a profit or non-profit organization. The
deposit shall be applied to cover any cost to the city of cleanup. The city
shall promptly return the bond to the applicant, along with an accounting of
any costs to which the deposit, in whole or in part, was applied.
      (2)   The applicant must obtain and maintain at applicant’s own expense,
an insurance policy covering the event. The policy must be a general liability
policy with combined single limits of $1,000,000. The city reserves the right
to increase the amount of coverage or require additional types of coverage
depending on the size of the carnival and any additional risk concerns. Such
policies must name the city as an additional insured. Any other entities that
might be impacted by this event shall also be named as additional insureds. The
applicant must provide the city with proof of coverage prior to issuance of the
permit. All policies required shall provide for a waiver of subrogation.
      (3)   The applicant must specifically agree to indemnify, defend and hold
the city, its officers, directors, agents, representatives and employees
harmless from and against any and all claims, expenses, damages or other
liabilities, including reasonable attorneys’ fees and court costs, arising out
of bodily injury or property damages arising out of or in connection with the
event.
      (4)   The applicant must carry workers’ compensation coverage for its
employees and submit proof to the city with the application.
      (5)   All insurance shall be with an insurance company with an insurance
best rating of A-7 or better.
      (6)   The provisions of this section shall apply regardless of whether
the applicant or the event is a profit or non-profit organization.
(1998 Code, § 14-4)  (Ord. 03-12, passed 4-2-2003; Ord. 13-17, passed 6-19-
2013)
§ 118.005  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Compliance with laws. Applicants shall comply with all federal, state,
county and local laws, including city ordinances, Mechanical/Electrical/Fire
and related codes, as well as zoning regulations.
   (B)   Public safety. All carnivals must meet the public safety criteria of
the City Police and Fire Departments. Acceptance of the permit shall be
considered as a grant of permission for city, county or state enforcement
officers to enter and inspect the premises for safety or violations of the law.
Cost of standby fire personnel, security and EMS, shall be the responsibility
of the applicant and shall be contracted for separately.
   (C)   Sanitation. The applicant is responsible for the sanitation for the
event.
   (D)   Vendors. Applicants must coordinate all vendor and concession
activities with the city. All vendors and concessionaires shall, at their
expense, obtain any required city concessionaire permits and pay any associated
fees.
   (E)   Sales tax. An applicant that will sell food or beverages or novelty
items must obtain all proper permits and indicate the city as the origin of
sales. If an applicant will allow third parties to sell the food or beverages
or novelty items, the applicant shall show proof that applicant has required
said third parties to comply with this requirement.
   (F)   Traffic control plan. Any use of the city right-of-ways will require a
city-approved traffic control plan. Any costs involved in the development of
this plan are the responsibility of the applicant.
   (G)   Alcohol. The sale or furnishing of alcoholic beverages will require an
additional permit from the State Alcohol and Beverage Commission, and is
allowed only in areas where not prohibited by the city code. If alcohol will be
sold or provided, the applicant shall obtain and furnish proof of liquor
liability insurance, in the amount of $1,000,000.
   (H)   Advertising and promotions. All banners, signage and advertisement to
be installed for a carnival must be approved by the city’s Building Official
before installation. The applicant must comply with the city zoning standards
and the city’s sign ordinance.
   (I)   Mobile amusement rides. Applicants of carnivals having mobile
amusement rides shall post signs at the entrance to the carnival and at each
ride telling patrons where to report any ride that appears to be unsafe or ride
operator who appears to be violating the law.
   (J)   Parking. Adequate parking shall be provided for by the applicant. The
applicant shall show parking availability in the details of the operation of
the carnival submitted to the city.
   (K)   Conduct. Offensive language, gestures, reckless driving, belligerency
or unruly conduct will not be tolerated. Applicants are responsible for the
actions of all spectators, visitors, guests, participants or invitees, and
shall fully cooperate with law enforcement.
   (L)   Posting. The permit and insurance documents shall be conspicuously
posted on site.
(1998 Code, § 14-5)  (Ord. 03-12, passed 4-2-2003; Ord. 13-17, passed 6-19-
2013)  Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.006  APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF APPLICATION; REVOCATION.
   (A)   Public interest.
      (1)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee, shall not grant the
permit required in this chapter if he or she finds that granting the permit
will be contrary to the public interest.
      (2)   Additionally, the Chief of Police or his or her designee reserves
the right to deny any application that may be inconsistent with any of the
city’s goals, or would adversely impact the public health, safety or welfare,
or violate zoning.
   (B)   Payment of city services. The Chief of Police or his or her designee,
may require, as a permit condition, pre-payment of any and all required city
services. Payment of all required city services is due and payable no later
than three business days before the event. Failure to timely pay applicable
payments shall render the permit void.
   (C)   Revocation of permit. Violation of any federal, state or county or
local law, or violation of the city code or any condition of a permit granted
under this chapter, shall be grounds for revocation of the permit.
(1998 Code, § 14-6)  (Ord. 03-12, passed 4-2-2003; Ord. 13-17, passed 6-19-
2013)
COIN-OPERATED MACHINES
§ 118.020  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COIN-OPERATED MACHINE. Every machine or device of any kind or character
which is operated by or with coins, metal slugs, tokens or checks. MUSIC COIN-
OPERATED MACHINES and SKILL OR PLEASURE COIN-OPERATED MACHINES, as defined in
this section, shall be included in such term.
   MUSIC COIN-OPERATED MACHINE. Every coin-operated machine of any kind or
character which dispenses or vends or which is used or operated for dispensing
or vending music and which is operated by or with coins or metal slugs, tokens
or checks. The following are expressly included within this term: phonographs,
pianos, graphophones and all other coin-operated machines which dispense or
vend music.
   OPERATOR. Any person who exhibits, displays or permits to be exhibited or
displayed, in a place of business other than his or her own, any coin-operated
machine in the city.
   OWNER. Any person owning or having the care, control, management or
possession of any coin-operated machine in the city.
   SERVICE COIN-OPERATED MACHINE. Every pay toilet or pay telephone and all
other machines or devices which dispense service only and not merchandise,
music, skill or pleasure.
   SKILL OR PLEASURE COIN-OPERATED MACHINE.
      (1)   Every coin-operated machine, of any kind or character whatsoever,
when the machines dispense or are used or are capable of being used or operated
for amusement or pleasure or when the machines are operated for the purpose of
dispensing or affording skill or pleasure, or for any other purpose other than
the dispensing or vending of merchandise or music or service exclusively as
those terms are defined in this section.
      (2)   The following are expressly included within this term: marble
machines, marble table machines, marble shooting machines, miniature racetrack
machines, miniature football machines, miniature golf machines, miniature
bowling machines and all other coin-operated machines which dispense or afford
skill or pleasure.
      (3)   Every machine or device of any kind or character which dispenses or
vends merchandise, commodities or confections or plays music in connection with
or in addition to these games or dispensing of skill or pleasure shall be
considered as SKILL OR PLEASURE MACHINES and taxed at the higher rate fixed for
these machines.
(1998 Code, § 14-31)  (Ord. 11-20, passed 7-6-2011; Ord. 11-35, passed 10-19-
2011)
§ 118.021  OCCUPATION TAX LEVIED.
   (A)   Every person who owns, controls, exhibits, displays or permits to be
exhibited or displayed in the city any coin-operated machines shall pay, and
there is hereby levied on every coin-operated machine, except such as are
exempted in this subchapter, an annual occupation tax of one-fourth the tax
charged and collected by the state.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the operator of the machines
from paying the tax levied in this section for the account of the owner, but
the payment of the tax by the operator or other person shall not relieve the
owner from the responsibility of complying with all provisions of this
subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 14-32)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to levy, see. Tex. Occupations Code § 2153.401
§ 118.022  PAYMENT OF OCCUPATION TAX; RECEIPT TO BE ATTACHED TO MACHINE.
   (A)   The occupation tax levied by this subchapter, with the exception of
amusement redemption machines, shall be paid to the City Finance Department,
who shall issue an occupation tax receipt.
   (B)   The occupation tax levied on amusement redemption machines in the
amount of $15 per machine shall be paid to the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee, who shall issue an occupation tax receipt.
   (C)   The occupation tax receipt shall be attached to the coin-operated
machine mentioned in the receipt and shall bear the serial number of the
particular machine.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, exhibit or display any
coin-operated machine in the city without having attached thereto an occupation
tax receipt, and no occupation tax receipt issued for a certain coin-operated
machine shall be transferred to any other machine.
(1998 Code, § 14-33)  (Ord. 11-12, passed 4-20-2011)  Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.023  EXEMPTIONS.
   Gas meters, pay telephones, pay toilets, food vending machines, confection
vending machines, beverage vending machines, merchandise vending machines and
cigarette vending machines which are subject to an occupation or gross receipts
tax and service coin-operated machines are expressly exempt from the tax levied
in this subchapter and the other provisions of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 14-34)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Occupations Code § 2153.044
§ 118.024  ILLEGAL MACHINES NOT AUTHORIZED.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed or have the effect to license,
permit, authorize or legalize any machine, device, table or coin-operated
machine, the keeping, exhibition, operation, display or maintenance of which is
illegal or in violation of any article of the Penal Code of the state or the
constitution of the state.
(1998 Code, § 14-35)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Penal Code Ch. 47
§ 118.025  SKILL OR PLEASURE COIN-OPERATED MACHINES AND AMUSEMENT REDEMPTION
MACHINES PROHIBITED NEAR SCHOOLS, CHURCHES OR HOSPITALS, IN ACCORDANCE WITH
STATE LAW.
   No skill or pleasure coin-operated machine or amusement redemption machine
shall be permitted within 300 feet of any school, church or hospital, in
accordance with state law.
(1998 Code, § 14-36)  (Ord. 11-12, passed 4-20-2011; Ord. 11-20, passed 7-6-
2011; Ord. 11-35, passed 10-19-2011)  Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.026  AMUSEMENT REDEMPTION MACHINES AND GAME ROOMS.
   (A)   Licensing and permitting.
      (1)   License. No person shall operate an amusement redemption machine
game room in the city without first obtaining a license from the Chief of
Police, or his or her designee, as required by this section.
      (2)   Permit. No person shall operate an amusement redemption machine in
the city without first obtaining a permit from the Chief of Police, or his or
her designee, as required by this section. The current state and county tax
stamps as well as the city permit will be attached to the front of the
amusement redemption machine. All expired tax stamps and permit stickers will
be removed from the machine by the owner/operator. Only current, valid official
stamps may be displayed. The annual permit fee shall be $100 per machine. The
permit fee shall apply to all amusement redemption machines, regardless if
located in an amusement redemption machine game room. Permits shall
automatically expire on December 31 following date of issuance.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AMUSEMENT REDEMPTION MACHINE.
         (a)   A skill or pleasure coin-operated machine that is designed, made
and adapted solely for bona fide amusement purposes, and that by operation of
chance or a combination of skill and chance affords the user, in addition to
any right of replay, an opportunity to receive exclusively non-cash merchandise
prizes, toys, novelties or a representation of value redeemable for those
items;
         (b)   Any electronic, electromechanical or mechanical contrivance
designed, made and adapted solely for bona fide amusement purposes if the
contrivance rewards the player exclusively with non-cash merchandise, prizes or
novelties, or a representation of value redeemable for those items, that have a
wholesale value available from a single play of the game or device of not more
than ten times the amount charged to play the game or device once or $5,
whichever is less.
      AMUSEMENT REDEMPTION MACHINE GAME ROOM. Any establishment where five or
more amusement redemption machines, with the exception of excluded machines,
are displayed or exhibited for public use.
      COIN-OPERATED MACHINE. A machine or device operated by the payment or
insertion of paper currency or any other consideration.
      CONVICTED SEX OFFENDER. A person that has received a rendition of an
order by a court imposing a punishment of incarceration, probation or fine for
a crime of: aggravated sexual assault, aggravated sexual assault of a child,
aggravated sexual assault 65 years or older, aggravated kidnapping (violate/
abuse victim sexually), indecency with child sexual-contact, sexual assault,
sexual assault of a child, sexual performance of child, prohibited sexual
conduct, compelling prostitution, possession/promotion of child pornography,
indecency with child-exposure, kidnapping with victim under 17 years of age,
unlawful restraint with victim under 17 years of age, aggravated kidnapping
(with no sexual intent and victim under 17 years of age), indecent exposure-
second conviction, preparatory offense-attempt, conspiracy and solicitation to
commit any sexual offense. Also included herein is a conviction involving the
violations of any statute from another state regardless of title, that the
elements of which meet the above offenses.
      CONVICTION. A conviction in a federal court or a court of any state or
foreign nation or political subdivision of a state or foreign nation that has
not been reversed, vacated or pardoned.
      EMPLOYEE. Any person who performs any service or entertainment upon the
premises of an amusement redemption machine game room business, whether or not
the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or
otherwise, and regardless of whether the person paid is paid a salary, wage or
other compensation by the owner or operator of the business. The term EMPLOYEE
does not include a person exclusively on the premises for any of the following:
         (a)   The repair or maintenance of the premises;
         (b)   The delivery of goods to the premises; or
         (c)   The delivery of services, such as legal, accounting, insurance
or other similar services provided to businesses generally.
      EXCLUDED MACHINES. An amusement redemption machine game room does not
include:
         (a)   A machine that awards the user non-cash merchandise prizes, toys
or novelties solely and direct from the machine, including claw, crane or
similar machines; nor
         (b)   A machine from which the opportunity to receive non-cash
merchandise prizes, toys or novelties, or a representation of value redeemable
for those items, varies depending upon the user’s ability to throw, roll, flip,
toss, hit or drop a ball or other physical object into the machine or a part
thereof, including basketball, skeet ball, golf, bowling, pusher or similar
machines; nor
         (c)   A machine or any device defined in Tex. Penal Code § 47.01, as a
gambling device, or any activity prohibited or described in Tex. Penal Code Ch.
47.
      KNOWINGLY. With actual knowledge of a specific fact or, with reasonable
inquiry, a reasonable person should have known a specific fact.
      OPERATOR. Any person who is both present on and in charge of any
amusement redemption machine game room business premises.
      OWNER. The legal owner of an amusement redemption machine game room
business and includes the following:
         (a)   The owner of a sole proprietorship;
         (b)   Each member of a firm, association, LLC or general partnership;
         (c)   Each general partner in a limited partnership; or
         (d)   Each officer, director and owner of 50% or more of the stock of
a corporation.
      REPRESENTATION OF VALUE. Cash paid under authority of sweepstakes
contests as provided in Tex. Business and Commerce Code Ch. 43(B), or a gift
certificate or gift card that is presented to a merchant in exchange for
merchandise.
   (C)   Local license fee for amusement redemption machine game room required.
      (1)   An owner, operator or lessee of an amusement redemption machine
game room shall be required to secure a license annually. An amusement
redemption machine game room shall be required to secure a license by paying to
the city an annual inspection and amusement redemption machine game room
license fee of $1,000. Upon payment of fee and compliance with all licensing
requirements, the license shall be issued by the Chief of Police, or designee.
      (2)   Any person submitting an application for an amusement redemption
machine game room license shall not have been convicted of any of the
following:
         (a)   Felony offense in the preceding five years;
         (b)   Class A or B misdemeanor in the past two years, for which:
            1.   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction,
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, or termination
of probation whichever is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a
misdemeanor offense;
            2.   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of
conviction, the date of release from confinement for the conviction, or the
termination of probation or parole whichever is the later date, if the
applicant was convicted of a felony offense; or
            3.   A convicted sex offender.
      (3)   An applicant for a license or permit shall file with the Chief of
Police a written application on a form provided for that purpose, which shall
be signed by the applicant, who shall be the owner, operator or lessee of the
amusement redemption machine game room. Should an applicant maintain an
amusement redemption machine game room at more than one location, a separate
application must be filed for each location. The following information is
required in the application:
         (a)   Name, address, telephone number and driver’s license number of
the applicant if a natural person; name, address, telephone number and driver’s
license number of all persons who own 25% or more interest in the amusement
redemption machine game room; name, address, telephone number and driver’s
license of all corporate officers, if any, of the such business; name, address
and telephone number of the business; if incorporated, the name of the business
registered with the Secretary of State; if a partnership, the name, address,
telephone number and drivers license of each of the general and limited
partners; a copy of the applicant’s d/b/a, if applicable. If applicant is not
the owner of the premises, the applicant shall furnish the name, address and
telephone number of the property owner;
         (b)   The previous occupation(s) of the applicant and, if applicable,
all corporate officers and partners of the applicant within the preceding five
years;
         (c)   Whether a previous license or permit of applicant or, if
applicable, corporate officer or partner of applicant, has been revoked within
two years of filing of the application;
         (d)   Number of amusement redemption machines in the amusement
redemption machine game room;
         (e)   A statement that:
            1.   The amusement redemption machines are not and will not be used
as gambling devices;
            2.   All the facts contained in the application are true and
correct;
            3.   The location and operation of the amusement redemption machine
game room will not violate any applicable deed restrictions; and
            4.   The amusement redemption machine game room will be operated in
accordance with all laws.
         (f)   Name, address and telephone number of an emergency contact
person who can be reached after hours.
   (D)   Expiration and renewal.
      (1)   Expiration. An annual amusement redemption machine game room
license issued by the city shall automatically expire on December 31 following
its issuance, except as otherwise stated herein. Such license shall
automatically expire if the licensee thereof sells the property or the
business, transfers equity to accomplish same or otherwise disposes of such
devices. An amusement redemption machine game room license is not assignable or
transferable. The city shall not refund any portion of a license after the
license is issued, nor shall it prorate or reduce in amount any fee due to the
city.
      (2)   Late penalty. Upon the expiration of a license, the licensee shall
obtain a renewal if the licensee wishes to continue operating an amusement
redemption machine game room. Failure to obtain the renewal within 30 days
after expiration will require such person to pay an additional late fee in an
amount equal to 20% of the fee actually due or 20% of the previous year’s fee,
whichever is greater in order to obtain reinstatement of his or her license.
Nothing herein authorizes the licensee to operate after the expiration of a
license and before a renewal is effective.
   (E)   Sealing. The city shall have the authority to seal any coin-operated
machine located at any amusement redemption machine game room for which a
license fee has not been secured. A $5 fee will be charged for the release of
any machine sealed for non-payment of said license fee.
   (F)   Posting of license. The license shall be conspicuously posted inside
the building.
   (G)   Restrictions, regulations, controls and limitations. The following
restrictions, regulations, controls and limitations shall apply to all
amusement redemption machine game rooms.
      (1)   Condition of premises. All Building and Fire Code standards must be
met. Inspection by the Building Official and certificate of occupancy shall be
obtained before license is issued. The game room must be located in area zoned
for that activity.
      (2)   Methods of conduction of business. No alcoholic beverages shall be
served or allowed on premises. No activities allowed outdoors.
      (3)   Hours of operation. May only be operated between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 2:00 a.m.
      (4)   Parking requirements. One space for each two machines (exclusive of
handicapped), plus one space per employee per shift. The area utilized for
parking shall be form poured concrete or asphalt. The spaces will be striped
with a minimum of ten feet in width for each space.
      (5)   Location requirements. Premises shall not operate within 300 feet
of an established church, school, day care or hospital.
      (6)   Presence required. The owner, operator or manager of the premises
must be present to supervise the operation of the machines. The machines shall
not be left unattended.
      (7)   Public view. Machines must be so situated within the premises as to
be in full and open public view, which entails being visible to all patrons of
the establishment.
      (8)   Minors. Minors may not operate machines during school hours on days
when school is in session.
      (9)   Operators. A game room operator must be a person who is at least 18
years of age.
      (10)   Number of machines. Total number of machines in one establishment
shall be limited to 50.
      (11)   Private rooms prohibited. All game rooms shall be open to the
public and no “private game rooms” or private “members-only” establishments
shall be permitted.
   (H)   Employees qualification. A person may not be an employee/operator of
an amusement redemption machine game room if he or she does not meet the
requirements set forth in division (C)(2) above. The owner of a amusement
redemption machine game room who knowingly employs an employee/operator who is
in violation of division (C)(2) above will be in violation of this subchapter.
   (I)   Termination of license. The Chief of Police may terminate any license
to maintain and operate an amusement redemption machine game room when the
licensee is in violation of any provision of this section, any other ordinance
of the city or any applicable state or federal law on regulation, or licensee
was found to have submitted false information in licensee’s application. Such
termination shall be upon the decision of the Chief of Police which shall be
final no less than ten calendar days after receipt of written notice sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested and addressed to the licensee at the
premises, specifying the particular violation or violations. If requested
before the ten-day period has expired, the licensee may request a hearing
before the Chief of Police to contest the termination. Any decision of the
Chief thereon shall be final and non-appealable.
   (J)   Suspension and/or termination. An amusement redemption machine game
room license holder can have his or her license suspended and/or terminated if,
at any time, the Police Chief or designee determines that an amusement
redemption machine game room license holder is not qualified under this
section, and/or is under indictment, and/or has charges pending for any offense
involving a Class A or B misdemeanor or a felony offense. The Police Chief or
designee shall suspend or terminate the license holder’s license until the
Chief of Police or designee determines that the license holder is qualified or
that the charges against the license holder have been finally adjudicated.
   (K)   Re-application. If a license is terminated pursuant to divisions (I)
or (J) above, the licensee shall not be eligible to re-apply until two years
after the date of termination.
   (L)   Audit. The books and records of the amusement redemption machine game
room shall be open for inspection and copying during regular business hours by
the Chief of Police or designee. Application and receipt of a license shall
constitute implied consent for the Chief of Police or designee to inspect the
premises and obtain any video/audio surveillance tapes of the premises.
   (M)   Disclaimer. By issuing the required license, the city is not
certifying the installation or use of the amusement redemption machines
applying for a license, the applicant shall acknowledge that the city is not
certifying or sanctioning the installation or use of such machines.
(1998 Code, § 14-37)  (Ord. 03-58, passed 12-10-2003; Ord. 04-12, passed 4-7-
2004; Ord. 08-21, passed 5-21-2008; Ord. 11-12, passed 4-20-2011)
DANCES AND DANCEHALLS
§ 118.040  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT DANCEHALL. Any dancehall that admits patrons 17 years of age or older.
   BREACH OF THE PEACE. Acts that disturb the public order, including, but not
limited to, homicide, assault, affray, communication threats, unlawful
possession of dangerous or deadly weapons and discharging firearms.
   CONVICTED SEX OFFENDER. A person that has received a rendition of an order
by a court imposing a punishment of incarceration, probation or fine for a
crime of: aggravated sexual assault, aggravated sexual assault of a child,
aggravated sexual assault 65 years or older, aggravated kidnapping (violate/
abuse victim sexually), indecency with child sexual-contact, sexual assault,
sexual assault of a child, sexual performance of child, prohibited sexual
conduct, compelling prostitution, possession/promotion of child pornography,
indecency with child-exposure, kidnapping with victim under 17 years of age,
unlawful restraint with victim under 17 years of age, aggravated kidnapping
(with no sexual intent and victim under 17 years of age), indecent exposure-
second conviction, preparatory offense-attempt, conspiracy and solicitation to
commit any sexual offense. Also included herein is a conviction involving the
violations of any statute from another state regardless of title, that the
elements of which meet the above offenses.
   CONVICTION. A conviction in a federal court or a court of any state or
foreign nation or political subdivision of a state or foreign nation that has
not been reversed, vacated or pardoned.
   EMPLOYEE. An pertains to any person who performs any service or
entertainment upon the premises of a dancehall business, whether or not the
person is denominated any employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise,
and regardless of whether the person paid is paid a salary, wage or other
compensation by the owner or operator of the business. The term EMPLOYEE does
not include a person exclusively on the premises for any of the following:
      (1)   The repair or maintenance of the premises;
      (2)   The delivery of goods to the premises; or
      (3)   The delivery of services, such as legal, accounting, insurance or
other similar services provided to businesses generally.
   JUVENILE. A person under 17 years of age.
   JUVENILE DANCEHALL. Any dancehall whose patrons or admittees are under 17
years of age.
   KNOWINGLY. With actual knowledge of a specific fact or, with reasonable
inquiry, a reasonable person should have known a specific fact.
   OPERATOR. Any person who is both present on and in charge of any dancehall
business premises.
   OWNER. The legal owner of a dancehall business and includes the following:
      (1)   The owner of a sole proprietorship;
      (2)   Each member of a firm, association, LLC or general partnership;
      (3)   Each general partner in a limited partnership; or
      (4)   Each officer, director and owner of 50% or more of the stock of a
corporation.
   PREMISES. The interior of a structure and all exterior areas owned or leased
by the permittee.
   PUBLIC DANCE. Any dance or ball to which admission can be had by payment of
a fee or by the purchase, possession or presentation of a ticket or token, or
at which a charge is made for caring for clothing or other property, or any
other dance for which the public generally may gain admission with or without
the payment of fee.
   PUBLIC DANCEHALL. Any place or area of property operated as open to the
public which:
      (1)   Has music, either live or electronically produced or transmitted;
      (2)   Has space available for dancing or dancing is permitted, whether
such dancing takes place or not; and
      (3)   Allows admission by payment of a direct or indirect charge, fee,
donation, or any form of consideration, or by the purchase, possession or
presentation of a ticket or token.
   RESIDENTIAL FACILITY. A detached duplex, triplex, quadraplex, attached or
multi-family dwelling, manufactured home, mobile home, group home for up to six
clients, boardinghouse or dormitory. A RESIDENTIAL FACILITY specifically
excludes any structure that primarily functions as a warehouse or storage
structure, regardless of whether an individual is residing within the
structure.
(1998 Code, § 14-61)  (Ord. 05-30, passed 10-5-2005)
§ 118.041  APPLICABILITY.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a dancehall does not include:
   (A)   A private residence or residential facility from which the general
public is excluded. A private residence does not include a structure primarily
designed as a warehouse or storage structure, regardless of whether an
individual is living within the structure;
   (B)   A place owned or operated by the federal, state or local government;
   (C)   A public or private elementary school, middle school, high school,
college or university;
   (D)   A place owned or operated by a bona fide religious or civic
organization, created, organized, existing and recognized as such pursuant to
all applicable laws; and
   (E)   Any establishment or place that is regulated by the State Alcoholic
Beverage Commission due to licensing.
(1998 Code, § 14-62)  (Ord. 05-30, passed 10-5-2005)
§ 118.042  ENFORCEMENT.
   The Chief of Police shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of
this subchapter and all rules, regulations and ordinances relating to public
dances and public dancehalls. In making determinations as to proper cleanliness
and sanitation conditions, fire safety requirements and building regulations,
uses and requirements and the like, the Chief of Police shall work with and
seek the aid of the proper city department administering these regulations for
the city.
(1998 Code, § 14-63)  (Ord. 05-30, passed 10-5-2005)
§ 118.043  MAINTENANCE OF DANCEHALL PREMISES.
   All public dancehalls shall be kept at all times in clean, healthful and
sanitary condition and all rooms connected therewith shall be kept open and the
entire place shall be well lighted.
(1998 Code, § 14-64)  (Ord. 05-30, passed 10-5-2005)  Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.044  PROHIBITED CONDUCT; INTOXICATED PERSONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of any public dancehall to
permit any boisterous or disorderly person to enter, be or remain in or to
assist in any public dancehall or public dance, and it shall be unlawful for
any person to conduct himself or herself in a boisterous or disorderly manner
in any public dancehall or at any public dance. No intoxicated person shall be
permitted in any dancehall.
(1998 Code, § 14-65)  Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.045  AUTHORITY OF POLICE TO ORDER PREMISES TO BE VACATED.
   The Chief of Police, or other person under his or her direction, shall have
the power and duty to cause any place, hall or room where any public dance is
held or given to be vacated whenever any disorder of a violent character shall
take place therein.
(1998 Code, § 14-66)  (Ord. 05-30, passed 10-5-2005)
§ 118.046  REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.
   Any remedy prescribed by this subchapter for the enforcement of this
subchapter shall be merely cumulative and shall not preclude resort to any
other remedy provided by law.
(1998 Code, § 14-67)  (Ord. 05-30, passed 10-5-2005)
§ 118.047  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or conduct any public
dance within the city unless the dancehall in which the dance is held is
licensed for that purpose.
   (B)   It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to dance at any public
dancehall that is not duly licensed, and any person engaging in a dance or
dancing at an unlicensed public dance shall be deemed guilty of disorderly
conduct and a misdemeanor. The owner, proprietor, manager or person in charge
of any unlicensed public dancehall who permits or condones any person to engage
in a dance shall also be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1998 Code, § 14-81)  (Ord. 05-30, passed 10-5-2005)  Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.048  LICENSE APPLICATION; FEE.
   (A)   Any person desiring a license to operate a public dancehall shall file
with the city an application for the license on a form furnished by the city
giving the information requested thereon.
   (B)   Any person submitting an application for a dancehall license shall not
have been convicted of any of the following:
      (1)   Felony offense in the preceding five years;
      (2)   Class A or B misdemeanor in the past two years, for which:
         (a)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction,
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction or termination
of probation whichever is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a
misdemeanor offense;
         (b)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction,
the date of release from confinement for the conviction or the termination of
probation or parole whichever is the later date, if the applicant was convicted
of a felony offense; or
         (c)   A convicted sex offender.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for an applicant to misrepresent any fact or make
any false statement in the application, and any misrepresentation shall, in
addition to the other penalties prescribed by law, be sufficient cause for
denial, suspension or revocation of the license.
   (D)   All applicants are required to pay a $500 annual license fee and/or
may purchase a temporary three-day dance hall permit for $25. Initial license
fees shall be prorated monthly, depending on month acquired. Renewal fees shall
be due before January 1.
(1998 Code, § 14-82)  (Ord. 05-30, passed 10-5-2005)  Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.049  RECOMMENDATION BY CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The Chief of Police or designee shall examine all applications for dancehall
licenses and make recommendations with reference to applications for dancehall
licenses.
(1998 Code, § 14-83)  (Ord. 05-30, passed 10-5-2005)
§ 118.050  INSPECTION; APPROVAL BY CITY OFFICIALS; ISSUANCE.
   (A)   No dancehall license shall be granted unless it shall appear, upon
inspection and investigation by the Chief of Police or designee, the Health
Officer, the Fire Marshal or designee and the Building Inspector, that the
premises desired to be used for the purpose of conducting a dancehall comply
with the laws of the state, the provisions of this subchapter, the ordinances
of the city regulating health and sanitation, the fire regulations, the zoning
requirements and the Building Code, and that a proposed dancehall is properly
ventilated and supplied with sufficient toilet conveniences and a safe and
proper place for the purpose for which it is used, as determined by regulations
adopted by the city. The officers named in this section shall, in their
respective capacities, note their approval or disapproval upon the application
for the license.
   (B)   The Chief of Police or designee shall issue such license upon the
applicant’s compliance with all prerequisites to issuance.
(1998 Code, § 14-84)  (Ord. 05-30, passed 10-5-2005)
§ 118.051  LICENSE CONTENTS; POSTING.
   A dancehall license issued under this subchapter shall state on its face to
whom it is issued, the date of expiration and the address and location of the
dancehall, and shall be signed by the Chief of Police or designee and posted by
the licensee in a conspicuous place and in such a manner and position that it
may be easily read at any time of the day or night.
(1998 Code, § 14-85)  (Ord. 05-30, passed 10-5-2005)
§ 118.052  LICENSE TRANSFER.
   No license issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
transferred without the written consent of the City Commission.
(1998 Code, § 14-86)  (Ord. 05-30, passed 10-5-2005)
§ 118.053  LICENSE DURATION.
   All licenses issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall terminate
on December 31 of the year issued. License fees shall be prorated monthly,
depending on month acquired.
(1998 Code, § 14-87)  (Ord. 05-30, passed 10-5-2005)
§ 118.054  LICENSE SUSPENSION AND/OR REVOCATION.
   A dance hall license holder can have his or her license suspended and/or
revoked if at any time the Police Chief or designee determines that a dance
hall license holder is not qualified under §
118.048 of this chapter, and/or is under indictment, and/or has charges pending
for any offense involving a Class A or B misdemeanor or a felony offense. The
Police Chief or designee shall suspend or revoke the license holder’s license
until the Chief of Police or designee determines that the license holder is
qualified or that the charges against the license holder have been finally
adjudicated.
(1998 Code, § 14-88)  (Ord. 05-30, passed 10-5-2005)
§ 118.055  PERSONS UNDER 17 PERMITTED IN ADULT DANCEHALLS.
   An adult dancehall business shall be subject to the following:
   (A)   A person under 17 years of age is permitted to remain on the premises
of an adult dancehall only if he or she is accompanied by a parent or guardian;
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person to falsely represent himself or
herself to be a parent or a guardian of another person under 17 years of age
for the purpose of gaining the other person’s admission into an adult dancehall
in violation of the restrictions set forth in division (A) above;
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a permittee, owner, operator or employee of
an adult dancehall to knowingly allow a person under 17 years of age to enter
or remain upon the premises of an adult dancehall in violation of the
restrictions set forth in division (A) above; and/or
   (D)   If a permittee, owner, operator or employee of an adult dancehall
allows a person under 17 years of age to enter the premises, it shall be
unlawful for such permittee, owner, operator or employee to maintain or operate
the premises without conspicuously posting a sign at each entrance to the
business that clearly reads: “It is unlawful for a person under 17 years of age
to remain on these premises unless he or she is accompanied by a parent or
guardian”.
(1998 Code, § 14-89)  (Ord. 05-30, passed 10-5-2005)  Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.056  PERSONS 17 AND OVER PROHIBITED IN JUVENILE DANCEHALLS.
   A juvenile dancehall business, regardless of whether or not a permit has
been issued for the business under this subchapter, shall be subject to the
following.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person 17 years of age and over to enter a
juvenile dancehall.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person to falsely represent himself or
herself to be under 17 years of age for the purpose of gaining admission to a
juvenile dancehall.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a permittee, owner, operator or employee of a
juvenile dancehall to knowingly allow a person 17 years of age or older to
enter or remain upon the premises of a juvenile dancehall.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a permittee, owner, operator or employee of a
juvenile dancehall to maintain or operate the premises without posting a
conspicuous sign at the entrance to the business that clearly reads: “It is
unlawful for any person 17 years of age or over to enter these premises”.
   (E)   It is a defense to a prosecution under divisions (A) or (B) above that
the person is:
      (1)   A permittee, owner, operator or employee of the dancehall;
      (2)   A parent or guardian of a person inside the dancehall;
      (3)   A governmental employee in the performance of official duties; or
      (4)   A person exclusively on the premises for the repair or maintenance
of the premises; the delivery of goods to the premises; or the delivery of
services, such as legal, accounting, insurance or other similar services
provided to businesses generally.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for owner operator or employee to knowingly allow
alcoholic beverages on the premises.
(1998 Code, § 14-90)  (Ord. 05-30, passed 10-5-2005)  Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.057  HOURS OF OPERATION OF JUVENILE DANCEHALLS.
   A juvenile dancehall shall be subject to the following.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate a juvenile dancehall during any hours
other than between 4:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain in or upon the
premises of a juvenile dancehall other than during the hours set forth in
division (A) above, unless the person is a permittee, owner, operator or
employee of the dancehall, or a person as described in §
118.056(E)(3) and (E)(4) of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 14-91)  (Ord. 05-30, passed 10-5-2005)  Penalty, see §
118.999
POOL HALLS
§ 118.070  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BILLIARD TABLE. Any table surrounded by a ledge or cushion with or without
pockets upon which balls are impelled by a stick or cue.
   BREACH OF THE PEACE. Acts that disturb the public order, including, but not
limited to, homicide, assault, affray, communication threats, unlawful
possession of dangerous or deadly weapons, and discharging firearms.
   CONVICTED SEX OFFENDER. A person that has received a rendition of an order
by a court imposing a punishment of incarceration, probation or fine for a
crime of: aggravated sexual assault, aggravated sexual assault of a child,
aggravated sexual assault 65 years or older, aggravated kidnapping (violate/
abuse victim sexually), indecency with child sexual - contact, sexual assault,
sexual assault of a child, sexual performance of child, prohibited sexual
conduct, compelling prostitution, possession/promotion of child pornography,
indecency with child - exposure, kidnapping with victim under 17 years of age,
unlawful restraint with victim under 17 years of age, aggravated kidnapping
(with no sexual intent and victim under 17 years of age), indecent exposure-
second conviction, preparatory offense - attempt, conspiracy and solicitation
to commit any sexual offense. Also included herein is a conviction involving
the violations of any statute from another state regardless of title, that the
elements of which meet the above offenses.
   CONVICTION. A conviction in a federal court or a court of any state or
foreign nation or political subdivision of a state or foreign nation that has
not been reversed, vacated or pardoned.
   EMPLOYEE.
      (1)   Describes and pertains to any person who performs any service or
entertainment upon the premises of a pool hall business, whether or not the
person is denominated any employee, independent contractor, agent, or
otherwise, and regardless of whether the person paid is paid a salary, wage, or
other compensation by the owner or operator of the business.
      (2)   The term EMPLOYEE does not include a person exclusively on the
premises for any of the following:
         (a)   The repair or maintenance of the premises;
         (b)   The delivery of goods to the premises; or
         (c)   The delivery of services, such as legal, accounting, insurance,
or other similar services provided to businesses generally.
   JUVENILE. A person under 17 years of age.
   KNOWINGLY. With actual knowledge of a specific fact or, with reasonable
inquiry, a reasonable person should have known a specific fact.
   LICENSEE. Any person holding a pool hall license issued under the provisions
of this subchapter.
   OPERATOR. Means and includes any person who is both present on and in charge
of any pool hall business premises.
   OWNER. The legal owner of a pool hall business and includes the following:
      (1)   The owner of a sole proprietorship;
      (2)   Each member of a firm, association, LLC or general partnership;
      (3)   Each general partner in a limited partnership; or
      (4)   Each officer, director, and owner of 50% or more of the stock of a
corporation.
   POOL HALL. Any place or establishment which is required by state law to pay
an occupation tax to the state for owning and operating one or more billiard
tables; and its primary purpose of business is billiards.
   PREMISES. The interior of a structure and all exterior areas owned or leased
by the permittee.
   PUBLIC POOL HALL.
      (1)   Any pool hall to which admission can be had by payment of a fee or
by the purchase, possession or presentation of a ticket or token, or at which a
charge is made, or any other pool hall for which the public generally may gain
admission with or without the payment of fee.
      (2)   PUBLIC POOL HALL means any place or area of property operated as
open to the public which:
         (a)   Has music, either live or electronically produced or
transmitted;
         (b)   Has space available for playing pool or pool is permitted
whether such pool playing takes place or not; and
         (c)   Allows admission by payment of a direct or indirect charge, fee,
donation, or any form of consideration, or by the purchase, possession, or
presentation of a ticket or token.
   RESIDENTIAL FACILITY.  A detached duplex, triplex, quadraplex, attached or
multi-family dwelling, manufactured home, mobile home, group home for up to six
clients, boardinghouse, or dormitory. A residential facility specifically
excludes any structure that primarily functions as a warehouse or storage
structure, regardless of whether an individual is residing within the
structure.
(1998 Code, § 14-111) (Ord. 13-17, passed 6-19-2013)
§ 118.071  HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a pool hall at any time
during the hours a person may be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages, if such
person holds a retail dealer’s on-premises late hours license, as authorized by
the Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended whether the pool hall sells alcoholic
beverages or not.
(1998 Code, § 14-112)  (Ord. 13-17, passed 6-19-2013)  Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.072  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a pool hall in the city
without first obtaining a license therefor from the Chief of Police or his or
her designee.
(1998 Code, § 14-131)  (Ord. 13-17, passed 6-19-2013)  Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.073  FILING OF LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Each person desiring to operate a pool hall in the city shall make an
application in writing on forms provided by the city requesting a license for
the pool hall.
(1998 Code, § 14-132)  (Ord. 13-17, passed 6-19-2013)
§ 118.074  CONTENTS OF LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Each application for a license to operate a pool hall shall contain the
following information:
   (A)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
   (B)   Location of the proposed pool hall;
   (C)   Number of persons to be employed by the applicant, if any, and the
nature of the employment;
   (D)   Whether the applicant has ever been charged with or convicted of a
felony involving moral turpitude, any violation of the liquor laws, or any
offense involving lewd or indecent conduct or narcotics, or any other
misdemeanor, other than traffic violations and full information concerning the
conviction;
   (E)   A statement that any violations of state law, this code or city
ordinances which may occur at the establishment will be reported promptly to
the Police Department; and
   (F)   A statement that no person will be allowed to work or perform duties
at the establishment who has been convicted of a crime involving moral
turpitude or any offense involving immoral acts, lewd or indecent conduct or
narcotics.
(1998 Code, § 14-133)
§ 118.075  FALSIFYING LICENSE APPLICATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any applicant for a license under the provisions of
this subchapter to make any false statement while making application therefor.
(1998 Code, § 14-134)  Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.076  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   All licenses issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
prominently displayed by the licensee at the pool hall.
(1998 Code, § 14-135)  Penalty, see §
118.999
§ 118.077  INSPECTIONS.
   Any pool hall within the city shall be subject to inspection by members of
the Police Department at any time.
(1998 Code, § 14-137)  (Ord. 13-17, passed 6-19-2013)
§ 118.078  REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT NOT TO BAR PROSECUTION.
   The revocation of any license or permit for violation of any provision of
this chapter shall not preclude a criminal prosecution for the violation.
   (Ord. 13-17, passed 6-19-2013)
§ 118.079  REVOCATION AUTHORIZED; GROUNDS.
   A permit issued under this section may be revoked in accordance with the
procedures set out in §§
118.080 through
118.083 if it is found that:
   (A)   The permittee has violated any provision of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person required to be listed on the application for the permit
has, since the permit was granted, been convicted or plead guilty or nolo
contendre to any federal, state or local law (other than traffic violations)
for any activity done while conducting business under the permit, after such
permit was granted.
   (C)   Any statements made in the application for the permit were known to be
false or should have been known to be false by any person required to sign the
application.
   (Ord. 13-17, passed 6-19-2013)
§ 118.080  HEARING ON REVOCATION; NOTICE TO PERMITTEE.
   (A)   Whenever the city receives reliable information that grounds for
revocation of a permit exist under §
118.079, the city shall investigate the facts. If the city finds there are
probable grounds for revocation of a permit, the city shall give written notice
to the permittee by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt
requested. Such notice shall set forth:
      (1)   The specific grounds upon which the permit in question may be
revoked.
      (2)   That there will be a hearing before the city's designated
representative in which the city will seek the revocation of the permit.
      (3)   The date, time and place of such hearing.
      (4)   That the permittee may appear in person and/or be represented by an
attorney and may present testimony and may examine all witnesses.
   (B)   The notice shall be mailed to the last known address of the vendor if
a notice which has been mailed is returned undelivered, service shall be deemed
executed.
   (Ord. 13-17, passed 6-19-2013)
§ 118.081  CONDUCT OF HEARING.
   (A)   All permit revocation hearings under this section shall be held by the
city's designated representative. Such officer shall be referred to as the
hearing officer.
   (B)   All hearings shall be conducted under rules consistent with the nature
of the proceedings, and only evidence presented before the Hearing Officer at
such hearing may be considered in rendering the final order.
   (Ord. 13-17, passed 6-19-2013)
§ 118.082  FAILURE OF PERMITTEE TO APPEAR AT HEARING.
   If the permittee fails to appear at a permit revocation hearing at the date
and time specified, the city shall introduce evidence to establish a prima
facie case showing that grounds exist for revocation of the permit.
   (Ord. 13-17, passed 6-19-2013)
§ 118.083  FINDINGS AND ORDER BY HEARING OFFICER.
   After completion of the presentation of evidence by all parties appearing at
a permit revocation hearing, the Hearing Officer shall make written findings in
an order as to whether or not there are grounds for revocation of the permit,
and if there are such grounds setting forth in such written findings the
specific facts supporting such grounds. If the Hearing Officer finds that
grounds do exist for revocation of the permit, he or she shall revoke the
permit for such grounds. A true and accurate copy of the Hearing Officer's
order shall be personally delivered or sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the permittee. The Hearing Officer's decision is final.
   (Ord. 13-17, passed 6-19-2013)
Cross-reference:
   Conduct of hearing, see §
118.081
§ 118.999  PENALTY.
   Any person or entity who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in a penal
sum not to exceed $500 for each offense. If said violation affects the health,
safety or welfare of the city, or violates zoning, the penal sum shall not
exceed $2,000. Each day such offense shall continue shall be deemed a separate
offense. The foregoing penalties for violations shall be in addition to any
other remedies or penalties which may be lawfully available to the city,
including revocation or suspension of any permit issued pursuant to §§
118.001 through
118.006 of this chapter, and injunctive relief.
(1998 Code, § 14-7)  (Ord. 03-12, passed 4-2-2003)
CHAPTER 119:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
119.01   Definitions
   
119.02   Location of businesses selling alcoholic beverages
   
119.03   Hours for sale of beer
   
119.04   Hours for sale of liquor generally
   
119.05   Hours of sale of mixed beverages
   
119.06   Hours of consumption generally
   
119.07   Hours of consumption in private clubs
   
119.08   Consumption on street or sidewalk
   
119.09   Sale to intoxicated persons
   
119.10   Sale to persons under 21 years of age
   
119.11   Employment of persons under 18 years of age
   
119.12   Purchase by persons under 21 years of age
   
119.13   Consumption or possession by a minor
   
119.14   Possession prohibited at school athletic events
   
119.15   Lewd, immoral or offensive conduct prohibited on licensed premises
   
119.16   Prohibition against bringing alcoholic beverages onto city golf course
Permits and Licenses
   
119.30   Required; amount of fee
   
119.31   Prerequisites to issuance
   
119.32   Renewal; assignment or transfer; refund of fee
   
119.33   Duration; proration of fee
   
119.34   Separate license or permit required for each place of business
 
   
119.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority to restrict location of sale of beer, intoxicating liquor near
schools, churches and hospitals, see Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33
   Definitions, see Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 119.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, all definitions of words, terms and
phrases as set forth in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code are hereby adopted
and made a part of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 10-1)
§ 119.02  LOCATION OF BUSINESSES SELLING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (A)   Restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or engage in
the business of selling alcoholic beverages within the city, where the place of
business of the person is situated:
      (1)   Within 300 feet of any church, public school or public hospital;
and/or
      (2)   Within 1,000 feet of a public school if the City Commission
receives a request from the board of trustees of a school district pursuant to
Tex. Education Code § 38.007.
   (B)   Measurement of distance. The measurement of the distance between the
place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church or public
hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front
door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections. The measurement
of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are
sold and the public schools shall be in a direct line from the property line of
the public school to the property line of the place of business, and in a
direct line across intersections.
   (C)   Notice to State Alcoholic Beverage Commission. Every applicant for an
original alcoholic beverage license or permit for a location with a door by
which the public may enter the place of business of the applicant that is
within 1,000 feet of the nearest property line of a public school, measured
along street lines and directly across intersections, must give written notice
of the application to officials of the public school before filing the
application with the State Alcoholic Beverage Commission. A copy of the notice
must be submitted to the State Alcoholic Beverage Commission with the
application. This division (C) does not apply to a permit or license covering
premises where minors are prohibited from entering the premises under Tex.
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.53.
   (D)   Existing businesses. As to any dealer who held a license or permit on
9-1-1983, in a location where a regulation under this section was in effect on
that date, for purposes of division (A) above, but not division (C) above, the
measurement of the distance between the place of business of the dealer and a
public school shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from
front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections.
   (E)   Variances. The City Commission may allow variances to division (A)
above if it determines that enforcement of division (A) above in a particular
instance is not in the best interest of the public, constitutes waste or
inefficient use of land or other resources, creates an undue hardship on an
applicant for a license or permit, does not serve its intended purpose or is
not effective or necessary, or for any other reason the City Commission, after
consideration of the health, safety and welfare of the public and the equities
of the situation, determines is in the best interest of the community.
   (F)   Exceptions. Division (A)(2) above does not apply to the holder of:
      (1)   A retail on-premises consumption permit or license if less than 50%
of the gross receipts for the premises is from the sale or service of alcoholic
beverages;
      (2)   A retail off-premises consumption permit or license if less than
50% of the gross receipts for the premises, excluding the sale of items subject
to the motor fuels tax, is from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages; or
      (3)   A wholesaler’s, distributor’s, brewer’s, distiller’s and
rectifier’s, winery, wine bottlers’ or manufacturer’s permit or license, or any
other license or permit held by a wholesaler or manufacturer as those words are
ordinarily used and understood in Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code § 102.01.
(1998 Code, § 10-2)  Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.03  HOURS FOR SALE OF BEER.
   (A)   Findings of fact. The City Commission finds as facts the following.
      (1)   The county is a county of less than 500,000 population according to
the last preceding federal census.
      (2)   By virtue of Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code § 105.05, as amended, the
City Commission, the governing body of the city, is authorized to set, and has
set in divisions (B) and (C) below, hours each week in which it shall be
unlawful for any person to sell beer or offer beer for sale within the city.
   (B)   Persons not holding retail dealer’s on-premises late hours license. If
a person does not hold a retail dealer’s on-premises late hours license, it
shall be unlawful for him or her to sell beer or offer beer for sale:
      (1)   On Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon; and
      (2)   On any day, except Sunday between the hours of 12:00 midnight and
7:00 a.m.
   (C)   Persons holding retail dealer’s on-premises late hours license. If a
person holds a retail dealer’s on-premises late hours license, it shall be
unlawful for him or her to sell beer or offer beer for sale:
      (1)   On Sunday at any time between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00
noon; and
      (2)   On any day, except Sunday at any time between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(1998 Code, § 10-3)  Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.04  HOURS FOR SALE OF LIQUOR GENERALLY.
   (A)   Except as provided in Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 105.02 through
105.04, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale or deliver
any liquor within the city:
      (1)   On New Year’s Day, Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day;
      (2)   On Sundays; and
      (3)   Before 10:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. on any other day.
   (B)   When Christmas Day or New Year’s Day falls on a Sunday, division (A)
above applies to the following Monday.
(1998 Code, § 10-4)  Penalty, see §
119.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code § 105.01
§ 119.05  HOURS OF SALE OF MIXED BEVERAGES.
   (A)   Findings of fact. The City Commission finds as facts the following.
      (1)   The county is a county of less than 300,000 population according to
the last preceding federal census.
      (2)   By virtue of Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 22.08, 105.01 through
105.03, 201.09, 201.13, 201.45 and 201.47, as amended, the City Commission, the
governing body of the city, is authorized to set, and has set in divisions (B)
and (C) below, hours each week in which it shall be unlawful for any person to
sell any mixed beverages as that term is defined by Tex. Alcoholic Beverage
Code § 1.04(13), as amended, or offer any mixed beverages for sale within the
city.
   (B)   Persons not holding mixed beverage late hours permit. If a person does
not hold a mixed beverage late hours permit, duly issued as provided by the
Alcoholic Beverage Code, it shall be unlawful for him or her to sell any mixed
beverage or offer any mixed beverage for sale:
      (1)   On Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon; and
      (2)   On any day, except Sunday between the hours of 12:00 midnight and
7:00 a.m.
   (C)   Persons holding mixed beverage late hours permit. If a person holds a
mixed beverage late hours permit, duly issued as provided by the Alcoholic
Beverage Code, it shall be unlawful for him or her to sell any mixed beverage
or offer any mixed beverage for sale:
      (1)   On Sunday at any time between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00
noon; and
      (2)   On any day, except Sunday at any time between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(1998 Code, § 10-5)  Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.06  HOURS OF CONSUMPTION GENERALLY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage in any
public place, or for any person to possess any alcoholic beverage in any public
place for the purpose of consuming the alcoholic beverage in such public place,
at any time on Sunday between the hours of 2:15 a.m. and 12:00 noon and on all
other days at any time between the hours of 2:15 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(1998 Code, § 10-6)  Penalty, see §
119.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code § 105.06(c)
§ 119.07  HOURS OF CONSUMPTION IN PRIVATE CLUBS.
   It shall be unlawful for any private club to cause, permit or allow any
person to consume or be served any alcoholic beverages on the club premises at
any time on Sunday between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon or on any
other day at any time between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(1998 Code, § 10-7)  Penalty, see §
119.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code § 33.01
§ 119.08  CONSUMPTION ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage while
on any street, sidewalk or other public way in the city.
(1998 Code, § 10-8)  Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.09  SALE TO INTOXICATED PERSONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any alcoholic beverage to any
person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor for either on-premises
or off-premises consumption.
(1998 Code, § 10-9)  Penalty, see §
119.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code § 101.63(a)
§ 119.10  SALE TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly sell any alcoholic
beverage to any person under the age of 21 years.
   (B)   A person who sells a minor an alcoholic beverage does not commit an
offense if the minor falsely represents himself or herself to be 21 years old
or older by displaying an apparently valid state driver’s license containing a
physical description consistent with his or her appearance, or an
identification card issued by the State Department of Public Safety, for the
purpose of inducing the person to sell him or her an alcoholic beverage.
(1998 Code, § 10-10)  Penalty, see §
119.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code § 106.03
§ 119.11  EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE.
   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (B) and (C) below, no person may
employ a person under 18 years of age to sell, prepare, serve or otherwise
handle liquor, or to assist in doing so.
   (B)   A holder of a wine-only package store permit may employ a person 16
years old or older to work in any capacity.
   (C)   A holder of a mixed beverage permit may employ a person under 18 years
of age to work in any capacity other than the actual selling, preparing or
serving of mixed beverages.
(1998 Code, § 10-11)  Penalty, see §
119.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code § 106.09
§ 119.12  PURCHASE BY PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to purchase any
alcoholic beverage.
(1998 Code, § 10-12)  Penalty, see §
119.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code § 106.02
§ 119.13  CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION BY A MINOR.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, a minor commits an offense
if he or she consumes an alcoholic beverage.
   (B)   A minor may consume an alcoholic beverage if he or she is in the
visible presence of an adult parent, guardian or spouse.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (D) below, a minor commits an offense
if he or she possesses an alcoholic beverage.
   (D)   A minor may possess an alcoholic beverage:
      (1)   While in the course and scope of his or her employment if he or she
is an employee of a licensee or permittee and the employment is not prohibited
by this code; or
      (2)   If he or she is in the presence of an adult parent, guardian or
spouse, or other adult to whom he or she has been committed by a court.
(1998 Code, § 10-13)  Penalty, see §
119.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 106.04, 106.05
§ 119.14  POSSESSION PROHIBITED AT SCHOOL ATHLETIC EVENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring or carry into any enclosure,
field or stadium where athletic events sponsored or participated in by any
public school are being held any alcoholic beverage or to have any alcoholic
beverage in his or her possession while in or on such enclosure, field or
stadium.
(1998 Code, § 10-14)  Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.15  LEWD, IMMORAL OR OFFENSIVE CONDUCT PROHIBITED ON LICENSED PREMISES.
   No person authorized to sell beer at retail, or his or her agent, servant or
employee, may engage in or permit conduct on the premises of the retailer which
is lewd, immoral or offensive to public decency, including, but not limited to,
any of the following acts:
   (A)   The use of loud and vociferous or obscene, vulgar or indecent
language, or permitting its use;
   (B)   The exposure of a person or permitting a person to expose his or her
person;
   (C)   Rudely displaying or permitting a person to rudely display a pistol or
other deadly weapon in a manner calculated to disturb persons in the retail
establishment;
   (D)   Solicitation of any person to buy drinks for consumption by the
retailer or any of his or her employees;
   (E)   Being intoxicated on the licensed premises;
   (F)   Permitting lewd or vulgar entertainment or acts;
   (G)   Permitting solicitations of persons for immoral or sexual purposes;
   (H)   Failing or refusing to comply with state or municipal health or
sanitary laws or ordinances; and/or
   (I)   Possession of a narcotic or any equipment used or designed for the
administering of a narcotic or permitting a person on the licensed premises to
do so.
(1998 Code, § 10-15)  Penalty, see §
119.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code § 104.01
§ 119.16  PROHIBITION AGAINST BRINGING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ONTO CITY GOLF
COURSE.
   Individuals, groups, associations, companies and the like are prohibited
from bringing alcohol onto the city’s golf course (Bayou Golf Course) without
the express written consent of the city or the city’s concessionaire.
(Ord. 17-21, passed 8-16-2017)  Penalty, see §
119.99
PERMITS AND LICENSES
§ 119.30  REQUIRED; AMOUNT OF FEE.
   No person shall manufacture, sell, distribute or store any alcoholic
beverage, or engage in any other activity with relation to any alcoholic
beverage for which a license or permit is required by the Alcoholic Beverage
Code, within the city, without first obtaining a license or permit to do so
from the city. The fee for an annual license or permit shall be an amount equal
to one-half the permit or license fee charged by the state under the Alcoholic
Beverage Code. A person obtaining a Texas Alcoholic Beverage Control, temporary
license/permit, special three-day permit, will be required to obtain a
temporary permit from the city at a fee of $25.
(1998 Code, § 10-41) (Ord. 13-38, passed 10-2-2013)  Penalty, see §
119.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to levy fees, see Tex. Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 11.38,
61.36
§ 119.31  PREREQUISITES TO ISSUANCE.
   No permit or license required under the terms of this subchapter shall be
issued to any person until he or she shows that he or she holds a state permit
or license for the particular phase of the alcoholic beverage business in which
he or she desires to engage in the city and until the fee required by the city
for the permit or license has been paid to the city.
(1998 Code, § 10-42)
§ 119.32  RENEWAL; ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER; REFUND OF FEE.
   The provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Code relating to renewal,
assignment and transfer of licenses or permits, and relating to refund of
license and permit fees, shall apply to licenses and permits and fees of the
city.
(1998 Code, § 10-43)
§ 119.33  DURATION; PRORATION OF FEE.
   All permits and licenses issued under the terms of this subchapter shall
expire at the time shown in the state license or permit presented by the
applicant. If the license or permit sought is issued for a period of time less
than one year, only a proportionate part of the annual fee shall be exacted and
collected; provided, however, a fractional part of any month shall be counted
as one month in calculating the fee which is to be paid.
(1998 Code, § 10-44)
§ 119.34  SEPARATE LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED FOR EACH PLACE OF BUSINESS.
   No license or permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall
entitle the licensee or permittee to carry on business at more than one
location, and a separate license or permit shall be obtained for each place of
business.
(1998 Code, § 10-45)
§ 119.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §
119.06 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $50.
(1998 Code, § 10-6)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 120:  OIL AND GAS WELLS
Section
General Provisions
   
120.01   Policy
   
120.02   Annual report by operators
   
120.03   Location of drilling
   
120.04   Pipeline construction
   
120.05   Trespassing on drilling site or pipeline right-of-way
Drilling Permits
   
120.20   Required
   
120.21   Application
   
120.22   Plat showing location of well
   
120.23   Fee
   
120.24   Staking of location of well; change of location
   
120.25   Investigation
   
120.26   Insurance; surety bond
   
120.27   Issuance
   
120.28   Permission of owner required for drilling near residences or other
structures
   
120.29   Repair of damages to streets and public ways
Operation Regulations
   
120.45   Compliance
   
120.46   Dikes around tanks
   
120.47   Location of flow tanks
   
120.48   Location of field working tanks
   
120.49   Generators and boilers
   
120.50   Warning signs
   
120.51   Premises to be kept clean
   
120.52   Open earthen storage
   
120.53   Tanks to be gas-tight and vented
   
120.54   Forges or open lights inside derricks
   
120.55   Pipelines across highways
   
120.56   Installation of electric light and power
   
120.57   Blowout preventers
   
120.58   Elimination of fire hazards; waste disposal
   
120.59   Fences
Statutory reference:
   Oil and gas generally, see Tex. Natural Resources Code §§ 81.001 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 120.01  POLICY.
   The City Commission hereby declares it to be the policy of the city to
protect the health, safety, welfare and comfort of the resident citizens and
all other persons that might at any time be in the city and, at the same time,
to permit the development of industry and natural resources within the city for
the general benefit of the public.
(1998 Code, § 50-61)
§ 120.02  ANNUAL REPORT BY OPERATORS.
   (A)   Each operator of a producing oil and gas well within the city shall
file a written report annually with the Director of Transportation and Planning
containing the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of the operator;
      (2)   Names and addresses of all owners of interests, including royalty
and working interests; and
      (3)   A plat showing the tract upon which the well is located, the
location of the well thereon and the location of battery tanks.
   (B)   This report shall be due on or before February 1 of each year and
shall cover the operations of the previous calendar year.
(1998 Code, § 50-63)  (Ord. 13-23, passed 8-7-2013)
§ 120.03  LOCATION OF DRILLING.
   (A)   All oil and gas well drilling shall be from the location of any other
existing well or within a radius of not more than 50 feet of such existing
wells.
   (B)   Division (A) above shall apply, however, only to acreage which has
been subdivided into homesites, the size of which is one-acre tracts or less.
Whenever acreage has been so subdivided, the provisions of division (A) above
shall apply when the plat thereof has been filed for record in the office of
the County Clerk.
   (C)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drill a well in the body
of water within the confines of the Texas City/LaMarque Hurricane Protection
Levee known as Moses Lake or Dollar Bay.
      (2)   Nothing herein, however, shall prohibit slant drilling from a body
of land into Moses Lake or Dollar Bay.
(1998 Code, § 50-64)  (Ord. 99-78, passed 1-19-2000; Ord. 00-24, passed 3-15-
2000)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.04  PIPELINE CONSTRUCTION.
   No pipelines for the transportation of oil and gas from drilled wells shall
be constructed or laid in addition to the pipelines now in use as of 4-11-1956,
except on rights-of-way owned by the operators of such existing wells or upon
the designated drilling tracts set forth in this chapter and upon rights-of-way
necessary to connect well sites to present lines.
(1998 Code, § 50-65)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.05  TRESPASSING ON DRILLING SITE OR PIPELINE RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to trespass on any properties, or to
enter onto the oil or gas well drilling sites or their flowline rights-of-way,
other than from an existing street or dedicated highway used by the public and
for the convenience of the public.
(1998 Code, § 50-66)  Penalty, see §
10.99
DRILLING PERMITS
§ 120.20  REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drill or commence to drill a well for
oil or gas within the city or to work upon or assist in any way in the
prosecution of the drilling of any such well without first obtaining a permit
for the drilling, completion and operation of such well from the city.
(1998 Code, § 50-81)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.21  APPLICATION.
   Every application for a permit required by the provisions of this subchapter
shall be in writing, signed by the applicant or by some person duly authorized
to sign the application on his or her behalf, and shall state:
   (A)   Whether the well shall be drilled as an oil or gas well;
   (B)   The proposed drilling depth;
   (C)   The drilling block and the location of the proposed well, which shall
include the name of the fee owner, the name of the lease owner, a brief
description of the land and a detailed plat showing the location of all battery
tanks and the like; and
   (D)   Any other information the Director of Transportation and Planning may
consider pertinent to the issuance of the permit.
(1998 Code, § 50-82)  (Ord. 13-23, passed 8-7-2013)
§ 120.22  PLAT SHOWING LOCATION OF WELL.
   The application for a permit to be issued under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be accompanied by a plat showing the exact location of the
well. A copy of the plat (Form 1) furnished to the State Railroad Commission
shall be acceptable.
(1998 Code, § 50-83)
§ 120.23  FEE.
   The application for a permit to be issued under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be filed with the Director of Transportation and Planning and
accompanied by a fee of $10,000 in cash, or equivalent. The City Commission, by
ordinance, reserves the right to change the fees set out in this section.  The
current fees under this section, after approval by the Commission, are posted
at the City Hall Annex, 928 5th Avenue North.
(1998 Code, § 50-84)  (Ord. 93-47, passed 9-30-1993; Ord. 13-23, passed 8-7-
2013)
§ 120.24  STAKING OF LOCATION OF WELL; CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   The location of the proposed oil or gas well shall be staked out before the
city permit required by the provisions of this subchapter may be issued. No
location shall ever be changed without filing with the Director of
Transportation and Planning an amended application showing the proposed change.
(1998 Code, § 50-85)  (Ord. 13-23, passed 8-7-2013)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.25  INVESTIGATION.
   Upon receipt of the application for a permit required by the provisions of
this subchapter, the Director of Transportation and Planning shall forthwith
make or cause to be made an investigation of the proposed well site and the
contents of the application.
(1998 Code, § 50-86)  (Ord. 13-23, passed 8-7-2013)
§ 120.26  INSURANCE; SURETY BOND.
   (A)   (1)   Before any permit shall be issued under the provisions of this
subchapter, the applicant therefor shall first post with the city, at his or
her own expense, a public liability insurance certificate covering all of his
or her operations in the city limits, in bodily injury limits not less than
$1,000,000 for each person and $1,000,000 for each accident, and property
damage limits of not less than $1,000,000 for each accident and $1,000,000
umbrella insurance coverage.
      (2)   The city shall be named as an additional insured and a certificate
of insurance evidencing the city as an additional insured, the applicable
limits of liability, and the term of the policy of insurance shall be delivered
to the Director of Transportation and Planning before or at the time of
application for a permit.
      (3)   The public liability insurance required under the provisions of
this section shall be carried in companies acceptable to the city.
      (4)   The insurance shall be continued in force so long as the applicant
remains engaged in operations for the drilling or production of oil and gas
within the city.
   (B)   The application shall also be accompanied by a surety bond in the sum
of $75,000, payable to the city, executed by the applicant as principal and by
a surety company as surety, acceptable to the city, conditioned that the
applicant and surety will pay all unrepaired damages, if any, caused by the
applicant in the movement of drilling rig equipment, pipe, tools, tanks,
machinery and supplies over city streets and public ways to and from the
drilling site.
   (C)   The application fee shall also be accompanied by an irrevocable letter
of credit in the amount of $25,000, payable to the City of Texas City.  The
letter of credit shall remain in effect during the entire period when tanks,
valves, or other equipment remain on the well site.
(1998 Code, § 50-88)  (Ord. 99-78, passed 1-19-2000; Ord. 00-24, passed 3-15-
2000; Ord. 13-23, passed 8-7-2013)
§ 120.27  ISSUANCE.
   If the Director of Transportation and Planning finds that the proposed
drilling and producing of the oil or gas well will be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, the Director of Transportation and Planning shall
issue the permit required under the provisions of this subchapter to the
applicant upon the posting by the applicant of the required bond and letter of
credit.
(1998 Code, § 50-89)  (Ord. 13-23, passed 8-7-2013)
§ 120.28  PERMISSION OF OWNER REQUIRED FOR DRILLING NEAR RESIDENCES OR OTHER
STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this chapter, no
permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location which is
nearer than 600 feet to any residence, building or structure without the
applicant having first secured the written permission of the owner thereof.
   (B)   However, a distance of no less than 200 feet shall apply to all wells
to be drilled on land which was purchased; leased; or optioned, dated and
notarized prior to enactment of this amendment; provided that, such purchase or
lease was duly and timely recorded with the Clerk of Galveston County and the
proposed permittee or its designee has filed an application with the State
Railroad Commission for a permit to drill no later than three years from the
date of enactment of this amendment.
(1998 Code, § 50-90)  (Ord. 99-78, passed 1-19-2000; Ord. 00-24, passed 3-15-
2000; Ord. 13-23, passed 8-7-2013)
§ 120.29  REPAIR OF DAMAGES TO STREETS AND PUBLIC WAYS.
   (A)   Upon completion of the well, the applicant for a permit under the
provisions of this subchapter, together with the Director of Public Works,
shall inspect damages to streets and public ways, if any, caused by the
applicant, his or her subcontractors, associates and employees in the movement
of drilling rig equipment, pipe, tools, tanks, machinery and supplies to and
from the drill site.
   (B)   All of the damages shall be promptly repaired to the approval of the
Director of Public Works.
(1998 Code, § 50-91)  (Ord. 13-23, passed 8-7-2013)
OPERATION REGULATIONS
§ 120.45  COMPLIANCE.
   In operations conducted under a permit issued under the provisions of this
chapter, the permittee or his or her assigns shall conform to the provisions of
this subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 50-111)
§ 120.46  DIKES AROUND TANKS.
   All permanent oil tanks or batteries of tanks must be surrounded by a dike
or ditch of at least the capacity of the tank or battery of tanks.
(1998 Code, § 50-112)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.47  LOCATION OF FLOW TANKS.
   No flow tank, unless it is entirely buried, or other oil tank of any size,
shall be placed nearer than 150 feet to any derrick, rig, building, power plant
or boiler of any description.
(1998 Code, § 50-113)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.48  LOCATION OF FIELD WORKING TANKS.
   No field working tank having a capacity of 10,000 barrels or more shall be
built nearer than 200 feet, measured from shell to shell, to any other like
tank.
(1998 Code, § 50-114)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.49  GENERATORS AND BOILERS.
   No boiler or electric lighting generator shall be placed or remain nearer
than 150 feet to any producing oil or gas well or oil tank. Boilers must be
equipped with steam lines for fighting fire and must be set not nearer than 150
feet to any producing well.
(1998 Code, § 50-115)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.50  WARNING SIGNS.
   Printed signs reading as follows or similar wording shall be posted in
conspicuous places on each producing drilling oil or gas well:
      DANGEROUS
      NO SMOKING ALLOWED
(1998 Code, § 50-116)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.51  PREMISES TO BE KEPT CLEAN.
   All persons having a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall keep
their premises clear of high grass, weeds and combustible trash within a radius
of 50 feet around an oil tank or producing wells.
(1998 Code, § 50-117)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.52  OPEN EARTHEN STORAGE.
   Open earthen storage for oil or gas is hereby prohibited within the city.
(1998 Code, § 50-118)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.53  TANKS TO BE GAS-TIGHT AND VENTED.
   All oil tanks, where there is a gas hazard, shall be gas-tight and provided
with proper gas vents.
(1998 Code, § 50-119)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.54  FORGES OR OPEN LIGHTS INSIDE DERRICKS.
   No forge or open light shall be placed inside the derrick of a well showing
oil or gas.
(1998 Code, § 50-120)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.55  PIPELINES ACROSS HIGHWAYS.
   All oil and gas pipelines laid upon or across a public road or highway shall
be buried to a reasonable safe depth.
(1998 Code, § 50-121)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.56  INSTALLATION OF ELECTRIC LIGHT AND POWER.
   Wherever available and practicable, electric light and power shall be
installed in congested drilling areas.
(1998 Code, § 50-122)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.57  BLOWOUT PREVENTERS.
   A blowout preventer, control head and other connections for keeping the well
under control at all times shall be installed as soon as surface casing is set.
The blowout preventer shall be tested against pump pressure at least once every
24 hours. All control equipment shall be in good working order and condition at
all times.
(1998 Code, § 50-123)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.58  ELIMINATION OF FIRE HAZARDS; WASTE DISPOSAL.
   Any rubbish or debris that might constitute a fire hazard shall be removed
to a distance of at least 100 feet from the vicinity of wells, tanks and pump
stations. All waste shall be burned or disposed of in such a manner as to avoid
creating a fire hazard or polluting streams and freshwater strata.
(1998 Code, § 50-124)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.59  FENCES.
   (A)   All well heads, pits and tank batteries shall be adequately protected
with human-proof fencing.
   (B)   However, this provision shall not apply:
      (1)   Where the well head, pits or tanks are located on acreage which has
not been platted into homesite tracts of one acre or less with the plat filed
for record in the office of the County Clerk, if the dwelling house density
surrounding the well head, pits and tanks is less than 100 dwellings per square
mile. To determine this density, all dwellings within one square mile with the
well head as the center shall be counted; and
      (2)   Where the well head, pits or tanks are located within such a
platted subdivision, duly filed for record in the office of the County Clerk,
but at a greater distance than 500 feet from any existing dwelling. Whenever a
dwelling is constructed therein within the 500-foot distance, such provision
shall apply. Where the well, pits or tanks are located outside the subdivision,
but within 500 feet of a dwelling within the subdivision, such provision shall
apply.
(1998 Code, § 50-125)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 121:  PIPELINES
Section
General Provisions
   
121.01   Definitions
   
121.02   Conformance to plans and specifications
Permits
   
121.15   Required
   
121.16   Application
   
121.17   Fees
   
121.18   Insurance; surety bond
   
121.19   Issuance
   
121.20   Revocation
Operation
   
121.35   Registration of pipelines; exemptions
   
121.36   Signs on pipeline right-of-way
   
121.37   Unauthorized operation of or tampering with shutoff valves
   
121.38   Unauthorized excavation or other activities in pipeline right-of-way
   
121.39   Annual fees
 
   
121.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 121.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMODITY. Any substance capable of being transmitted through a pipeline
which is, or may become, flammable, toxic or otherwise hazardous to human,
animal or plant health or life.
   PIPELINE. A line or lines of pipe with pumps, valves and control devices for
conveying a commodity and operated as a single unit under normal operating
conditions.
   SHUTOFF VALVE. Any device installed in a pipeline and used to stop the
conveyance of a commodity through a pipeline.
(1998 Code, § 50-151)  (Ord. 01-55, passed 12-5-2001)
§ 121.02  CONFORMANCE TO PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   All work done pursuant to a permit issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall be in strict conformance with and shall be limited to plans and
specifications therefor filed with the Director of Transportation and Planning.
   (B)   All excavations will be permitted and performed as required in this
chapter.
(1998 Code, § 50-153)  (Ord. 13-23, passed 8-7-2013)
PERMITS
§ 121.15  REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, reconstruct, alter,
repair, extend or lay any pipeline within the city without first having
obtained from the Director of Transportation and Planning a permit to do so;
except that, in a bona fide emergency, repairs and alterations may be started
and the application for a permit will be made as soon as practical.
(1998 Code, § 50-171)  (Ord. 13-23, passed 8-7-2013)  Penalty, see §
121.99
§ 121.16  APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person desiring a permit required by the provisions of this
subchapter shall make application therefor to the Director of Transportation
and Planning.
   (B)   The application shall be in writing and shall contain the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   Plans and specifications for the work to be done;
      (3)   All information required under §
121.35 of this chapter; and
      (4)   Any other information as the Director of Transportation and
Planning shall require.
(1998 Code, § 50-172)  (Ord. 13-23, passed 8-7-2013)
§ 121.17  FEES.
   Before any permit shall be issued under the provisions of this subchapter,
the applicant therefor shall pay to the Director of Transportation the
following fees:
   (A)   Permit application fee: $2,000, and an additional permit fee; and
   (B)   For each street or drainage ditch crossing: $500.
   (C)   The City Commission, by ordinance, reserves the right to change the
fees set out in this section.  The current fees under this section, after
approval by the Commission, are posted at the City Hall Annex, 928 5th Avenue
North.
(1998 Code, § 50-173)  (Ord. 01-55, passed 12-5-2001; Ord. 13-23, passed 8-7-
2013)
§ 121.18  INSURANCE; SURETY BOND.
   (A)   Before any permit shall be issued under the provisions of this
subchapter, the applicant therefor shall first post with the city, at his or
her own expense, a public liability insurance certificate covering all of his
or her operations in the city limits, in bodily injury limits not less than
$1,000,000 for each person and $1,000,000 for each accident, and property
damage limits of not less than $1,000,000 for each accident and $1,000,000
umbrella insurance coverage. The city shall be named as an additional insured
and a certificate of insurance evidencing the city as an additional insured,
the applicable limits of liability, and the term of the policy of insurance
shall be delivered to the Director of Transportation and Planning before or at
the time of application for a permit. The public liability insurance required
under the provisions of this section shall be carried in companies acceptable
to the city. The insurance shall be continued in force so long as the applicant
remains engaged in pipeline operations within the city.
   (B)   The application shall also be accompanied by a surety bond in the sum
of $75,000, payable to the city, executed by the applicant as principal and by
a surety company as surety, acceptable to the city, conditioned that the
applicant and surety will pay all unrepaired damages, if any, caused by the
applicant in the movement of pipeline equipment, pipe, tools, tanks, machinery
and supplies over city streets and public ways to and from the site.
(1998 Code, § 50-174)  (Ord. 01-55, passed 12-5-2001; Ord. 13-23, passed 8-7-
2013)
§ 121.19  ISSUANCE.
   Upon the payment of the required fee, the posting of the required bond and
the approval of the application for a permit required by the provisions of this
subchapter, the Director of Transportation and Planning shall issue the permit.
Prior to issuance of the permit, a review and approval by the Planning Board
may be required, if the proposed routing of the line is in close proximity to
residential structures, platted residential subdivision lots or other
structures.
(1998 Code, § 50-175)  (Ord. 01-55, passed 12-5-2001; Ord. 13-23, passed 8-7-
2013)
§ 121.20  REVOCATION.
   Any permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter may be revoked by
the Director of Transportation and Planning in the event of any violation of
any applicable provision of this code, state law or city ordinance, rule or
regulation by the permittee or his or her agents, employees or assigns.
(1998 Code, § 50-176)  (Ord. 13-23, passed 8-7-2013)
OPERATION
§ 121.35  REGISTRATION OF PIPELINES; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The owner of every pipeline now located across or along or under the
public streets, highways, sidewalks, parks, public squares or public places
within the city, and the owner of any pipeline constructed or replaced
hereafter, shall prepare and file with the Director of Transportation and
Planning three official scaled city street maps, as currently revised by the
City Engineer, upon which the owner shall fully delineate the area within the
city’s corporate limits traversed by the existing or proposed pipeline, with
the route, distance and shutoff valve locations clearly and indelibly drawn
thereon, together with the name and mailing address of the owner and the
telephone number of at least one officer or person available on a 24-hour basis
who can furnish, or obtain immediately, information as to the pressure at the
points of input nearest to the city and the common name of the commodity
carried by the pipeline of such owner. The Director of Transportation and
Planning shall transmit one copy to the Director of Transportation and Planning
and one copy to the Fire Department, and shall retain one copy in his or her
files. The Director of Transportation and Planning shall issue a receipt for
each registration filed. Any change in the 24-hour contact information must be
promptly reported to the Fire Department.
   (B)   This chapter shall not apply to the distribution system of any
corporation now or hereafter providing natural gas service to the inhabitants
of the city pursuant to
Art. XVII of the Charter; provided, however, that, transmission lines as
defined in 48 C.F.R. § 192.3 shall be subject to all requirements of this
chapter.
   (C)   This chapter shall not apply to those pipelines or pipeline sections
inside of industrial facilities which meet the requirements of §
150.069 of this code of ordinances.
   (D)   No failure to register a pipeline or to obtain a permit for work
performed prior to 1-1-2002, shall be subject to punishment if the affected
pipeline is registered in compliance with this chapter and a permit application
fee is paid prior to 1-1-2003.
   (E)   Pipeline owners shall promptly register any new pipeline information
with the city. In addition, all pipeline owners shall re-register all pipeline
information with the city every two years following initial issuance of a
permit. Re-registration information shall be submitted on a form acceptable to
the Director of Transportation and Planning.
(1998 Code, § 50-191)  (Ord. 01-55, passed 12-5-2001; Ord. 13-23, passed 8-7-
2013)
§ 121.36  SIGNS ON PIPELINE RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Every pipeline, new or existing, within the corporate limits of the city
shall bear signs in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations
or, if unregulated, signs denoting the owner or operator of the pipeline,
affixed in the pipeline right-of-way every 500 feet along the route and located
at road crossings, on both sides, and on entering or leaving public property.
No person, except the owner or his or her duly authorized agent, shall tamper
with or remove any such sign.
(1998 Code, § 50-192)  (Ord. 01-55, passed 12-5-2001)  Penalty, see §
121.99
§ 121.37  UNAUTHORIZED OPERATION OF OR TAMPERING WITH SHUTOFF VALVES.
   No person shall turn off or on or otherwise operate or tamper with any
pipeline shutoff valve within the city’s corporate limits, unless such person
is an employee of the owner or operator of the pipeline or a duly authorized
agent of such owner or operator.
(1998 Code, § 50-193)  Penalty, see §
121.99
§ 121.38  UNAUTHORIZED EXCAVATION OR OTHER ACTIVITIES IN PIPELINE RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   No person, other than the owner of the pipeline or his or her duly
authorized agent, shall excavate over or change the grade of or operate on or
construct anything on or across the right-of-way in any pipeline without first
notifying the Building Official and the owner of the pipeline and giving them
reasonable opportunity to have an observer present during such activity; except
that, in a bona fide emergency, repairs and alterations may be started and
notification will be made as soon as practical.
(1998 Code, § 50-194)  (Ord. 13-23, passed 8-7-2013)  Penalty, see §
121.99
§ 121.39  ANNUAL FEES.
   Upon the construction, reconstruction, extension or alteration of any
pipeline within the city right-of-way or on city property under a permit
required by the provisions of this chapter, the permittee shall pay to the city
an annual fee or annual easement charge. Effective 1-1-2014, fees will be de
and payable on or before January first of each calendar year and annual fee
rates will be as follows:
   (A)   Use of public right-of-way or city property:
      (1)   First year, per rod: $25; and
      (2)   Annual renewal, per rod: $40 per pipelines less than 24 inches in
nominal diameter; $80 for pipelines equal to or greater than 24 inches in
nominal diameter.
   (B)   A pipeline owner may pay up to ten years rental fees in advance in one
lump sum payment.
   (C)   Payment of annual right-of-way fees or easement fees is cumulative of,
and in addition to, any initial permit fees.
   (D)   Annual right-of-way fees shall not be assessed for simple
perpendicular or angular street or ditch crossings.
   (E)   Payments received after January thirtieth of each year shall be
subject to a late charge at the maximum allowable rate at law.
   (F)   The City Commission, by ordinance, reserves the right to change the
fees set out in this section.  The current fees under this section, after
approval by the Commission, are posted at the City Hall Annex, 928 5th Avenue
North.
(1998 Code, § 50-195)  (Ord. 01-55, passed 12-5-2001; Ord. 13-23, passed 8-7-
2013)
§ 121.99  PENALTY.
   Any violation of any section, division or part of this chapter shall be
deemed a misdemeanor, and each violation during all or any portion of any day
shall be a separate offense and subject to punishment as described in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(1998 Code, § 50-152)  (Ord. 01-55, passed 12-5-2001; Ord. 13-23, passed 8-7-
2013)
CHAPTER 122:  HOUSE MOVERS
Section
General Provisions
   
122.01   Work to be continuous
   
122.02   Equipment inspection
   
122.03   Notice to Public Utilities, Police Department and Fire Department
   
122.04   Accompaniment by police officer
   
122.05   Flaggers; flares and lights; leaving building on public property
Permits
   
122.20   Required
   
122.21   Application
   
122.22   Fee
   
122.23   Bond
   
122.24   Issuance
   
122.25   Notice of denial
   
122.26   Right to appeal; notice of appeal
   
122.27   Appeal hearing
   
122.28   Form and contents; conditions
   
122.29   Time limit
   
122.30   Transfer
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 122.01  WORK TO BE CONTINUOUS.
   When a building is moved on, over or across city streets, alleys or
railroads, the work of moving shall be continuously prosecuted on a 24-hour-
per-day basis from the time of entry upon public thoroughfares until exit
therefrom.
(1998 Code, § 22-521)
§ 122.02  EQUIPMENT INSPECTION.
   (A)   When moving a building, prior to entry upon a public thoroughfare, the
City Building Official shall be notified and shall inspect for adequacy both as
to condition and type of equipment to be used in moving the building.
   (B)   Should the Building Official deem the equipment inadequate, such steps
as are necessary shall be taken to correct any and all deficiencies to the
satisfaction of the Building Official, and the building shall not be entered
upon a public thoroughfare without final approval by the City Building
Official.
(1998 Code, § 22-522)
§ 122.03  NOTICE TO PUBLIC UTILITIES, POLICE DEPARTMENT AND FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   No person shall move any house, building or other structure over any street,
alley or other public thoroughfare without first notifying all public utilities
and the Police and Fire Departments of the proposed route to be taken and the
proposed time of the move.
(1998 Code, § 22-523)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 122.04  ACCOMPANIMENT BY POLICE OFFICER.
   No building, house or other structure shall be moved unless accompanied by a
police officer, if required by the Building Official.
(1998 Code, § 22-524)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 122.05  FLAGGERS; FLARES AND LIGHTS; LEAVING BUILDING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   When the moving of a house, building or other structure is commenced,
flaggers must be posted ahead of and behind the moving to give proper warning.
   (B)   If it becomes necessary to leave the building or structure on public
property, there shall be placed around the property, and all equipment in use,
red lights, flares or other warning devices; provided that, no building or
structure shall be allowed to remain stationary on and in the streets and ways
for more than 24 hours, except on weekends.
   (C)   Any moving at night must be accompanied by sufficient lights and
flares continually burning for the protection of the public.
(1998 Code, § 22-525)  Penalty, see §
10.99
PERMITS
§ 122.20  REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to move, or cause to be moved, a house,
building or other structure from one location to another within the city
limits, or to move a house, building or other structure from without the city
limits to a location within the city, or to move a house, building or other
structure within the city to a point without the city, without first securing a
permit to move the structure from the Building Official.
(1998 Code, § 22-541)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 122.21  APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for a permit required by this subchapter shall be filed
with the Building Official on a form provided for that purpose, and shall
contain the following information:
      (1)   Name of the mover and his or her address;
      (2)   Present location of the building to be moved;
      (3)   Owner thereof;
      (4)   Location of the property to which the building is to be moved;
      (5)   Route for movement; and
      (6)   Time the movement is to begin, and the estimated time the move will
be completed.
   (B)   The written application shall be received by the Building Official in
duplicate, and one copy of the application promptly transmitted to the Director
of Public Works for his or her inspection and approval.
(1998 Code, § 22-542)
§ 122.22  FEE.
   The fee for a permit required by the provisions of this subchapter shall be
$100.
(1998 Code, § 22-543)
§ 122.23  BOND.
   (A)   If the Building Official approves the application for a permit under
this subchapter, he or she shall require either a written or cash bond from the
applicant in an amount of not less than $5,000 and not more than $50,000, which
amount is to be determined by the City Building Official, payable to the city,
for the use and benefit of itself and any person who claims injury to his or
her property by reason of the move, executed by the applicant as principal and
by a surety company (if not a cash bond) duly licensed to do business in the
state, and approved by the city as surety, conditioned that the applicant shall
repair any damage and injury to any street or alley that may be caused by the
move, and leave the streets and alleys in as good condition as they were prior
to the move, and make good any damages sustained to private property occasioned
by the move.
   (B)   After the building is moved the applicant may make application to the
City Building Official for the refund of the bond; whereupon, the City Building
Official shall give notice thereof to the Director of Public Works, whose duty
it shall be to investigate the streets and alleys over which the building was
moved by the applicant, and he or she shall investigate any claims which may be
made by any persons as to damages sustained by them to their property. If such
streets and alleys are found in good repair or undamaged or if damages to have
been suitably repaired by the applicant, and if no persons have sustained
damages to their property by occasion of the move or if the damages have been
suitably repaired by the applicant, the Director of Public Works shall so
report to the City Building Official and he or she shall file a report with the
City Commission for action by it at its next meeting, together with the
application for refund on the bond for its action.
   (C)   If the Director of Public Works shall report that the applicant has
not repaired the streets or alleys after having caused damage to them in moving
the building over the streets or alleys, or has not made settlement with any
person after having damaged his or her property in making the move, a report
setting out the facts shall be made by the City Building Official and the bond
shall not be refunded to the applicant until the City Commission is satisfied
that the terms of the bond have been fully complied with.
(1998 Code, § 22-544)
§ 122.24  ISSUANCE.
   The Building Official shall issue the permit applied for under this
subchapter upon compliance with all of the provisions of this subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 22-545)
§ 122.25  NOTICE OF DENIAL.
   If the Building Official shall deny the permit required by this subchapter,
he or she shall give notice in writing of his or her denial to the applicant by
depositing the notice in the United States mail, addressed to the applicant,
using the address furnished by the applicant.
(1998 Code, § 22-546)
§ 122.26  RIGHT TO APPEAL; NOTICE OF APPEAL.
   Any applicant under this subchapter shall have the right to appeal from the
adverse decision of the Building Official, the appeal to be perfected by giving
notice in writing of his or her decision, addressed to the City Commission, and
mailed or personally delivered to the City Secretary within a period of ten
days following receipt of the written notice of the adverse decision of the
Building Official.
(1998 Code, § 22-547)
§ 122.27  APPEAL HEARING.
   The City Secretary shall receive the notice of appeal as provided in §
122.26 of this chapter and place the matter before the City Commission at its
next regular meeting, at which time the applicant shall have a full hearing.
The City Commission shall either sustain the action of the Building Official or
it shall reverse him or her and order the issuance of a permit, setting the
amount of the bond to be required of the applicant, as set forth in this
subchapter, but in no event to exceed the sum of $50,000. If the City
Commission sustains the action of the Building Official, no permit shall be
issued and the action of the City Commission shall be final; provided, however,
the applicant shall have the right to bring suit in a court of competent
jurisdiction to complain of the action of the City Commission only if the suit
is brought within 15 days from the date of the action of the City Commission.
(1998 Code, § 22-548)
§ 122.28  FORM AND CONTENTS; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   A permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be in
the form and contain such information as the City Commission may require;
provided that, each permit, whether expressly stated therein or not, shall be
issued on the condition that the permit holder will pay all damage done
directly or indirectly to any city street, alley or way or any other public or
private property.
   (B)   Before issuance of the permit, the applicant shall be required in
writing to agree to the following.
      (1)   After moving, the applicant shall bring the structure into
compliance with the applicable provisions of the Building Code adopted in this
chapter within 120 days.
      (2)   In the event of failure to bring the structure into compliance with
the Building Code adopted in this chapter as provided in division (B)(1) above
within the required period of time, the applicant shall remove the structure
from the property at his or her expense within 30 days following the expiration
of the period of time.
      (3)   In the event of failure to comply with the provisions of division
(B)(2) above, the city may remove the structure at the applicant’s expense.
   (C)   The Building Official shall prepare the necessary forms to implement
all provisions of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 22-549)
§ 122.29  TIME LIMIT.
   The application for a permit to move a building on, over or across city
streets, alleys or railroads shall include a statement of the time required for
the movement. The granting of a moving permit shall be predicated upon this
length of time, and movement shall be in conformance with the stated time,
subject to acts of God, disaster or civil disturbance.
(1998 Code, § 22-550)
§ 122.30  TRANSFER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person securing a permit under the provisions
of this subchapter to lend, rent or transfer the permit, or for any other
person to make use of the permit.
(1998 Code, § 22-551)  Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Abandoned refrigerators or air-tight containers
   
130.02   Giving false name or address to police officer or hospital official
   
130.03   Glue sniffing; sale of glue to persons under 18 years of age
   
130.04   Throwing articles from windows or vehicles
   
130.05   Climbing towers, poles or similar structures
   
130.06   Uncovered wells or excavations
   
130.07   Solicitation to purchase or acquire controlled substance, dangerous
drug or other prohibited substance
   
130.08   Intruding on premises
   
130.09   Carrying firearm on premises owned by city
   
130.10   Regulation of sex offender residency
Curfew Hours for Minors
   
130.25   Definitions
   
130.26   Offenses
   
130.27   Defenses
   
130.28   Enforcement
   
130.29   Review of juvenile curfew ordinance
 
   
130.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01  ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS OR AIR-TIGHT CONTAINERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to remain
outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any warehouse
or storage room or any unoccupied or abandoned dwelling, building or other
structure, under such circumstances as to be accessible to children, any
icebox, refrigerator or other air-tight or semi-air-tight container which has a
capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more and an opening of 50 square
inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with a latch or other
fastening device capable of securing the door or lid shut.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon an icebox without first
removing the locks or doors of the icebox in such a way as to prevent the doors
from being closed and locked.
(1998 Code, § 78-1)  Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see Tex. Health and Safety Code §§ 756.011 through
756.013
§ 130.02  GIVING FALSE NAME OR ADDRESS TO POLICE OFFICER OR HOSPITAL OFFICIAL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, when giving a written promise to
appear or given a written notice by any police officer to appear before the
Municipal Court, to answer for an offense against any law of the state,
sections of this code or ordinances of the city to give an assumed or
fictitious name or a false place of residence or address, or any other than his
or her true name and the true place of his or her residence or address, upon
the request of the officer.
(1998 Code, § 78-2)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person when receiving inpatient or
outpatient aid or services at the hospital or whenever otherwise being treated
or being under the care or custody of any person while in the hospital to give
an assumed or fictitious name or a false place of residence or address, or any
other than his or her true name and the true place of his or her residence or
address, to anyone requesting the information.
(1998 Code, § 78-3)
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03  GLUE SNIFFING; SALE OF GLUE TO PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE.
   (A)   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this section, no person
shall sell, offer for sale, deliver or give to any individual under the age of
18 years any glue or cement commonly known as airplane glue, plastic cement,
household cement, cement or any other similar substance if the glue, cement or
similar substance contains one or more of the following volatile solvents:
      (1)   Toluol;
      (2)   Hexane;
      (3)   Trichlorethylene;
      (4)   Acetone;
      (5)   Toluene;
      (6)   Ethyl acetate;
      (7)   Methyl ethyl ketone;
      (8)   Trichloroethane;
      (9)   Isopropanol;
      (10)   Methyl isobutyl ketone;
      (11)   Methyl cellosolve acetate; and/or
      (12)   Cyclohexanone.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) above shall not apply when the glue,
cement or similar substance is sold, delivered or given simultaneously with and
as a part of a kit used for the construction of model airplanes, model boats,
model automobiles, model trains or other similar models.
   (C)   No person shall smell, sniff or inhale any glue, cement or similar
substance containing one or more of the volatile solvents named in division (A)
above for the purpose of becoming intoxicated or in a manner that intoxication
results.
(1998 Code, § 78-4)  Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04  THROWING ARTICLES FROM WINDOWS OR VEHICLES.
   Any person who shall, within the city, throw or cause to be thrown any water
or other liquid or any other article from the upper story of any house or
building, or from any vehicle upon any street, alley or sidewalk, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1998 Code, § 78-6)  Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.05  CLIMBING TOWERS, POLES OR SIMILAR STRUCTURES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, not employed to do so, to climb or
ascend any water tower, windmill tower, telephone, telegraph, electric light or
any other publicly or privately owned pole in the city.
(1998 Code, § 78-7)  Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.06  UNCOVERED WELLS OR EXCAVATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any well, cistern or other
excavation on premises owned or occupied by him or her to remain open or
uncovered to the danger of others.
(1998 Code, § 78-8)  Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.07  SOLICITATION TO PURCHASE OR ACQUIRE CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE, DANGEROUS
DRUG OR OTHER PROHIBITED SUBSTANCE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. The meaning ascribed to it by Tex. Health and
Safety Code § 481.002(5), or any amendments thereto.
      CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOGUE. The meaning ascribed to it by Tex. Health
and Safety Code § 481.002(6), or any amendment thereto.
      DANGEROUS DRUG. The meaning ascribed to it by Tex. Health and Safety Code
§ 483.001(2), or any amendment thereto.
      PROHIBITED SUBSTANCE. A controlled substance, controlled substance
analogue, dangerous drug, volatile chemical or any combination thereof.
      VOLATILE CHEMICAL. Any of the chemicals, or an isomer of any of the
chemicals, as defined by state law.
   (B)   A person commits an offense with intent to acquire a prohibited
substance if he or she requests, commands or attempts to induce another to
sell, donate or otherwise transfer or deliver a prohibited substance to the
person.
   (C)   A person may not be convicted under this section on the uncorroborated
testimony of the person allegedly solicited unless the solicitation is made
under circumstances corroborative of both the solicitation itself and the
actor’s intent that the other person act on the solicitation.
   (D)   It is no defense to prosecution under this section that:
      (1)   No monetary or other consideration was tendered to the person
solicited; and/or
      (2)   The person solicited was unable or unwilling to transfer or deliver
a prohibited substance.
   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution under this section
that:
      (1)   The solicitation is made in furtherance of a transaction which
would not constitute a violation of any applicable law; and/or
      (2)   The solicitation is made by a peace officer or federal law
enforcement officer in the lawful discharge of his or her duties or by a law
enforcement agent acting in the lawful discharge of an official duty.
(1998 Code, § 78-9)  Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.08  INTRUDING ON PREMISES.
   It shall be unlawful for a person to enter or remain upon the premises of
another without the effective consent of the owner or occupier of the premises.
(1998 Code, § 78-10)  (Ord. 03-08, passed 3-5-2003)  Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.09  CARRYING FIREARM ON PREMISES OWNED BY CITY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CITY BUILDING. Any building or portion of a building owned, occupied,
leased or controlled by the city for city operations and/or activities. The
term does not include any public or private driveway, street, sidewalk or
walkway, parking lot, parking garage or other parking area.
      GUN, PISTOL, RIFLE and FIREARM. All percussion weapons, and also include
all air guns, air pistols, air rifles and all other firearms using air pressure
to propel a projectile.
      HANDGUN. Any firearm that is designed, made or adapted to be fired with
one hand. The term CONCEALED HANDGUN means a handgun, the presence of which is
not openly discernible to the ordinary observation of a reasonable person.
   (B)   Firearms prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a
certified peace officer, to carry a firearm in any city building or in any city
park, regardless of whether or not the person is duly licensed by the state to
carry a concealed handgun.
   (C)   Exceptions. This section shall not be construed to prohibit any
officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his or her
duty, or to prohibit any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully
defending person or property.
(1998 Code, § 78-81)  (Ord. 95-21, passed 12-6-1995)  Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.10  REGULATION OF SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY.
   (A)   Finding and intent.
      (1)   The foregoing recitals are hereby found to be true and correct and
are hereby adopted by the City Commission and made a part hereof for all
purposes as findings of fact.
      (2)   Further, the City Commission finds that sex offenders that use
physical violence and who are convicted of preying on children are sexual
predators who present an extreme threat to the health, safety and welfare of
children.
      (3)   Sex offenders are likely to use physical violence, to repeat an
offense, have many more victims that are ever reported, are prosecuted for only
a fraction of their actual sexual offenses, and children not only lack the
ability to protect themselves, but additional measures should be taken to keep
known sex offenders from having access to children in areas where children
generally feel safe.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      PERMANENT RESIDENCE. A place where the person abides, lodges or resides
for 14 or more consecutive days.
      TEMPORARY RESIDENCE. A place where the person abides, lodges or resides
for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year, and
which is not the person’s permanent address, or a place where the person
routinely abides, resides or lodges for a period of four or more consecutive or
non-consecutive days in any month, and which is not the person’s permanent
residence.
   (C)   Sex offender residency prohibition; penalty; and exceptions.
      (1)   If a person is required to register on the Department of Public
Safety’s sex offender database because of a violation involving a victim who
was less than 17 years of age, it is unlawful for that person to establish a
permanent residence or temporary residence within 2,500 feet of any premises
where children commonly gather, including a playground, school, day care
facility, video arcade facility, public or private youth center, public
swimming pool, or public park, as those terms are defined in Tex. Health and
Safety Code Art. 481.134. It shall be prima facie evidence that this section
applies to such person if the person’s record appears on the database and the
database indicates that the victim was less than 17 years of age.
      (2)   For the purpose of determining the minimum distance separation, the
requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer
property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest property
line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein, or in
the case of multiple residences on one property, measuring from the nearest
wall of the building or structure occupied or the parking/driveway, whichever
is closer to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly
gather, as described herein.
      (3)   It is unlawful to stop, sit, park, stand or loiter for any period
of time exceeding the amount of time reasonably necessary to engage in
legitimate activity within 2,500 feet of such facilities and locations as
designated in this section.
      (4)   (a)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to modify or
reduce the state’s Child Safety Zone, being Tex. Gov’t Code § 508.187.
         (b)   A person, as described in division (C)(1) above, residing within
2,500 feet of those places where children commonly gather does not commit a
violation of this section if any of the following apply:
            1.   The person established the permanent or temporary residence
and has complied with all the sex offender registration laws of the state,
prior to the date of the adoption of this section; and has not established
another permanent or temporary residence at any time afterwards;
            2.   The person was a minor when he or she committed the offense
and was not convicted as an adult;
            3.   The person is a minor;
            4.   The premises where children commonly gather, as specified
herein, within 2,500 feet of the person’s permanent or temporary residence, was
opened after the person established the permanent or temporary residence and
complied with all sex offender registration laws of the state; and/or
            5.   The person proves that the information on the database is
incorrect and that, if corrected, this chapter would not apply to the person.
   (D)   Property owners prohibited from renting real property to sex
offenders. It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure or part thereof,
manufactured home, trailer or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will
be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person
prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence
pursuant to the terms of this chapter, if such place, structure or part
thereof, manufactured home, trailer or other conveyance is located within 2,500
feet, as defined in division (C)(2) above, of any premises where children
commonly gather, including a playground, school, day care facility, video
arcade facility, public or private youth center, or public swimming pool, as
those terms are defined in Tex. Health and Safety Code Art. 481.134.
(1998 Code, § 78-86)  (Ord. 07-10, passed 2-21-2007; Ord. 07-12, passed 3-7-
2007; Ord. 16-02, passed 2-17-2016)  Penalty, see §
130.99
CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 10-13, adopted 5-5-2010, included provisions which stated “That the
curfew regulations set out in Chapter 78, ‘Offenses and Miscellaneous
Provision’, Division 2, ‘Curfew for Minors’, of the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Texas City, are hereby renewed and continued in accordance with the
requirements of law”. Chapter 78 of the 1998 code has since been renumbered
herein.
§ 130.25  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CURFEW HOURS.
      (1)   9:00 a.m. until 2:30 p.m. on any school day; and
      (2)   11:30 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday,
Friday or Saturday until 5:00 a.m. of the following day.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a
fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business operated for a profit to which the
public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or
entertainment.
   GUARDIAN.
      (1)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian, managing
conservator or possessory conservator of the person of a minor; and
      (2)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
   MINOR. Any person under 17 years of age, or where disabilities have not been
removed by law as provided in §
130.27(A)(9) of this chapter.
   OPERATOR. Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
   PARENT. A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of a
minor, or a person at least 21 years of age who is authorized by the parent or
guardian of a minor to have the care and custody of such minor.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Texas City Police Department.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and shall include, but not be limited to, streets, highways
and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, restaurants, theaters, game rooms, shops, shopping
centers or any other place that offers for sale services or merchandise.
   REMAIN. To:
      (1)   Linger or stay; or
      (2)   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer
or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
(1998 Code, § 78-51)  (Ord. 94-27, passed 12-21-1994; Ord. 95-23, passed 12-20-
1995; Ord. 98-21, passed 6-17-1998; Ord. 07-35, passed 9-19-2007)
§ 130.26  OFFENSES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any minor to knowingly remain, walk, run or
stand, or operate or ride in any motor vehicle or on any bicycle, in or upon
any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during
curfew hours.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the parent or guardian of a minor to
knowingly permit or, by insufficient control, allow a minor to remain in or
upon any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city
during curfew hours.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or any employee of an
establishment to knowingly allow a minor to remain upon the premises of an
establishment during curfew hours.
(1998 Code, § 78-52)  (Ord. 94-27, passed 12-21-1994; Ord. 98-21, passed 6-17-
1998; Ord. 07-35, passed 9-19-2007)  Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.27  DEFENSES.
   (A)   It is a defense to prosecution under §
130.26(A) of this chapter that the minor was:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence if the neighbor did
not complain to the Police Department about the minor’s presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the
right of assembly; and/or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with Tex. Family Code §§ 31.01 et seq.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under §
130.26(C) of this chapter that the owner, operator or employee of an
establishment promptly notified the Police Department that a minor was present
on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and the minor refused
to leave.
   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under §
130.26(A) of this chapter that the minor had been directed by his or her parent
or guardian to engage in a specific activity or to carry out expressed
instructions, during the time that the minor is actually engaged in fulfilling
those directions or responsibilities.
(1998 Code, § 78-53)  (Ord. 94-27, passed 12-21-1994; Ord. 98-21, passed 6-17-
1998; Ord. 07-35, passed 9-19-2007)
§ 130.28  ENFORCEMENT.
   Before taking any enforcement action under this subchapter, a police officer
shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place.
The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this subchapter
unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that,
based on any response and other circumstances, no defense under §
130.27 of this chapter is present.
(1998 Code, § 78-54)  (Ord. 94-27, passed 12-21-1994; Ord. 98-21, passed 6-17-
1998; Ord. 07-35, passed 9-19-2007)
§ 130.29  REVIEW OF JUVENILE CURFEW ORDINANCE.
   Before the third anniversary of the date of adoption of this subchapter, and
every third year thereafter, the City Commission shall:
   (A)   Review the ordinance’s effects on the community and on problems the
ordinance was intended to remedy;
   (B)   Conduct a public hearing on the need to continue the ordinance; and
   (C)   Abolish, continue or modify the ordinance.
(1998 Code, § 78-57)  (Ord. 07-35, passed 9-19-2007)
§ 130.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   A violation of §
130.01 shall be subject to the following:
      (1)   A person commits an offense if he or she violates Tex. Health and
Safety Code, § 756.012
      (2)   An offense under this §
130.01 is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $5 or more than
$200.
      (3)   Each day of continuing violation constitutes a separate offense.
   (C)   Violation of §
130.07 of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable, upon
conviction, by a fine of not less than $100, and not more than $2,000. However,
any conduct prescribed under §
130.07 of this chapter which also constitutes an offense under state law shall
not be prosecuted under this section, but shall be prosecuted pursuant to and
punishable as provided by the applicable state law. An offense under §
130.07 of this chapter is not a lesser included offense under Tex. Health and
Safety Code §§ 481.002(6), 483.001(2) or 501.001 et seq.
(1998 Code, § 78-9)
   (D)   A violation of §
130.08 of this chapter shall be a Class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
(1998 Code, § 78-10)
   (E)   Any person violating any provision of §
130.09 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,000.
(1998 Code, § 78-81)
   (F)   (1)   Any person violating a provision of §
130.10(C) of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalties
set forth in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(1998 Code, § 78-81)
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation violating a provision of §
130.10(D) of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalties
set forth in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(1998 Code, § 78-86)
   (G)   (1)   A person who violates a provision of §§
130.25 through
130.29 of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of
a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Each
offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
      (2)   When required by Tex. Family Code § 51.08, as amended, the
Municipal Court shall waive original jurisdiction over a minor who violates §
130.26(A) of this chapter and shall refer the minor to Juvenile Court.
(1998 Code, § 78-55)
(Ord. 94-27, passed 12-21-1994; Ord. 95-21, passed 12-6-1995; Ord. 98-21,
passed 6-17-1998; Ord. 03-08, passed 3-5-2003; Ord. 07-10, passed 2-21-2007;
Ord. 07-12, passed 3-7-2007; Ord. 07-35, passed 9-19-2007)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   ELECTRICITY
      
152.   GAS
      
153.   MECHANICAL REGULATIONS
      
154.   PLUMBING
      
155.   SIGNS
      
156.   MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS
      
157.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
158.   STORM WATER
      
159.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
160.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Fire limits
   
150.002   Water conservation and drought contingency plan
Building and Standards Commission
   
150.020   Quasi-judicial enforcement of health and safety ordinances
   
150.021   Presumption of notice
   
150.022   Creation of Building and Standards Commission
   
150.023   Proceedings of the Commission
   
150.024   Notice
   
150.025   Functions
   
150.026   Vote
   
150.027   Judicial review
   
150.028   Lien; abstract
   
150.029   Commission panel decision final
   
150.030   Municipal Court proceeding not affected
   
150.031   Civil remedies not affected
   
150.032   Additional authority regarding substandard buildings
   
150.033   Minimum standards substandard buildings
   
150.034   Enforcement procedures
   
150.035   Hearing before the Building and Standards Commission
   
150.036   Additional authority to secure
   
150.037   Occupancy of dangerous buildings
Building Code
   
150.050   International Building Code adopted; conflicting regulations
   
150.051   Amendments to International Building Code
   
150.052   Contractor’s bond required
Other Codes Adopted
   
150.065   International Amusement Device Code adopted; conflicting regulations
   
150.066   International Property Maintenance Code; amendments
   
150.067   International Energy Conservation Code adopted; conflicting
regulations
   
150.068   Technical Code; exemptions; inspections
   
150.069   International Residential Code; amendments
   
150.070   International Existing Building Code adopted; conflicting regulations
   
150.071   International Housing Code; conflicting regulations; amendments
 
   
150.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001  FIRE LIMITS.
   The fire limits or zones of the city shall be as shown and indicated on the
official map of the fire zones on file in the office of the Building Official.
(1998 Code, § 22-1)
§ 150.002  WATER CONSERVATION AND DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN.
   The City Commission hereby finds it in the best interest of the city to
adopt the Water Conservation and Drought Contingency Plan - August 2009 and the
same is hereby, adopted as the official policy of the city. A copy of the Water
Contingency Drought Contingency Plan - August 2009 shall remain on file in the
office of the City Secretary.
(1998 Code, § 50-3)  (Ord. 05-16, passed 5-18-2005; Ord. 13-23, passed 8-7-
2013)  Penalty, see §
150.999
BUILDING AND STANDARDS COMMISSION
§ 150.020  QUASI-JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT OF THE HEALTH AND SAFETY ORDINANCES.
   (A)   The city hereby implements Tex. Local Gov’t Code Ch. 54, Subch. C.
   (B)   This subchapter shall apply only to ordinances:
      (1)   For the preservation of public safety, relating to the materials or
methods used to construct a building or improvement, including the foundation,
structural elements, electrical wiring or apparatus, plumbing and fixtures,
entrances or exits;
      (2)   Relating to the fire safety of a building or improvement, including
provisions relating to materials, types of construction or design, warning
devices, sprinklers or other fire suppression devices, availability of water
supply for extinguishing fires or location, design or width of entrances or
exits;
      (3)   Relating to dangerously damaged or deteriorated buildings or
improvements;
      (4)   Relating to conditions caused by accumulations of refuse,
vegetation or other matter that creates breeding and living places for insects
and rodents; and/or
      (5)   Relating to a Building Code or to the condition, use or appearance
of property in a municipality.
(1998 Code, § 22-301)  (Ord. 04-35, passed 9-1-2004)
§ 150.021  PRESUMPTION OF NOTICE.
   (A)   (1)   Where the city is required by statute, rule, regulation or
ordinance to send a notice to an owner of real property for the purpose of
enforcing a municipal ordinance, the city may include the following statement
in the notice:
         “According to the real property records of Galveston County, you own
the real property described in this notice. If you no longer own the property,
you must execute an affidavit stating that you no longer own the property and
stating the name and last known address of the person who acquired the property
from you. The affidavit must be delivered in person or by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to this office not later than the 20th day after the
date you received this notice. If you do not send the affidavit, it will be
presumed that you own the property described in this notice, even if you do
not.”
      (2)   The notice must be delivered in person or by certified mail, return
receipt requested.
   (B)   If the city sends a notice to the owner of the property to which the
notice relates, as shown on or after the tenth day before the date notice is
sent by the real property records of the county, and the record owner no longer
owns the property, the record owner shall execute an affidavit provided with
the notice by the city, stating:
      (1)   The record owner no longer owns the property; and
      (2)   The name and last known address of the person who acquired the
property from the record owner.
   (C)   The record owner shall deliver the affidavit in person or by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the city not later than the twentieth day
after the date the record owner receives the notice.
   (D)   If the city receives an affidavit under division (C) above, the city
shall send the appropriate notice to the person named in the affidavit as
having acquired the property. A notice sent under this division (D) must
include the statement authorized by division (A) above.
   (E)   If the city receives an affidavit under division (C) above, it shall:
      (1)   Maintain the affidavit on file for at least two years after the
date the entity receives the affidavit; and
      (2)   Deliver a copy of the affidavit to the chief appraiser of the
County Central Appraisal District.
   (F)   The city is considered to have provided notice to a property owner if
the city complies with the statute, rule, regulation or ordinance under which
the notice is sent and if it:
      (1)   Complies with division (A) above and does not have an affidavit
from the record owner; or
      (2)   Complies with division (D) above and does not receive an affidavit
from the person to whom the notice was sent under division (D) above.
   (G)   If the city complies with this section and does not receive an
affidavit under division (C) above, the record owner is presumed to be the
owner of the property for all purposes to which the notice relates.
   (H)   For the purposes of this section, “real property” does not include a
mineral interest or royalty interest.
(1998 Code, § 22-302)  (Ord. 04-35, passed 9-1-2004)
§ 150.022  CREATION OF BUILDING AND STANDARDS COMMISSION.
   (A)   A Building and Standards Commission is hereby created to hear and
determine cases under this subchapter. The Commission shall be composed of the
five members of the Board of Adjustments, who shall be appointed by the City
Commission for terms of two years. A separate appointment to the Building and
Standards Commission is not required. The Commission shall be a board that is
separate and distinct from the Board of Adjustments; provided, however, that,
combined meetings and agendas shall be allowed, as permitted by law.
   (B)   The City Commission may remove a Commission member for cause on a
written charge. Before a decision regarding removal is made, the City
Commission must hold a public hearing on the matter if requested by the
Commission member subject to the removal action. Removal of a Commission member
shall mean the person is also removed as member of the Board of Adjustments.
   (C)   A vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term.
   (D)   The City Commission, by Charter or ordinance, may provide for the
appointment of eight or more alternate members of the Commission who shall
serve in the absence of one or more regular members when requested to do so by
the Mayor. The alternate members serve for the same period as the regular
members. A vacancy is filled in the same manner as a vacancy among the regular
members.
(1998 Code, § 22-303)  (Ord. 04-35, passed 9-1-2004)
§ 150.023  PROCEEDINGS OF THE COMMISSION.
   (A)   A majority of the members of the Commission must hear a case.
   (B)   A majority of the Commission shall adopt rules for the Commission in
accordance with any ordinances adopted pursuant to this subchapter. The rules
shall establish procedure for use in hearings, providing ample opportunity for
presentation of evidence and testimony by respondents or persons opposing
charges brought by the city or its Building Officials relating to alleged
violations of ordinances.
   (C)   The Director of Community Services, or designee, is designated as the
appropriate official to present all cases before the Commission.
   (D)   Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairperson of the
Commission, and at other times as determined by the Commission. All meetings of
the Commission shall be open to the public. The Chairperson of the Commission,
or in the Chairperson’s absence the acting Chairperson, may administer oaths
and compel the attendance of witnesses.
   (E)   The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote
of each member on each question or the fact that a member is absent or fails to
vote. The Commission shall also keep records of its examinations and other
official actions. The minutes and records shall be filed immediately in the
office of the City Secretary as public records.
(1998 Code, § 22-304)  (Ord. 04-35, passed 9-1-2004)
§ 150.024  NOTICE.
   (A)   Notice of all proceedings before the Commission must be given:
      (1)   By personal delivery or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the record owners of the affected property, and each holder of a
recorded lien against the affected property, as shown by the records in the
office of the County Clerk if the address of the lienholder can be ascertained
from the deed of trust establishing the lien and/or other applicable
instruments on file in the office of the County Clerk; and
      (2)   To all unknown owners, by posting a copy of the notice on the front
door of each improvement situated on the affected property or as close to the
front door as practicable.
   (B)   The notice must be posted and either personally delivered or mailed on
or before the tenth day before the date of the hearing before the Commission
panel and must state the date, time and place of the hearing. In addition, the
notice must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city on
one occasion on or before the tenth day before the date fixed for the hearing.
   (C)   The Commission may file notice of a proceeding before the Commission
in the official public records of real property of the county. The notice must
contain the name and address of the owner of the affected property if that
information can be determined from a reasonable search of the instruments on
file in the office of the County Clerk, a legal description of the affected
property and a description of the proceeding. The filing of the notice is
binding on subsequent grantees, lienholders or other transferees of an interest
in the property who acquire such interest after the filing of the notice and
constitutes notice of the proceeding on any subsequent recipient of any
interest in the property who acquires such interest after the filing of the
notice.
   (D)   The city must exercise due diligence to determine the identity and
address of a property owner or lienholder to whom the city is required to give
notice.
   (E)   The city exercises due diligence in determining the identity and
address of a property owner or lienholder when it searches the following
records:
      (1)   County real property records;
      (2)   Appraisal district records of the County Appraisal District;
      (3)   Records of the Secretary of State, if the property owner or
lienholder is a corporation, partnership or other business association;
      (4)   Assumed name records of the county;
      (5)   Tax records of the city; and
      (6)   Utility records of the city.
   (F)   When the city mails a notice in accordance with this section to a
property owner or lienholder and the United States Postal Service returns the
notice as “refused” or “unclaimed”, the validity of the notice is not affected
and the notice is considered delivered.
(1998 Code, § 22-305)  (Ord. 04-35, passed 9-1-2004)
§ 150.025  FUNCTIONS.
   A Commission panel may:
   (A)   Order the repair, within a fixed period, of buildings found to be in
violation of an ordinance;
   (B)   Declare a building substandard in accordance with the powers granted
by this subchapter;
   (C)   Order, in an appropriate case, the immediate removal of persons or
property found on private property, enter on private property to secure the
removal if it is determined that conditions exist on the property that
constitute a violation of an ordinance, and order action to be taken as
necessary to remedy, alleviate or remove any substandard building found to
exist;
   (D)   Issue orders or directives to any peace officer of the state,
including a sheriff or constable or the Chief of Police of the city, to enforce
and carry out the lawful orders or directives of the Commission panel;
   (E)   Determine the amount and duration of the civil penalty the city may
recover as provided by Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 54.017 and this subchapter;
   (F)   Act on the City Commission’s behalf in hearing and deciding cases
brought to determine substandard buildings and structures pursuant to Tex.
Local Gov’t Code Ch. 214; and
   (G)   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the City Commission
or by law.
(1998 Code, § 22-306)  (Ord. 04-35, passed 9-1-2004)
§ 150.026  VOTE.
   A majority vote of the members voting on a matter is necessary to take any
action under this subchapter and any ordinance adopted by the city in
accordance with this subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 22-308)  (Ord. 04-35, passed 9-1-2004)
§ 150.027  JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   (A)   (1)   Any owner, lienholder or mortgagee of record jointly or
severally aggrieved by any decision of a Commission may present a petition to a
district court, as provided by Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 54.039, setting forth
that the decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds
of the illegality.
      (2)   Costs may not be allowed against the Commission panel.
   (B)   If the decision of the Commission panel is affirmed or not
substantially reversed, but only modified, the District Court shall allow to
the city all attorney’s fees and other costs and expenses incurred by it and
shall enter a judgment for those items, which may be entered against the
property owners as well as all persons found to be in occupation of the
property subject to the proceedings before the Commission panel.
(1998 Code, § 22-309)  (Ord. 04-35, passed 9-1-2004)
§ 150.028  LIEN; ABSTRACT.
   (A)   An abstract of judgment shall be issued against all parties found to
be the owners of the subject property or in possession of that property.
   (B)   A lienholder does not have standing to bring a proceeding under Tex.
Local Gov’t Code § 54.039 on the ground that the lienholder was not notified of
the proceedings before the Commission panel or was unaware of the condition of
the property, unless the lienholder had first appeared before the Commission
panel and entered an appearance in opposition to the proceedings.
(1998 Code, § 22-310)  (Ord. 04-35, passed 9-1-2004)
§ 150.029  COMMISSION PANEL DECISION FINAL.
   If no appeals are taken from the decision of the Commission panel within the
required period, the decision of the Commission panel is, in all things, final
and binding.
(1998 Code, § 22-311)  (Ord. 04-35, passed 9-1-2004)
§ 150.030  MUNICIPAL COURT PROCEEDING NOT AFFECTED.
   This subchapter does not affect the ability of the city to proceed under the
jurisdiction of the Municipal Court.
(1998 Code, § 22-312)  (Ord. 04-35, passed 9-1-2004)
§ 150.031  CIVIL REMEDIES NOT AFFECTED.
   This subchapter does not affect the ability of the city to initiate a civil
action in District or County Court, including a suit for injunctive relief, for
the enforcement of an ordinance:
   (A)   For the preservation of public safety, relating to the materials or
methods used to construct a building or other structure or improvement,
including the foundation, structural elements, electrical wiring or apparatus,
plumbing and fixtures, entrances or exits;
   (B)   Relating to the preservation of public health or to the fire safety of
a building or other structure or improvement, including provisions relating to
materials, types of construction or design, interior configuration,
illumination, warning devices, sprinklers or other fire suppression devices,
availability of water supply for extinguishing fires or location, design or
width of entrances or exits;
   (C)   For zoning that provides for the use of land or classifies a parcel of
land according to the municipality’s district classification scheme;
   (D)   Establishing criteria for land subdivision or construction of
buildings, including provisions relating to street width and design, lot size,
building width or elevation, setback requirements or utility service
specifications or requirements;
   (E)   Implementing civil penalties under this subchapter for conduct
classified by statute as a Class C misdemeanor;
   (F)   Relating to dangerously damaged or deteriorated structures or
improvements;
   (G)   Relating to conditions caused by accumulations of refuse, vegetation
or other matter that creates breeding and living places for insects and
rodents;
   (H)   Relating to the interior configuration, design, illumination or
visibility of business premises exhibiting for viewing by customers while on
the premises live or mechanically or electronically displayed entertainment
intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification; or
   (I)   Relating to point source effluent limitations or the discharge of a
pollutant, other than from a non-point source, into a sewer system, including a
sanitary or storm water sewer system, owned or controlled by the municipality.
(1998 Code, § 22-313)  (Ord. 04-35, passed 9-1-2004)
§ 150.032  ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY REGARDING SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS.
   (A)   In addition to the powers and remedies provided for by the foregoing,
and without affecting the ability of the city to proceed under other provisions
of this subchapter, or by other law, the city implements Tex. Local Gov’t Code
Ch. 214 as additional authority concerning substandard structures.
   (B)   The City Commission grants the authority to the Building and Standards
Commission to act on its behalf in hearing cases and enforcing laws and
ordinances as provided by Tex. Local Gov’t Code Ch. 214.
(1998 Code, § 22-317)  (Ord. 04-35, passed 9-1-2004)
§ 150.033  MINIMUM STANDARDS SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS.
   As provided for by Tex. Local Gov’t Code Ch. 214, the city adopts the
following minimum standards for the continued use and occupancy of all
buildings, regardless of the date of their construction.
   (A)   “Substandard building” defined. For the purpose of this subchapter,
any dwelling, building or structure that has any or all of the conditions or
defects described in this section shall be deemed a SUBSTANDARD BUILDING:
      (1)   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members of
the building, dwelling or structure list, lean or buckle to such an extent that
a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the
middle one-third of the base;
      (2)   Whenever the building, dwelling or structure, exclusive of the
foundation, shows 33% or more damage or deterioration of its supporting
members, or 50% damage or deterioration of its non-supporting members,
enclosing or outside walls or coverings;
      (3)   Whenever the building, dwelling or structure has improperly
distributed loads upon the foundation or roofs or when the foundations or roofs
are overloaded or have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the
proposed use, the general public or possible occupants;
      (4)   Whenever the building, dwelling or structure has been so damaged by
fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated,
as to become an attractive nuisance to children, or a harbor for vagrants,
criminals or immoral persons, or as to enable persons to resort thereto for the
purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts;
      (5)   Whenever, for any reason, the building, dwelling or structure or
any portion thereof is manifestly unsafe and dangerous to the life, safety or
general health and welfare of possible occupants or the general public;
      (6)   Whenever the building, dwelling or structure intended to be used
for habitation, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage,
faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light and air (artificial or
natural) or inadequate sanitary facilities or otherwise, is determined by the
city’s designated Health Official to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation
or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease;
      (7)   Whenever the building, dwelling or structure has inadequate
facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or the door, aisle, passageway,
stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so
arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit for the purposes;
      (8)   Whenever any portion or appurtenance of the building, dwelling or
structure is likely to fail or to become detached or dislodged or to collapse
and thereby injure persons or damage property;
      (9)   Whenever the building, dwelling or structure or any portion
thereof, because of dilapidation, deterioration or decay; faulty construction;
the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for
the purposes of supporting such building; the deterioration, decay or
inadequacy of its foundation; or any other cause, is likely to partially or
completely collapse;
      (10)   Whenever the building, dwelling or structure has a floor, exterior
wall or roof with holes, cracks or loose, rotten, warped or protruding boards
therein so as not to give reasonable protection to any occupants or possible
occupants thereto from weather elements or danger of collapse;
      (11)   Whenever the building, dwelling or structure has interior walls or
ceilings with holes, cracks, loose plaster, defective materials or structural
deterioration to the extent that the building, dwelling or structure is
manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used or so as not to
give reasonable protection to any occupants of the building, dwelling or
structure from danger of collapse or fire;
      (12)   Whenever any building, dwelling or structure, because of
obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits,
lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas
connections or heating apparatus, or other causes, is determined by the Fire
Marshal or designee or other authorized representative to be a fire hazard; and
      (13)   Whenever any portion of the building, dwelling or structure
remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building, dwelling
or structure by natural causes or otherwise, so as to constitute such building,
dwelling or structure or portion thereof an attractive nuisance to children or
a hazard to the public or their property.
   (B)   Abatement required. The city requires the vacation, relocation of
occupants, securing, repair, removal or demolition of a building that is:
      (1)   Dilapidated, substandard or unfit for human habitation and a hazard
to the public health, safety and welfare;
      (2)   Regardless of its structural condition, unoccupied by its owners,
lessees or other invitees and is unsecured from unauthorized entry to the
extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons
as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children; or
      (3)   Boarded up, fenced or otherwise secured in any manner if:
         (a)   The building constitutes a danger to the public even though
secured from entry; or
         (b)   The means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent
unauthorized entry or use of the building in the manner described by division
(B)(2) above.
   (C)   Public nuisances. All buildings or portions thereof that are defined
in this section as substandard buildings are hereby declared to be public
nuisances and may also be abated in accordance with the nuisance abatement
provisions of the city code.
(1998 Code, § 22-318)  (Ord. 04-35, passed 9-1-2004)
§ 150.034  ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Inspections. The Fire Marshall or designee, Community Development
Director, Building Official, and other authorized representatives of the city,
individually or in concert, shall have the following authority:
      (1)   To inspect any building, dwelling or structure concerning which
complaints have been filed by any person to the effect that the building,
dwelling or structure is or may be a substandard building, except where limited
or prohibited by law; and
      (2)   To inspect any building, dwelling or structure reported by the Fire
Department, Police Department or any other administrative department of the
city as being a substandard building, except where limited or prohibited by
law.
   (B)   Administrative notification. If, upon inspection and investigation, it
is found that a building, dwelling or structure violates §
150.033(B)(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this chapter, the authorized official shall
issue a notice and order, which shall contain the following:
      (1)   The street address and legal description sufficient for
identification of the premises upon which the building is located;
      (2)   A statement that the official has found the building to be in
violation of §
150.033(B)(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this chapter, with a brief and concise
description of the conditions found to be in violation; and
      (3)   A statement of the action required to be taken as determined by the
official. If it has been determined that the structure must be repaired, the
order shall require that all required permits be secured therefor and the work
physically commenced within such time (not to exceed 60 days from the date of
the order) and completed within such time as the official shall determine is
reasonable under all of the circumstances. If it has been determined that the
building or structure must not be occupied, then the order shall require that
the building or structure must not be occupied and that the building or
structure remain unoccupied or vacant until such time as is determined by the
official. If it has been determined that the building or structure must be
demolished (if the building or structure cannot possibly be repaired), the
order shall require that the building continue in its vacated and unoccupied
state, that all required permits be secured, and that the demolition be
completed within such time as the official shall determine is reasonable.
   (C)   Reporting. The official shall report to the Building and Standards
Commission any non-compliance with the notice and order provided for in
division (B) above.
   (D)   Appearance. The official sending the notice and order shall appear at
all hearings conducted by the Building and Standards Commission and shall
testify as to the violating condition(s).
   (E)   Notice. The city shall place a notice on a dangerous building reading
substantially as follows:
“This building has been found to be dangerous. No person shall occupy this
building until such time as the same has been brought to standards in
accordance with the written request of the Building Official, Community
Development Director, Fire Marshal or designee, or other authorized
representative of the city. It is unlawful to remove this notice until such
requirements are complied with. This notice is to remain on this building until
it is repaired or demolished in accordance with the notice and order which has
been given the record owner.”
(1998 Code, § 22-319)  (Ord. 04-35, passed 9-1-2004)
§ 150.035  HEARING BEFORE THE BUILDING AND STANDARDS COMMISSION.
   The Building and Standards Commission, upon adoption of its own rules and
procedures, shall perform the following.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a report of the Building Official, Community
Development Director, Fire Marshal or designee, or other authorized
representatives of the city as provided for in §
150.034 of this chapter, written notice of a hearing is to be given by the
Commission to appear before the Commission on a date specified in the notice to
determine whether the building complies with the standards set out in this
subchapter.
   (B)   The Board shall hold a hearing and hear such testimony as the Building
Official, Community Development Director, Fire Marshal or designee, or other
representatives of the city and the owner, mortgagee, lessee or any other
person having an interest in the building, as shown by the deed records of the
County Clerk’s office and/or the tax rolls of the city, shall offer relative to
the determination of the question of whether or not the building or structure
in question is a dangerous building.
   (C)   A notice of a hearing sent to an owner, lienholder or mortgagee under
this section must include a statement that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee
will be required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that
may be required to comply with the ordinance and the time it will take to
reasonably perform the work.
   (D)   After the public hearing, if a building is found in violation of
standards set out in the subchapter, the Building and Standards Commission may
order that the building be vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished by
the owner within a reasonable time as provided by this section. The Building
and Standards Commission also may order that the occupants be relocated within
a reasonable time. If the owner does not take the ordered action within the
allotted time, the Building and Standards Commission shall make a diligent
effort to discover each mortgagee and lienholder having an interest in the
building or in the property on which the building is located. The Building and
Standards Commission shall personally deliver or send by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to each identified mortgagee and lienholder a notice
containing:
      (1)   An identification, which is not required to be a legal description,
of the building and the property on which it is located;
      (2)   A description of the violation of the city’s minimum standards that
is present at the building; and
      (3)   A statement that the city will vacate, secure, remove or demolish
the building or relocate the occupants of the building if the ordered action is
not taken within a reasonable time.
   (E)   As an alternative to the procedure prescribed by division (D) above,
the Building and Standards Commission may make a diligent effort to discover
each mortgagee and lienholder before conducting the public hearing and may give
them a notice of and an opportunity to comment at the hearing. In addition, the
Building and Standards Commission may file notice of the hearing in the
official public records of real property in the county in which the property is
located. The notice must contain the name and address of the owner of the
affected property if that information can be determined, a legal description of
the affected property and a description of the hearing. The filing of the
notice is binding on subsequent grantees, lienholders or other transferees of
an interest in the property who acquire such interest after the filing of the
notice, and constitutes notice of the hearing on any subsequent recipient of
any interest in the property who acquires such interest after the filing of the
notice. If the city chooses to operate under this division (E), the order
issued by the Building and Standards Commission may specify a reasonable time
as provided by this section for the building to be vacated, secured, repaired,
removed or demolished by the owner or for the occupants to be relocated by the
owner and an additional reasonable time as provided by this section for the
ordered action to be taken by any of the mortgagees or lienholders in the event
the owner fails to comply with the order within the time provided for action by
the owner. Under this division (E), the Building and Standards Commission is
not required to furnish any notice to a mortgagee or lienholder other than a
copy of the order in the event the owner fails to timely take the ordered
action.
   (F)   Within ten days after the date that the order is issued, the Building
and Standards Commission shall:
      (1)   File a copy of the order in the office of the City Secretary; and
      (2)   Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice
containing:
         (a)   The street address or legal description of the property;
         (b)   The date of the hearing;
         (c)   A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and
         (d)   Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be
obtained.
   (G)   After the hearing, the Building and Standards Commission shall
promptly mail by certified mail, return receipt requested, or personally
deliver a copy of the order to the owner of the building and to any lienholder
or mortgagee of the building. The Building and Standards Commission shall use
its best efforts to determine the identity and address of any owner, lienholder
or mortgagee of the building.
   (H)   In conducting a hearing authorized under this section, the Building
and Standards Commission shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee of
the building to within 30 days:
      (1)   Secure the building from unauthorized entry; or
      (2)   Repair, remove or demolish the building, unless the owner or
lienholder establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be
performed within 30 days.
   (I)   If the Building and Standards Commission allows the owner, lienholder
or mortgagee more than 30 days to repair, remove or demolish the building, the
Building and Standards Commission shall establish specific time schedules for
the commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner,
lienholder or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable manner from
unauthorized entry while the work is being performed, as determined by the
Hearing Official.
   (J)   The Building and Standards Commission may not allow the owner,
lienholder or mortgagee more than 90 days to repair, remove or demolish the
building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless the
owner, lienholder or mortgagee:
      (1)   Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the
hearing; and
      (2)   Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be
completed within 90 days because of the scope and complexity of the work.
   (K)   If the Building and Standards Commission allows the owner, lienholder
or mortgagee more than 90 days to complete any part of the work required to
repair, remove or demolish the building, the Building and Standards Commission
shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to regularly submit progress
reports to the city to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules
established for commencement and performance of the work. The order may require
that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee appear before the Hearing Official or
the Hearing Official’s designee to demonstrate compliance with the time
schedules. If the owner, lienholder or mortgagee owns property, including
structures or improvements on property, within the municipal boundaries that
exceeds $100,000 in total value, the Building and Standards Commission may
require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to post a cash or surety bond in an
amount adequate to cover the cost of repairing, removing or demolishing a
building under this division (K). In lieu of a bond, the Building and Standards
Commission may require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to provide a letter
of credit from a financial institution or a guaranty from a third party
approved by the Building and Standards Commission. The bond must be posted, or
the letter of credit or third party guaranty provided, not later than the
thirtieth day after the date the Building and Standards Commission issues the
order.
   (L)   In a public hearing to determine whether a building complies with the
standards set out in this subchapter, the owner, lienholder or mortgagee has
the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required
to comply with the ordinance and the time it will take to reasonably perform
the work.
   (M)   If the building is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed or
demolished, or the occupants are not relocated within the allotted time, the
city may vacate, secure, remove or demolish the building or relocate the
occupants at its own expense. This division (M) does not limit the ability of
the city to collect on a bond or other financial guaranty that may be required
by division (K) above.
   (N)   If a city incurs expenses under division (M) above, the city may
assess the expenses on, and the city has a lien against, unless it is a
homestead as protected by the State Constitution, the property on which the
building was located. The lien is extinguished if the property owner or another
person having an interest in the legal title to the property reimburses the
city for the expenses. The lien arises and attaches to the property at the time
the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the County
Clerk in the county in which the property is located. The notice must contain
the name and address of the owner if that information can be determined with a
reasonable effort, a legal description of the real property on which the
building was located, the amount of expenses incurred by the city and the
balance due.
   (O)   If the notice is given and the opportunity to relocate the tenants of
the building or to repair, remove or demolish the building is afforded to each
mortgagee and lienholder as authorized by divisions (D), (E) or (G) above, the
lien is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens.
   (P)   The Building and Standards Commission satisfies the requirements of
this section to make a diligent effort, to use its best efforts or to make a
reasonable effort to determine the identity and address of an owner, a
lienholder or a mortgagee if the municipality searches the following records:
      (1)   County real property records;
      (2)   County Appraisal District records;
      (3)   Records of the Secretary of State;
      (4)   Assumed name records of the county;
      (5)   City tax records; and
      (6)   City utility records.
   (Q)   When the Building and Standards Commission mails a notice in
accordance with this section to a property owner, lienholder or mortgagee and
the United States Postal Service returns the notice as “refused” or
“unclaimed”, the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is
considered delivered.
   (R)   Administrative tasks such as mailing of notices, efforts to determine
identities and publication of hearings may be performed on behalf of the
Building and Standards Commission by authorized officials of the city.
(1998 Code, § 22-320)  (Ord. 04-35, passed 9-1-2004)
§ 150.036  ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY TO SECURE.
   (A)   The city may secure a building that the City Building Official
determines:
      (1)   Violates the minimum standards; and
      (2)   Is unoccupied or is occupied only by persons who do not have a
right of possession to the building.
   (B)   Before the eleventh day after the date the building is secured, the
Building Official shall give notice to the owner by:
      (1)   Personally serving the owner with written notice;
      (2)   Depositing the notice in the United States mail addressed to the
owner at the owner’s post office address;
      (3)   Publishing the notice at least twice within a ten-day period in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county, if personal service cannot be
obtained and the owner’s post office address is unknown; or
      (4)   Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building if
personal service cannot be obtained and the owner’s post office address is
unknown.
   (C)   The notice must contain:
      (1)   An identification, which is not required to be a legal description,
of the building and the property on which it is located;
      (2)   A description of the violation of the minimum standards that is
present at the building;
      (3)   A statement that the city will secure or has secured, as the case
may be, the building; and
      (4)   An explanation of the owner’s entitlement to request a hearing
about any matter relating to the city’s securing of the building.
   (D)   The city shall conduct a hearing at which the owner may testify or
present witnesses or written information about any matter relating to the
city’s securing of the building if, within 30 days after the date the city
secures the building, the owner files with the Building Official a written
request for the hearing. The city shall conduct the hearing within 20 days
after the date the request is filed.
   (E)   The city has the same authority to assess expenses under this section
as it has to assess expenses under §
150.035(N) of this chapter. A lien is created under this section in the same
manner that a lien is created under §
150.035(N) of this chapter and is subject to the same conditions as a lien
created under that section.
(1998 Code, § 22-321)  (Ord. 04-35, passed 9-1-2004)
§ 150.037  OCCUPANCY OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessor, lessee or agent or
representative of the owner, lessor or lessee to allow or authorize any person
to rent, occupy or use any building, dwelling or structure as defined in this
subchapter, when notice has been given that such building, dwelling or
structure is substandard under the terms of this subchapter, until such time as
the owner, lessor or lessee has complied with the requirements specified in the
notice and the order of the Building and Standards Commission or the order and
notice are dismissed on appeal to the District Court as provided by law.
(1998 Code, § 22-325)  (Ord. 04-35, passed 9-1-2004)  Penalty, see §
150.999
BUILDING CODE
§ 150.050  INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED; CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted for and by the city a building code known as
the International Building Code, 2015 edition, with appendices and amendments
thereto, passed and recommended by the International Code Council, Inc., which
code is published in book form and which is referred to, incorporated in this
section and made a part of this section for all purposes. A copy of such code
is filed of record in the office of the City Secretary.
   (B)   In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the Building
Code and the provisions of this code of ordinances, state law or city
ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this code of ordinances,
state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be
controlling.
(1998 Code, § 22-31)  (Ord. 93-52, passed 9-22-1993; Ord. 93-57, passed 9-22-
1993; Ord. 98-1, passed 1-7-1998; Ord. 01-65, passed 1-17-2002; Ord. 04-15,
passed 5-19-2004; Ord. 07-48, passed 12-19-2007; Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 150.051  AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.
   The code adopted by this subchapter is amended as provided in this section.
   (A)   Section 104.4, Issuing Permits, is amended by adding subsection 5., to
read as follows:
      104.4.5. No permit shall be issued for a construction project in which a
trench excavation will exceed a depth of five feet, unless the applicant shall
indemnify and hold harmless the city from all claims or causes of actions
arising because of property damage, injury or death allegedly sustained by any
person as a result of such excavation.
   (B)   Section 1803.1, Scope, is amended to read as follows:
      1803.1   Scope
      (a)   When excavating for buildings or excavations accessory thereto,
such excavations shall be properly assured against any danger to life and
property. Permanent excavations shall have retaining walls of sufficient
strength, made of steel, masonry or reinforced concrete, to retain embankments,
together with any surcharged loads. Excavations for any purpose shall not
extend within one foot of the angle of repose or natural slope of the soil
under any footing or foundation, unless such footing or foundation is first
properly underpinned or protected against settlement.
      (b)   Within the city limits and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, on
construction projects in which trench excavation will exceed a depth of five
feet, the bid documents and the contract must include detailed plans and
specifications for trench safety systems that meet Occupational Safety and
Health Administration standards, and these plans and specifications must
include a pay item for such safety systems; provided, this section does not
apply to a contract entered into by a person subject to the safety standards
adopted under Vernon’s Ann. Civ. St. art. 6053-1, and the administrative
penalty provisions of Vernon’s Ann. Civ. St. art. 6053-2.
(1998 Code, § 22-32) (Ord. 93-57, passed 9-22-1993; Ord. 98-1, passed 1-7-1998;
Ord. 01-65, passed 1-17-2002; Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 150.052  CONTRACTOR’S BOND REQUIRED.
   It shall be the duty of every contractor of builder, who shall make
contracts for the erection or construction or repair of buildings for which a
permit is required, and every contractor or builder making such contracts and
subletting same, or any part thereof, to provide liability insurance (minimum
$300,000) with the city as certificate holder or to give good and sufficient
bond in the sum of $5,000 to be approved by the City Attorney, conditioned on
conformance to the building regulations of the city code and other ordinances
or laws of an applicable governing body in reference to buildings.
(1998 Code, § 22-33)  (Ord. 04-15, passed 5-19-2004; Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-
2015)
OTHER CODES ADOPTED
§ 150.065  INTERNATIONAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE CODE ADOPTED; CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted for and by the city an amusement code known as
the International Amusement Device Code, 2015 edition, with appendices and
amendments thereto, passed and recommended by the International Code Council,
which code is published in book form and which is referred to, incorporated in
this section and made a part of this section for all purposes. A copy of such
code is filed of record in the office of the City Secretary.
   (B)   In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the amusement
device code and the provisions of this code of ordinances, state law or city
ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this code of ordinances,
state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be
controlling.
(1998 Code, § 22-61)  (Ord. 93-52, passed 9-22-1993; Ord. 93-60, passed 9-22-
1993; Ord. 98-1, passed 1-7-1998; Ord. 01-65, passed 1-17-2002; Ord. 07-48,
passed 12-19-2007; Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 150.066  INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Adoption.
      (1)   There is hereby adopted for and by the city a code known as the
International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, with appendices and
amendments thereto, passed and recommended by the International Code Council,
Inc., which code is published in book form and which is referred to,
incorporated in this section and made a part of this section for all purposes.
A copy of such code is filed of record in the office of the City Secretary.
Said code is adopted as the code for regulating the property maintenance
requirements in the city.
      (2)   The Building Official shall adopt procedures for the administration
and enforcement of this code.
(1998 Code, § 22-501)
   (B)   Amendments to International Property Maintenance Code. The Code
adopted by this section is amended as set out in this section: Section 111,
Means of Appeal, is amended to read as follows:
      111.2 Membership of Board. The board of appeals shall be the city’s Board
of Adjustment as established and adopted by the Code of Ordinances of the city.
(1998 Code, § 22-502)
(Ord. 04-15, passed 5-19-2004; Ord. 07-48, passed 12-19-2007; Ord. 15-42,
passed 12-16-2015)
§ 150.067  INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE ADOPTED; CONFLICTING
REGULATIONS.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted for and by the city a code concerning energy
conservation in all residential, commercial and industrial construction known
as the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 edition, with appendices
and amendments thereto, passed and recommended by the International Code
Council, Inc., which code is published in book form and which is referred to,
incorporated in this section and made a part of this section for all purposes.
A copy of such code is filed of record in the office of the City Secretary.
Said code is adopted as the code for regulating the design, construction,
quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location,
relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of, the building
envelope, mechanical, lighting and power systems in the city.
   (B)   The Building Official shall adopt procedures for the administration
and enforcement of this Code.
(1998 Code, § 22-565)  (Ord. 01-65, passed 1-17-2002; Ord. 04-15, passed 5-19-
2004; Ord. 07-48, passed 12-19-2007; Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 150.068  TECHNICAL CODE; EXEMPTIONS; INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Manufacturing or processing plants; exemption from permit requirement.
No building or other permit as provided for by the codes described in or
adopted by this Code shall be required for work to be performed upon the
property of a manufacturing or processing plant or industry, under the
following conditions:
      (1)   The location of the work is on property of the plant or industry,
which property shall comprise the equivalent of one city block or more and be
bounded on all sides by city streets; provided, if one or more sides of the
property are bounded by another plant or industry, water, railroad rights-of-
way or other artificial objects making a street location impossible or
impractical, this requirement shall be met by streets bounding all other areas;
      (2)   The plant or industry retains a registered professional engineer or
architect on a permanent basis who shall be responsible for the design and who
shall oversee the construction of structures within the plant property; and
      (3)   The work shall meet the requirements of the codes described in or
adopted by this Code.
(1998 Code, § 22-571)
   (B)   Inspections. If permits are not required for work as provided for in
division (A) above, the Building Official shall not be required to make
inspections during the progress of the work; provided, he or she shall have the
right to make inspections as may be deemed necessary to ensure eligibility for
the provisions of division (A) above and compliance therewith.
(1998 Code, § 22-572)
(Ord. 01-65, passed 1-17-2002; Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 150.069  INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The International Residential Code, as existed on 5-1-2001, is the
municipal residential building code in the State of Texas. There is hereby
adopted for and by the city a code known as the International Residential Code,
2015 Edition with appendices and amendments thereto.
   (B)   The following sections of the code referenced under this section are
amended as follows: Section M1305, Appliance Access, is amended by adding new
section M1305.1.4.1 to read as follows:
   M1305.1.4.1 New residential dwellings: All dwellings with a five (5) foot
side yard setback requirement shall be prohibited from having outside air
conditioning units located within the five (5) foot side yard setback.
   (C)   Sec. R105.2 Work Exempt from Permit - the following sections are
deleted from adoption:
      1.   One-story detached accessory structures, provided that the floor
area does not exceed 200 square feet.
      2.   Sidewalks and driveways.
   (D)   Section R313.2 One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire systems is
deleted from adoption.
(1998 Code, § 22-580)  (Ord. 03-09, passed 4-16-2003; Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-
2015)
§ 150.070  INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE ADOPTED; CONFLICTING
REGULATIONS.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted for and by the city a code known as the
International Existing Building Code, 2015 edition, with appendices and
amendments thereto, passed and recommended by the International Code Council,
Inc., which code is published in book form and which is referred to,
incorporated in this section and made a part of this section for all purposes.
A copy of such code is filed of record in the office of the City Secretary.
Said code is adopted as the code for regulating the repair, alteration, change
of occupancy, addition and relocation of existing buildings in the city.
   (B)   The Building Official shall adopt procedures for the administration
and enforcement of this Code.
(1998 Code, § 22-586)  (Ord. 04-15, passed 5-19-2004; Ord. 07-48, passed 12-19-
2007; Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 150.071  INTERNATIONAL HOUSING CODE; CONFLICTING REGULATIONS; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   There is hereby adopted for and by the city a housing code known
as the International Housing Code, 2015 edition, with appendices and amendments
thereto, passed and recommended by the International Code Council, Inc., which
code is published in book form and which is referred to, incorporated in this
section and made a part of this section for all purposes. A copy of such code
is filed of record in the office of the City Secretary.
      (2)   In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the housing
code and the provisions of this code of ordinances, state law or city
ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this code of ordinances,
state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be
controlling.
(1998 Code, § 22-281)
   (B)   The Code adopted by division (A) above is amended as set out in this
section: Section 106.1, Appointment, is amended to provide that the Board
referred to in such section shall mean the Board of Adjustments and appeals.
(1998 Code, § 22-282)
(Ord. 93-52, passed 9-22-1993; Ord. 93-58, passed 9-22-1993; Ord. 98-1, passed
1-7-1998; Ord. 01-65, passed 1-17-2002; Ord. 04-15, passed 5-19-2004; Ord. 07-
48, passed 12-19-2007; Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 150.999  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)    (1)   A violation of the Water Conservation and Drought Contingency
Plan - August 2009, as adopted by §
150.002 of this chapter, shall be a Class C misdemeanor subject to the general
penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   A culpable mental state is expressly dispensed with.
(1998 Code, § 50-3)
   (C)   (1)   Civil penalty.
         (a)   In a proceeding against the owner or the owner’s representative
with control over the premises, the city may recover a civil penalty if it
proves that:
            1.   The defendant was actually notified of the provisions of §§
150.020 through
150.037 of this chapter; and
            2.   After the defendant received notice of §§
150.020 through
150.037 of this chapter, the defendant committed acts in violation of §§
150.020 through
150.037 of this chapter or failed to take action necessary for compliance with
§§
150.020 through
150.037 of this chapter.
         (b)   A civil penalty under this division (C)(1) may not exceed $1,000
a day for a violation of an ordinance.
         (c)   A determination made under §
150.024(E) of this chapter is final and binding and constitutes prima facie
evidence of the penalty in any court of competent jurisdiction in a civil suit
brought by the municipality for final judgment in accordance with the
established penalty.
         (d)   To enforce any civil penalty under §§
150.020 through
150.037 of this chapter, the City Secretary must file with the District Clerk
of the county, a certified copy of the order of the Commission panel
establishing the amount and duration of the penalty. No other proof is required
for a district court to enter final judgment on the penalty.
(1998 Code, § 22-307)
      (2)   Penalties; violations by corporations.
         (a)   The owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent or any other
persons having an interest in any dangerous building who shall intentionally,
knowingly or recklessly fail to comply with any notice or order given by the
authority of the Building and Standards Commission of the city, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished for
each offense.
         (b)   Any person removing the notice provided for in §
150.035 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
         (c)   In case the owner or occupant or lessee of any dangerous
building ordered to be repaired or demolished under the terms of §§
150.020 through
150.037 of this chapter shall be a corporation and shall violate any provisions
of §§
150.020 through
150.037 of this chapter, the president, vice-president, secretary or treasurer
of such corporation or any manager, agent or employee of such corporation shall
be jointly and severally liable for the penalties provided in this division (C)
(2).
(1998 Code, § 22-326)
   (D)   Any person who shall violate any provisions of the technical codes or
amendments to any of them adopted in §
150.068 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be punished by a fine in accordance with §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(1998 Code, § 22-573)
(Ord. 01-65, passed 1-17-2002; Ord. 04-35, passed 9-1-2004; Ord. 05-16, passed
5-18-2005; Ord. 05-17, passed 5-18-2005; Ord. 13-23, passed 8-7-2013; Ord. 15-
42, passed 12-16-2015)
CHAPTER 151:  ELECTRICITY
Section
General Provisions
   
151.001   Installation of meters and meter equipment; outlets in residential
installations
   
151.002   Identification on vehicles of electrical contractors
Board of Adjustments
   
151.015   Definition
   
151.016   Established; composition
   
151.017   Term of members
   
151.018   Compensation of members
   
151.019   Secretary
   
151.020   Duties
Licenses
   
151.035   Required
   
151.036   Unlicensed workers not to be assigned to jobs
Permits and Inspections
   
151.050   Permits generally
   
151.051   Eligibility for permit
   
151.052   Exemption for work by homeowners
   
151.053   Permit fees
   
151.054   Duties of City Inspector
   
151.055   Inspection and approval of work required; permission for connection
of electrical supply
   
151.056   Plumbing to be completed prior to inspection of wiring
   
151.057   Notice that work is ready for inspection
   
151.058   Notice of time of inspection; conduct of inspection
   
151.059   Correction of unsafe or defective conditions
   
151.060   Reinspections; final inspection
   
151.061   Posting of notice of inspection and approval of work
   
151.062   Temporary permission for connection of electrical supply
   
151.063   Issuance of final certificate of inspection
   
151.064   “Service” defined
   
151.065   Wiring and equipment of electric supply company
   
151.066   Interference with City Inspector
   
151.067   Contractor’s responsibility for defective work
Technical Regulations
   
151.080   National Electrical Code adopted; conflicting regulations
   
151.081   Raceways
   
151.082   Service wires generally
   
151.083   Service brackets
   
151.084   Service outlets
   
151.085   Service entrance conduit
   
151.086   Additional requirements
   
151.087   Installation and location of meters
   
151.088   Non-conforming service entrance equipment
   
151.089   Service entrance equipment grounding; wiring under houses
   
151.090   Aluminum conductors not to be used for interior or exterior wiring
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.001  INSTALLATION OF METERS AND METER EQUIPMENT; OUTLETS IN RESIDENTIAL
INSTALLATIONS.
   (A)   Any public service company, firm or persons furnishing electric
current to the public under franchise granted by the city for lighting, heating
or power shall have the right to install and connect or disconnect and remove
their meters, as well as meter-related connections on the line side, and their
protective devices at their option without permit.
   (B)   Where meters are now installed at inaccessible places in houses or
buildings and the electric public service company desires to relocate the meter
loop for convenience in rendering its service or for the purpose of
standardization of its service in the public interest, it may, upon request to
the City Electrical Inspector, have a licensed electrical contractor reinstall
the meter loop at a point desired by it and all work done at the request of the
electrical public service company shall be performed at its own expense without
cost to the owner.
   (C)   On a 20-amp branch circuit in residential installations, not more than
ten consuming outlets per circuit will be allowed.
(1998 Code, § 22-91)  (Ord. 96-21, passed 8-7-1996)
§ 151.002  IDENTIFICATION ON VEHICLES OF ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS.
   All vehicles used by electrical contractors shall have painted or affixed to
the vehicle’s side door a sign showing the name, address and a state license
number of the contractor in letters of a minimum size of two inches.
(1998 Code, § 22-92) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS
§ 151.015  DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. The Board of Adjustments.
(1998 Code, § 22-110) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 151.016  ESTABLISHED; COMPOSITION.
   (A)   There is hereby created a five-member Board of Adjustments consisting
of:
      (1)   An officer, agent or employee of the electrical utility company
engaged in furnishing electricity for the inhabitants of the city who shall
have been nominated by the Mayor and whose nomination shall have been confirmed
by the City Commission;
      (2)   A duly licensed electrical contractor who shall have been nominated
by the Mayor and whose nomination shall have been confirmed by the City
Commission;
      (3)   A duly licensed master electrician who shall have been nominated by
the Mayor and whose nomination shall have been confirmed by the City
Commission; and
      (4)   Two residents of the city, at least one of whom shall not be
employed in the electrical contracting industry or building industry.
   (B)   Serving as an ex-officio member to the Adjustments Board shall be the
Building Official and the Fire Marshal or designee.
(1998 Code, § 22-111) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 151.017  TERM OF MEMBERS.
   Members of the Board, except the City Building Official and the Fire Marshal
or designee, shall hold office for a period of two years, unless sooner removed
by a vote of the City Commission.
(1998 Code, § 22-112) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 151.018  COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.
   The members of the Board shall serve without pay.
(1998 Code, § 22-113) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 151.019  SECRETARY.
   The Building Official shall be an ex-officio member of the Board and serve
as Secretary of the Board. That person shall keep a record of all examinations
held, all applicants examined and the results of the examinations, together
with other records as the Board may direct.
(1998 Code, § 22-114) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 151.020  DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Board to hear the appeals of persons aggrieved
by interpretation of the Electrical Code or by a decision of the Electrical
Inspector and make recommendations to the staff.
(1998 Code, § 22-115)  (Ord. 04-16, passed 6-2-2004; Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-
2015)
LICENSES
§ 151.035  REQUIRED.
   (A)   The city recognizes the licensing scheme for electricians administered
by the State Department of Licensing and Regulation. A state license and proof
of liability insurance shall be registered with the Building Official before a
person may engage in business or work under the license.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person not the holder of an unexpired,
unrevoked license to engage in any business or do any work in connection with
installing, maintaining, repairing, extending, constructing or replacing any
electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment, including electrical signs, for the
utilization of the service of any supply company in providing electrical energy
for light, heat or power to or for any building, structure or premises in the
city. It shall further be unlawful for the holder of any license to engage in
business or work under the license other than business or work authorized by
the class of license held by him or her.
(1998 Code, § 22-131)  (Ord. 04-16, passed 6-2-2004; Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-
2015)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.036  UNLICENSED WORKERS NOT TO BE ASSIGNED TO JOBS.
   No electrical contractor shall send any person on any job requiring a
license in the capacity of an electrician unless such person is the holder of,
and in possession of, a master electrician’s or a journeyman electrician’s
license.
(1998 Code, § 22-132)  (Ord. 04-16, passed 6-2-2004; Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-
2015)  Penalty, see §
10.99
PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS
§ 151.050  PERMITS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Permit required. A permit will be required to do any electrical
construction of any character, install any electrical wiring, apparatus or
equipment, or make extensions or changes to existing wiring systems installed
for the utilization of the service of the supply company in providing
electrical energy for lights, heat or power within or attached to any building.
   (B)   Application; issuance. Application for a permit, describing the work
to be done, shall be made in writing to the Electrical Inspector by the person,
firm or corporation installing the work. The application shall be accompanied
by such plans, specifications and schedules as may be necessary to determine
whether the installation as described will be in conformity with the
requirements, and, if the applicant has complied with all provisions of this
chapter, a permit for such installation shall be issued.
(1998 Code, § 22-161)
§ 151.050  PERMITS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Permit required. A permit will be required to do any electrical
construction of any character, install any electrical wiring, apparatus or
equipment, or make extensions or changes to existing wiring systems installed
for the utilization of the service of the supply company in providing
electrical energy for lights, heat or power within or attached to any building.
   (B)   Application; issuance. Application for a permit, describing the work
to be done, shall be made in writing to the Electrical Inspector by the person,
firm or corporation installing the work. The application shall be accompanied
by such plans, specifications and schedules as may be necessary to determine
whether the installation as described will be in conformity with the
requirements, and, if the applicant has complied with all provisions of this
chapter, a permit for such installation shall be issued.
(1998 Code, § 22-161) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 151.051  ELIGIBILITY FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Permits to do electrical work of all kinds of electrical installations
and construction shall be issued only to a holder of an electrical contractor’s
license under the provisions of this chapter unless otherwise stated.
   (B)   Permits for wiring, installing and connecting electric signs,
including gas or vacuum signs, gas or vacuum decorative systems or gas or
vacuum illuminating systems only, shall be issued to the holder of an
electrical sign contractor’s license under the provisions of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 22-162) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 151.052  EXEMPTION FOR WORK BY HOMEOWNERS.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit any bona fide homeowner from
personally installing electrical conductors or equipment within his or her own
home; providing that, the owner shall file with the Electrical Inspector
approved plans and specifications, satisfy the Electrical Inspector as to his
or her ability to install electrical wiring, apply for and secure a permit, pay
the required fee, do work in accordance with this chapter, apply for an
inspection and receive a certificate of approval.
   (B)   Personal installation by an owner under these homeowner rights shall
be by himself or herself, for himself or herself on his or her own homestead
premises, without compensation, and no person shall be employed to assist him
or her in any way on the work.
(1998 Code, § 22-163) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 151.053  PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   No permit shall be issued by the City Inspector under this subchapter
until after the fees set forth in the following schedule shall have been paid:
      (1)   For the purpose of assessing permit fees, all light, switch and
receptacle openings are classed as outlets:
         (a)   For each outlet, lighting fixture, switch and receptacle: $0.40;
         (b)   1.   Motors, exhaust fans and other fans less than two
horsepower, each: $3:
               a.   From two, but less than ten, horsepower, each: $4;
               b.   From ten, but less than 35, horsepower, each: $5;
               c.   From 35, but less than 100, horsepower, each: $9; and
               d.   One hundred or more horsepower, per 100 horsepower: $15.
            2.   Each additional horsepower over 100: $0.08; and
            3.   Motor control equipment is included in these fees.
         (c)   Elevator, passenger, each: $10;
         (d)   Elevator, freight, each: $10;
         (e)   Motion picture machine, each: $4;
         (f)   Sound picture equipment, each: $6;
         (g)   Electric range or heater, each: $3;
         (h)   Water heater, each: $3;
         (i)   X-ray machine, each: $6;
         (j)   Gas or vacuum tube sign:
            1.   First transformer, each sign: $3; and
            2.   Each additional transformer: $1.
         (k)   Floodlight, single receptacle, each: $1;
         (l)   Floodlight, multiple receptacle, each: $3; and
         (m)   Two-hundred-twenty-volt outlet: $1.
      (2)   Each permanently connected electrical appliance or piece of
equipment of any nature not otherwise specified shall be charged for as
follows:
         (a)   One KVA or less: $1;
         (b)   Next 9 KVA, per KVA: $0.80;
         (c)   Next 40 KVA, per KVA: $0.60;
         (d)   Next 50 KVA, per KVA: $0.40; and
         (e)   More than 100 KVA, per KVA: $0.04.
      (3)   (a)   Each service and meter loop, or repairs to a service or meter
loop, shall be charged for as follows:
            1.   Up to and including 100 amps: $4;
            2.   More than 100 amps, but not more than 200 amps: $6; and
            3.   More than 200 amps: $10.
         (b)   No outlets are included in this fee.
      (4)   T. pole: $5; and
      (5)   A/C unit, per unit: $5.
   (B)   In addition to the fees set out in division (A) above, the fee for
issuing each permit shall be $10.
   (C)   For reinspection, for any reason, the fee shall be $25 for first
reinspection. Subsequent inspections will be $50, $100, $150, etc.
(1998 Code, § 22-164) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 151.054  DUTIES OF CITY INSPECTOR.
   It shall be the duty of the City Inspector, or any duly authorized
assistant, to issue permits for and inspect all electrical wiring, apparatus or
equipment for the utilization of the electrical utility company in providing
electrical energy for lights, heat and power inside of, or attached to, the
buildings or other structures within the city, to look after the enforcement of
laws, rules and regulations relating to such wiring, apparatus or equipment,
and to exercise a general supervision over all electrical construction and over
all electrical contractors and electricians licensed to carry on their
businesses or trades under the provisions of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 22-165) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 151.055  INSPECTION AND APPROVAL OF WORK REQUIRED; PERMISSION FOR CONNECTION
OF ELECTRICAL SUPPLY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any electrical current in
or through any wiring apparatus or fixtures installed for the utilization of
the service of the supply company in providing electrical energy for lights,
heat or power in or on any building or structure within the city until the
apparatus or fixtures shall have been inspected and approved by the City
Inspector and the final certificate of inspection shall have been issued.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any electrical supply company operating
under a franchise granted by the city or for any person furnishing electric
current for light, heat and power to connect its distribution system with any
installation of wiring apparatus or fixtures installed in, or to, any building
or other structure within the city without having first received written
permission from the City Inspector to furnish current for the wiring, apparatus
or fixtures.
      (2)   Permission shall be given by the City Inspector at any time after
the final certificate of inspection shall have been issued.
(1998 Code, § 22-166) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.056  PLUMBING TO BE COMPLETED PRIOR TO INSPECTION OF WIRING.
   All plumbing and other piping or tube work must be in place on work to be
concealed before the electrical wiring is inspected, and no wiring shall be
considered as completed until all the plumbing is in place.
(1998 Code, § 22-167)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.057  NOTICE THAT WORK IS READY FOR INSPECTION.
   (A)   When the electrical work in any building or other structure for which
a permit has been obtained under this division is ready for inspection, notice
in writing properly filled in upon blanks furnished at the office of the City
Inspector, stating the location of the work, the name of the owner and the name
of the electrician doing the work, shall be filed at the office of the City
Inspector.
   (B)   Notice that the work is ready for inspection must be given at the
office of the City Inspector, for morning inspections, before 5:00 p.m. the
preceding day, and for afternoon inspections, before 12:00 noon the same day. A
period of 48 hours, exclusive of Sundays and holidays, will be required in
which to make inspection and report.
(1998 Code, § 22-168) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 151.058  NOTICE OF TIME OF INSPECTION; CONDUCT OF INSPECTION.
   As soon as possible after the filing of notice that work is ready for
inspection, the City Inspector will notify the electrician in charge of the
work when he or she will inspect the work; and the Inspector will test the work
in the presence of the electrician in any manner, and in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. In large and complicated jobs, the work may be
inspected and tested in sections on the approval of the Inspector.
(1998 Code, § 22-169) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 151.059  CORRECTION OF UNSAFE OR DEFECTIVE CONDITIONS.
   (A)   The City Inspector, or any duly authorized assistant, is hereby
empowered to inspect or reinspect all interior wires and apparatus conducting
or using electric current for lights, heat or power, and, when the conductors
or apparatus are found to be unsafe to life or property, he or she shall notify
the person owning, using or operating them to place them in a safe and secure
condition within 24 hours,
or within such further time as the City Inspector shall determine is necessary.
Any person failing or refusing to repair or remove the conductors or apparatus
within 24 hours or within such further time as the City Inspector shall
determine is necessary, after receipt of the notice, shall be subject to the
penalty provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Whenever any electrical conductor or appliance used for any purpose in
or on a building is, in the opinion of the City Inspector, contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, he or she shall cause written notice to be served
on that person using the conductor or appliance to discontinue the use of the
conductor or appliance and to correct the defective conditions, hazards or
violations within 48 hours or within ten days, as he or she may decree
necessary and, upon failure to conform with the notice, the City Inspector is
hereby authorized and directed to cause the electrical service wires supplying
the unsafe conductor or appliance to be disconnected or cut off and require the
wires to remain cut off until the defects, hazards or violations are remedied;
and no person, whether proprietor, agent or employee, whether furnishing or
using the conductor or appliance, may again use the conductor or appliance
without first obtaining written permission to do so from the City Inspector.
(1998 Code, § 22-170) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 151.060  REINSPECTIONS; FINAL INSPECTION.
   (A)   If, after the first visit to a job on written notice to inspect the
job, it is necessary to return to reinspect, or it is necessary to reinspect
any work, whether from a defect or the work not being ready, the Inspector will
return only on another written notice and not less than 24 hours after the
notice, and shall charge a fee of $1 for so doing, all other notices taking
precedence.
   (B)   After the entire completion of the work, a notice shall be given the
Inspector for a final inspection; and, if he or she finds that the work has
been satisfactorily done, he or she shall issue a final certificate of
inspection on the request of the electrical contractor holding the permit, as
provided in this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 22-171)
§ 151.061  POSTING OF NOTICE OF INSPECTION AND APPROVAL OF WORK.
   Upon making an inspection of any electrical wiring or equipment, when it is
found to have been installed in a satisfactory manner and in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter, the Inspector shall place a notice at the
service switch or other suitable place stating that the electrical work has
been inspected and found to be in accordance with the rules as prescribed in
the provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to lath, seal or in any
manner conceal any electrical wiring or equipment until the wiring or equipment
has been inspected and the notice posted as required by this section.
(1998 Code, § 22-172) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.062  TEMPORARY PERMISSION FOR CONNECTION OF ELECTRICAL SUPPLY.
   When written application is filed with him or her requesting such
permission, the City Inspector may, before a final certificate of inspection is
issued, give temporary permission to connect and furnish electric current to
any wiring, apparatus or fixtures for a period of not exceeding 30 days, if, in
his or her opinion, the wiring, apparatus or fixtures are in a condition that
current may be safely connected, and there exists an urgent necessity for such
use.
(1998 Code, § 22-173) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 151.063  ISSUANCE OF FINAL CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION.
   When any electrical wiring, apparatus or fixtures covered by a permit shall
be found on inspection by the Electrical Inspector, or his or her duly
authorized assistant, to conform to the rules and regulations provided by this
chapter, the City Inspector shall issue a final certificate of inspection
certifying that the wiring, apparatus or fixtures have been inspected and found
to comply with the rules and regulations, but no certificate shall be issued
until the equipment is made to conform to the rules and regulations.
(1998 Code, § 22-174) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 151.064  “SERVICE” DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, to regulate the issuing of permits, and in
fixing the inspection fees covering permits, each recording watt-hour meter and
all subfeeder wires and branch circuit wires connecting the meter shall be
considered as one SERVICE, and a separate permit must be issued for each
service.
(1998 Code, § 22-175) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 151.065  WIRING AND EQUIPMENT OF ELECTRIC SUPPLY COMPANY.
   All electrical construction and all materials and appliances used in
connection with the installation, maintenance and operation of electrical
wiring, apparatus or equipment for the utilization of the service for the
supply company in providing electrical energy for light, heat or power, inside
or attached to buildings or property within the city, shall conform to the
special rules and regulations as may be embodied in this or other ordinances of
the city and to the code adopted by this chapter for the installation of wiring
and apparatus for electrical purposes.
(1998 Code, § 22-176) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 151.066  INTERFERENCE WITH CITY INSPECTOR.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or interfere with the City
Inspector or any electrical inspector in the discharge of his or her duties.
(1998 Code, § 22-177) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.067  CONTRACTOR’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR DEFECTIVE WORK.
   A final certificate of inspection issued under this subchapter shall not
relieve the electrical contractor of his or her responsibility for any
defective work.
(1998 Code, § 22-178) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
TECHNICAL REGULATIONS
§ 151.080  NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED; CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted for and by the city an electrical code known
as the National Electrical Code, 2015 edition, with appendices and amendments
thereto, passed and recommended by the National Fire Protection Association and
approved by the American National Standards Institute, which code is published
in book form and which is referred to, incorporated in this section and made a
part of this section for all purposes. A copy of such code is filed of record
in the office of the City Secretary. Such code is hereby adopted as the minimum
standard for the installation of all electrical wiring, devices and equipment
in the city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter.
   (B)   In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the Electrical
Code and the provisions of this Code, state law or city ordinances, rules or
regulations, the provisions of this Code, state law or city ordinances, rules
or regulations shall prevail and be controlling.
(1998 Code, § 22-201)  (Ord. 93-52, passed 9-22-1993; Ord. 93-55, passed 9-22-
1993; Ord. 96-21, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. 98-1, passed 1-7-1998; Ord. 01-65,
passed 1-17-2002; Ord. 02-31, passed 7-17-2002; Ord. 07-48, passed 12-19-2007;
Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 151.081  RACEWAYS.
   Approved metallic and non-metallic raceways (such as rigid conduit or steel
tubing), underfloor cast-in-place raceways, no armored cable shall be used for
any wiring to conduct current for light, heat or power in the wiring of all new
buildings and in all old buildings or additions to buildings within the fire
limits of the city, as they are now or may hereafter be established, and in
masonry apartment houses,
churches, schools, hotels, theaters and commercial buildings within the limits
of the city; provided, however, that:
   (A)   There shall be installed in all frame or veneer apartment houses
continuous grounding conductors;
   (B)   Where there is existing wiring which is not in metallic raceways and
not readily exposed to mechanical injury and which otherwise conforms with the
Electrical Code of the city, existing wiring may be continued in service during
its safe and useful lifetime; and
(1998 Code, § 22-202)  (Ord. 01-65, passed 1-17-2002)
   (C)   EMT conduit shall not be installed outdoors.
(Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 151.082  SERVICE WIRES GENERALLY.
   (A)   The service conduit and wires leading from the outside of the
customer’s building to the meter cabinet and main line switch are to be
supplied, owned and controlled by the property owner, but the installation of
service drops and the connection of these wires to the supply lines is to be
made by the electric public service company owning and operating the supply
lines.
   (B)   No service wire of a size smaller than 101 AMP Rating will be allowed
between the point where the service drops of the power company terminate on the
owner’s premises and the main line entrance switch, and such wire shall be
enclosed in rigid metal or schedule 40 polyvinyl chloride (PVC) conduit.
   (C)   Not less than three feet of each conductor shall be left at the
service head for connection to the service wire from the public service company
service drop, with the neutral marked with white tape.
(1998 Code, § 22-203)  (Ord. 01-65, passed 1-17-2002)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.083  SERVICE BRACKETS.
   The owner must provide a location for brackets or other point of attachments
to the building to which the service wires are to be connected. The location
shall be not more than 18 inches from the service conduit outlet. On residences
of two stories or more, the location shall be as high as is practical on the
building, but in no event shall it be more than 25 feet or less than ten feet
from the ground. In the business district, where the service is fed from alley
construction, the location should be at the ceiling of the first floor, if not
less than 12-1/2 feet from the ground. The location for the service bracket
must be on the building at a point nearest to or most accessible to the supply
lines of the electric public service company.
(1998 Code, § 22-204)  (Ord. 01-65, passed 1-17-2002; Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-
2015)
§ 151.084  SERVICE OUTLETS.
   The service outlets shall be no more than 25 feet and no less than 12-1/
2 feet from the ground and must be located so as not to be within reach from
any porch or stair landing, and shall be located so as to afford direct
unobstructed space for stringing the service drops from the service outlet to
the electric public service company’s mains.
(1998 Code, § 22-205) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 151.085  SERVICE ENTRANCE CONDUIT.
   (A)   The service entrance conduit shall not be smaller than one and one-
fourth inches and shall be protected from corrosion by the galvanized process
or by schedule 40 polyvinyl chloride (PVC). Steel tubing or EMT will not be
permitted for use as service conduit.
   (B)   The service entrance conduit of residences, apartments and combination
residences and commercial or industrial establishments may be run exposed on
the outside of the building from the point where the conduit contacts the
service drops of the electric public service company to the meter of the
electric public service company.
(1998 Code, § 22-206)  (Ord. 01-65, passed 1-17-2002; Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-
2015)
§ 151.086  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Minimum wire size is #12 copper.
   (B)   Every conduit and raceway shall contain an appropriately sized
equipment grounding conductor.
   (C)   For rough in inspections wiring must be installed in conduits and
boxes in walls and floors.
(Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 151.087  INSTALLATION AND LOCATION OF METERS.
   (A)   All meter loops for the installation of electric meters to measure the
service rendered by the electric public service company shall be in meter
cabinets furnished by the homeowner or electrical contractor and installed by
the owner or his or her agent. The meter loop must be ahead of or on the line
side of the main line switches. Each service must have an exterior main
disconnect adjacent to meter.
   (B)   Meters installed to measure the service rendered to residences,
apartments and combination residences and commercial or industrial
establishments shall be set on the outside of the building at a point not more
than six feet and not less than five feet from the ground to the dial of the
meter. Closed-in rear or front porches are not considered as outdoor locations.
   (C)   For convenience of ready access, all meter cabinets shall be located
on outside walls of a building nearest the point of service, except in cases
where exposure to mechanical injury by vehicle, as in the commercial section,
make such location impractical, or by nature of the location of the premises,
in which case the location shall be designated by the City Inspector.
(1998 Code, § 22-209)  (Ord. 96-21, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-
2015)
§ 151.088  NON-CONFORMING SERVICE ENTRANCE EQUIPMENT.
   Where changes or additions are being made to existing electrical
installations, necessitating changes or additions to the service entrance or to
the service switch or to the meter loop, the service entrance conduit and main
line switch and meter loop shall be changed to conform to the provisions of
this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 22-210) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 151.089  SERVICE ENTRANCE EQUIPMENT GROUNDING; WIRING UNDER HOUSES.
   (A)   All grounding for service entrance equipment must be in accordance
with the Code adopted in this chapter.
   (B)   Wiring under houses and in unfurnished basements not over six feet
from the ground shall be run in conduit or non-metallic sheathed cable bored
through or run along joists or sills.
(1998 Code, § 22-211)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 151.090  ALUMINUM CONDUCTORS NOT TO BE USED FOR INTERIOR OR EXTERIOR WIRING.
   Notwithstanding anything in the Code adopted in this chapter or elsewhere in
this chapter to the contrary, aluminum conductors shall not be used for
interior or exterior wiring.
(1998 Code, § 22-212)  (Ord. 01-65, passed 1-17-2002; Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-
2015)
CHAPTER 152:  GAS
Section
   
152.01   Licensing of gasfitters
   
152.02   Use of PVC pipe for gas transmission
   
152.03   Expiration of inspection tag
   
152.04   International Fuel Gas Code adopted; conflicting regulations
§ 152.01  LICENSING OF GASFITTERS.
   Any plumber or other person rendering any service in the city in connection
with gas or gas appliances or installations shall be required to have the
licenses required by the Plumbing License Law of 1947 of the state, codified as
Tex. Occupations Code §§
1301.001 et seq.
(1998 Code, § 22-241) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 152.02  USE OF PVC PIPE FOR GAS TRANSMISSION.
   (A)   Plastic pipe shall be buried a minimum of 18 inches under driveways
and streets and a minimum of 12 inches in yards;
   (B)   Plastic transition fittings shall be used from metal to plastic
underground. No metal to plastic threads shall be used underground. Metal shall
be wrapped with an approved wrapping; and
   (C)   Gas pressure on all gas pipe shall not exceed 10 psig on low pressure
and 25 psig on high pressure.
   (D)   No gas flex or risers at gas meter and riser shall be solid schedule
40 pipe.
(1998 Code, § 22-242) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 152.03  EXPIRATION OF INSPECTION TAG.
   An approved gas test inspection tag is valid for a period of 30 days from
the date of issuance. If gas service is not connected within said 30-day
period, a reinspection and retesting of the lines shall be required.
(1998 Code, § 22-243)  (Ord. 00-38, passed 7-5-2000; Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-
2015)
§ 152.04  INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED; CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted by and for the city a gas code known as the
International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, with appendices and amendments
thereto, which code is published in a book form by the International Code
Council, Inc., and which is referred to, incorporated in this section and made
a part of this section for all purposes. A copy of such Code is on file in the
office of the City Secretary.
   (B)   In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the fuel gas
code and the provisions of this code of ordinances, state law and city
ordinances, rules and regulations, the provisions of this Code of ordinances,
state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be
controlling.
(1998 Code, § 22-261)  (Ord. 93-52, passed 9-22-1993; Ord. 93-53, passed 9-22-
1993; Ord. 98-1, passed 1-7-1998; Ord. 01-65, passed 1-17-2002; Ord. 04-15,
passed 5-19-2004; Ord. 07-48, passed 12-19-2007; Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
CHAPTER 153:  MECHANICAL REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
153.01   International Mechanical Code adopted; conflicting regulations
   
153.02   Amendments to International Mechanical Code
Contractors
   
153.15   Duties of Heating and A/C Advisory Board
   
153.16   Composition of Board of Examiners
   
153.17   Term of office of members of Board of Examiners
   
153.18   Exemption for work by homeowners
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.01  INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED; CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   There is hereby adopted for and by the city a mechanical code
known as the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, with appendices and
amendments thereto, passed and recommended by the International Code Council,
Inc., which code is published in book form and which is referred to,
incorporated in this section and made a part of this section for all purposes.
      (2)   A copy of such code is filed of record in the office of the City
Secretary.
   (B)   If there is any conflict between the provisions of the Mechanical Code
and the provisions of this code of ordinances or state law, the provisions of
this Code of ordinances or state law shall preempt and be controlling.
(1998 Code, § 22-341)  (Ord. 93-52, passed 9-22-1993; Ord. 93-59, passed 9-22-
1993; Ord. 98-1, passed 1-7-1998; Ord. 01-65, passed 1-17-2002; Ord. 04-15,
passed 5-19-2004; Ord. 07-48, passed 12-19-2007; Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 153.02  AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE.
   The following sections of the Code adopted under this chapter are amended as
follows.
   (A)   Section 106.5, Schedule of Permit Fees, is amended to read as follows:
   On all mechanical work requiring a permit, as set forth in section 106.5.2,
a fee for each mechanical permit shall be paid at the time of approval of the
application. All fees shall be approved by the City Commission and a copy of
the current fees are to be posted at the City Hall Annex, 928 5th Avenue North,
Texas City, Texas.
   (B)   Section 109.1, Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals, is
amended to read as follows:
   A Board of Adjustments and appeals is hereby established for the purpose of
providing for the final interpretation of provisions of this code. The Board of
Adjustment as established and adopted by the zoning ordinance of the City of
Texas City, in addition to its present duties, shall be and become the Board of
Adjustments and appeals and shall perform all of its duties and shall have all
of its power.
   (C)   Section 306.1, Clearances for maintenance and replacement, is amended
by adding new section 306.1.2 to read as follows:
   306.1.2 New residential dwellings: All dwellings with a five (5) foot side
yard setback requirement shall be prohibited from having outside air
conditioning units located within the five (5) foot side yard setback.
   (D)   Heating and air conditioning permit fees: All fees shall be approved
by the City Commission and a copy of the current fees are to be posted at the
City Hall Annex, 928 5th Avenue North, Texas City, Texas.
(1998 Code, § 22-342)  (Ord. 98-1, passed 1-7-1998; Ord. 01-65, passed 1-17-
2002; Ord. 03-09, passed 4-16-2003; Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
CONTRACTORS
§ 153.15  DUTIES OF HEATING AND A/C ADVISORY BOARD.
   It shall be the duty of the Board to hear the appeals of persons aggrieved
by interpretation of the Mechanical Code or by a decision of the Inspector and
make recommendations to the staff.
(1998 Code, § 22-361)  (Ord. 07-48, passed 12-19-2007)
§ 153.16  COMPOSITION OF BOARD OF EXAMINERS.
   There is hereby created a six-member Contractors and Installers Examiners
Board consisting of:
   (A)   The Building Official;
   (B)   One duly licensed contractor appointed by the City Commission;
   (C)   Two persons appointed by the City Commission;
   (D)   A mechanical engineer appointed by the City Commission; and
   (E)   The Fire Marshal or designee.
(1998 Code, § 22-362)  (Ord. 07-48, passed 12-19-2007)
§ 153.17  TERM OF OFFICE OF MEMBERS OF BOARD OF EXAMINERS.
   Except for city officials who are members, members of the Board of Examiners
established by this subchapter shall hold office for a period of two years,
unless sooner removed by a vote of the City Commission.
(1998 Code, § 22-363)
§ 153.18  EXEMPTION FOR WORK BY HOMEOWNERS.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit any homeowner from personally
installing or repairing any heating, air conditioning or mechanical
refrigeration equipment in the home in which he or she resides. No unlicensed
person shall be employed by the homeowner to assist him or her in any such
work.
(1998 Code, § 22-369)
CHAPTER 154:  PLUMBING
Section
   
154.01   State plumbing license law adopted
   
154.02   Public liability insurance requirements for contractors
   
154.03   Wet venting
   
154.04   Prohibited pipe
   
154.05   International Plumbing Code adopted; conflicting regulations;
amendments
§ 154.01  STATE PLUMBING LICENSE LAW ADOPTED.
   There is hereby adopted for and by the city the Plumbing License Law of 1947
of the state, codified as Tex. Occupations Code §§
1301.001 et seq., insofar as it applies to the city. Any plumber covered by the
law who performs plumbing services in the city shall have the plumbing license
as provided by such law.
(1998 Code, § 22-431) (Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
§ 154.02  PUBLIC LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR CONTRACTORS.
   Each holder of a master plumbing license in the state shall, as a condition
for the issuance of a plumbing permit in the city, furnish a certificate of
insurance or other acceptable evidence that the holder has public liability
insurance with an insurance company approved by the city insuring in a sum of
not less than $300,000 against personal injury and $300,000 against property
damage.
(1998 Code, § 22-432)  (Ord. 95-11, passed 7-5-1995; Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-
2015)
§ 154.03  WET VENTING.
   Within the limits of the city, no wet venting shall be allowed. A variance
may be issued if there is no feasible alternative to wet venting. Any request
for a variance shall be submitted along with two sets of riser diagrams to the
Plumbing Appeals and Advisory Board for review and approval or disapproval.
(1998 Code, § 22-433)  (Ord. 95-11, passed 7-5-1995; Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-
2015)
§ 154.04  PROHIBITED PIPE.
   (A)   Galvanized pipe shall not be used for water piping in the city.
   (B)   Polybutylene (Quest) pipe shall not be used for water piping in the
city.
   (C)   No cellcore or foam core pipe shall be used.
(1998 Code, § 22-434)  (Ord. 00-38, passed 7-5-2000; Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-
2015)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 154.05  INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED; CONFLICTING REGULATIONS;
AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   The International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, with appendices
and amendments thereto, prepared by the International Code Council, Inc., and
published in book form, is hereby adopted, incorporated in this section and
made a part of this section for all purposes. A copy of such Code, including
such revisions, is filed of record in the office of the City Secretary.
      (2)   If there is any conflict between the provisions of the plumbing
code and the provisions of this code of ordinances or state law, the provisions
of this code of ordinances or state law shall preempt and be controlling.
(1998 Code, § 22-451)
   (B)   The Code adopted by this section is amended as set out in this
section:
      (1)   Section 109, Means of Appeal, is amended as follows:
      The term “board of appeals” shall be changed in all references to be
“plumbing appeals and advisory board.”
      (2)   Section 109.2, Membership of Board, is amended to read as follows:
      (a) Appointment. There is hereby established a board, appointed by the
Mayor and confirmed by the City Commission, to be called the plumbing appeals
and advisory board, which shall consist of five members.
      (b) Membership. The plumbing appeals and advisory board should consist of
five members:
      (1)   A licensed master plumber who shall have been nominated by the
Mayor and whose nomination shall have been confirmed by the City Commission;
      (2)   A licensed journeyman plumber who shall have been nominated by the
Mayor and whose nomination shall have been confirmed by the City Commission;
      (3)   A building contractor who shall have been nominated by the Mayor
and whose nomination shall have been confirmed by the City Commission; and
      (4)   Two residents of the city, both of whom shall not be employed in
the plumbing contracting industry or building industry.
      A board member shall not act in a case in which he has a personal or
financial interest.
      (c) Terms. The terms of office of the Board members shall be two years or
until their successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be filled
for an unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required
to be made. Continued absence of any member from required meetings of the Board
shall, at the discretion of the applicable governing body, render any such
member subject to immediate removal from office.
      (3)   Section 303.3, Plastic Pipe for Drains and Sewers, is added to read
as follows:
      Plastic pipe and fittings for draining wastes and vents shall be schedule
40 PVC only.
      (4)   Section 312, Method of Testing, is added to read as follows:
      Low pressure (not in excess of 0.5 psi) gas piping shall withstand a
pressure of at least ten pounds of air pressure for a period of not less than
15 minutes without showing any drop in pressure. Higher pressure piping must
stand a pressure of at least 25 psi for a period of not less than one hour
without showing any drop in pressure.
(1998 Code, § 22-452) (Ord. 93-52, passed 9-22-1993; Ord. 93-54, passed 9-22-
1993; Ord. 95-11, passed 7-5-1995; Ord. 98-1, passed 1-7-1998; Ord. 01-65,
passed 1-17-2002; Ord. 04-15, passed 5-19-2004; Ord. 07-48, passed 12-19-2007;
Ord. 15-42, passed 12-16-2015)
CHAPTER 155:  SIGNS
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Title of chapter
   
155.002   Purpose of chapter
   
155.003   Definitions
   
155.004   Periodic inspection
   
155.005   Variances
   
155.006   Certain information to be posted on signs; minimum clearance
   
155.007   Temporary business signs
Permits
   
155.020   Required
   
155.021   Application
   
155.022   Issuance; time limit for completion of work
   
155.023   Fee
   
155.024   Bond or liability insurance
   
155.025   Revocation
   
155.026   Signs exempted from permitting process
Prohibited Signs
   
155.040   Failure to obtain proper permits
   
155.041   Damaged or inadequately maintained signs
   
155.042   Outdated signs
   
155.043   Obstructions to doors, windows or fire escapes; attachment to
standpipe or fire escape
   
155.044   Traffic hazards
   
155.045   Unsafe signs
   
155.046   Illuminated signs
   
155.047   Flashing signs
   
155.048   Obscene signs
   
155.049   Vehicular signs
   
155.050   Moving signs
   
155.051   Posting signs on trees, utility poles or other fixtures
Allowable Signs
   
155.065   On-premises freestanding signs
   
155.066   Attached signs
   
155.067   Off-premises signs
   
155.068   Portable signs
   
155.069   Garage sale signs
   
155.070   Off-premises subdivision identification and directional signs
Administration and Enforcement
   
155.085   Non-conforming signs
   
155.086   Notice of violation; removal or alteration of unlawful signs
   
155.087   Protection of First Amendment rights
 
   
155.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001  TITLE OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the “Sign Regulations”.
(1998 Code, § 98-1)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993)
§ 155.002  PURPOSE OF CHAPTER.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable regulations for the
design, construction, installation and maintenance of all exterior signs in the
city in order to:
   (A)   Balance the right of individuals to identify their businesses and
convey their messages and the right of the public to be protected against the
unrestricted proliferation of signs;
   (B)   Further the objectives of the Comprehensive Plan;
   (C)   Protect the public health, safety and welfare;
   (D)   Reduce traffic hazards;
   (E)   Facilitate the creation of an attractive and harmonious community;
   (F)   Protect property values;
   (G)   Promote economic development; and
   (H)   Preserve the right of free speech exercised through the use of signs
containing non-commercial messages.
(1998 Code, § 98-2)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993)
§ 155.003  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BANNER. Any sign constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric or other light
material, and shall include advertising balloons.
   ERECT. To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, and shall
also include the painting of signs.
   FACING and SURFACE. The surface of the sign upon, against or through which
the message is displayed or illustrated on the sign.
   ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign which has characters, letters, fixtures, designs
or outlines illuminated externally by electric lights or internally by luminous
tubes.
   INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL. Any material which will not ignite at or below a
temperature of 1,200°F and will not continue to burn or glow at that
temperature.
   MONUMENT SIGN. Any freestanding sign having a low profile and made of
masonry, metal, routed wood planks or beams, durable plastic or similar
materials, including individual lettering, which repeats or harmonizes with the
architecture of the establishment it serves. MONUMENT SIGNS must be built on a
monument base as opposed to a pole base. Message boards and electronically
displayed time and temperature may not occupy more than 24 square feet of the
area of the sign face.
   OTHER ADVERTISING STRUCTURE. Any marquee, canopy, awning or street clock.
   PERMITTEE. A person receiving an erection permit pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter.
   POLE SIGN. Any sign supported by one or more columns, poles, uprights or
braces anchored in or on the ground and not attached to any building and as
defined by the Standard Building Code.
   PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign designed or constructed to be easily moved from one
location to another, and mounted upon or designed to be mounted upon a wheeled
carrier or other framed structure.
   SIGN. Any structure, part thereof or device or inscription which is located
upon, attached to, or painted or represented on any land or on the outside of
any building or structure, or on an awning, canopy, marquee or similar
appendage, or displayed or shown so as to be seen from the outside of the
building or structure, and which displays or includes any numeral, letter,
word, model, banner, emblem, insignia, symbol, device, monogram, heraldry,
light or other representation used as or in the nature of an announcement,
advertisement, attention arrester, direction, warning, or designation of any
person, firm, group, organization, corporation, association, place, commodity,
product, service, business, profession, enterprise, industry, activity or any
combination thereof. When the word SIGN is used herein without further
modification, the same shall be understood to embrace all regulated signs.
   SIGN AREA. The total square footage of all sign facing, including that
portion of the supporting structure or trim which carries any wording, symbols,
identifying colors or pictures; provided, however, in the case of double-faced
signs, only one face shall be computed to determine SIGN AREA .
   STRUCTURAL TRIM. The molding, battens, cappings, nailing strips, latticing
and platforms which are attached to the sign structure.
(1998 Code, § 98-3)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993; Ord. 99-28, passed 5-5-
1999; Ord. 00-55, passed 9-20-2000)
§ 155.004  PERIODIC INSPECTION.
   The Building Inspector shall inspect periodically, or whenever deemed
necessary, each sign or other advertising structure regulated by this chapter
for the purpose of ascertaining whether the structure is unsafe, in need of
repair, not in conformance with the permit application or otherwise in
violation of the provisions of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 98-4)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993)
§ 155.005  VARIANCES.
   Within 30 days after denial of a sign permit by the Building Inspector, a
request for variance may be filed with the Board of Adjustments. The Board of
Adjustments may grant a variance if it finds that the unusual shape, topography
or characteristics of the property in question prevent signage allowable under
the provisions of this chapter from adequately identifying the business or
other activity located on such property.
(1998 Code, § 98-5)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993)
§ 155.006  CERTAIN INFORMATION TO BE POSTED ON SIGNS; MINIMUM CLEARANCE.
   (A)   Every permitted sign or other advertising structure shall display in a
conspicuous place, in letters no less than one inch in height, the date of
erection, the permit number and the voltage of any electrical apparatus used.
   (B)   All signs and sign structures shall have a minimum clearance of 14
feet vertically, and shall have a clearance equal to the sign’s height from any
transmission line carrying 750 volts or greater.
(1998 Code, § 98-6)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993)
§ 155.007  TEMPORARY BUSINESS SIGNS.
   (A)   Definition. The term TEMPORARY BUSINESS SIGN , as used in this
chapter, shall mean any sign, banner, pennant or other advertising display
constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard or other light materials,
with or without frames, with or without words, intended to be displayed for a
limited period of time on the property of the business.
   (B)   Size and weight limitations.
      (1)   Size limitation. No temporary business sign of combustible material
shall exceed four feet in one of its dimensions or 60 square feet in area.
      (2)   Weight limitation. Temporary business signs weighing in excess of
50 pounds must be approved by the Building Inspector as conforming to the
safety requirements of the Building Code of the city.
   (C)   Projection over public property. No temporary business sign shall
extend over or into any street right-of-way, alley, sidewalk or other public
thoroughfare.
   (D)   Anchorage and support. Every temporary business sign shall be attached
with wire or steel cables. No strings, ropes or wood slats for anchorage or
support purposes shall be permitted.
   (E)   Maximum display period. Temporary business signs shall not be allowed
to remain for a period exceeding 15 days in a six-month period.
   (F)   Permitted advertising. The advertisement contained on any temporary
business sign shall pertain only to the business, industry or pursuit conducted
on or within the premises on which such sign is erected or maintained. This
provision shall not apply to signs of a civic, political or religious nature.
(1998 Code, § 98-7)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993)  Penalty, see § 155.999
PERMITS
§ 155.020  REQUIRED.
   Except as provided in § 155.026 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for
any person to erect, relocate or structurally alter within the city any sign or
other advertising structure as defined in this chapter without first obtaining
an erection permit from the Building Inspector and making payment of the fee
required by § 155.023 of this chapter. All illuminated signs shall, in
addition, be subject to the provisions of the Electrical Code and its requisite
permit fees. No permit is required for repair, repainting or maintenance which
does not entail structural change or for change of copy or message. Any change
of the sign face will be considered a structural change.
(1998 Code, § 98-61)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993; Ord. 99-28, passed 5-5-
1999)  Penalty, see § 155.999
§ 155.021  APPLICATION.
   Application for a sign erection permit shall be made upon a form provided by
the Building Inspector and shall contain and have attached the following:
   (A)   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
   (B)   Location of the building, structure or lot to which or upon which the
sign or other advertising structure is to be attached or erected;
   (C)   Position of the sign or other advertising structure in relation to
nearby buildings or structures;
   (D)   Two blueprints or drawings of the plans and specifications and method
of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground;
   (E)   A copy of registered professional engineer’s certification and
calculations showing that the structure is designed to meet the wind pressure
and dead load requirements of this chapter and all other laws and ordinances of
the city;
   (F)   Name of the person erecting the structure;
   (G)   Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land to
which or on which the structure is to be erected;
   (H)   Any required electrical permit;
   (I)   An insurance policy or bond as required by §
155.024 of this chapter; and
   (J)   Such other information as the Building Inspector shall require to show
full compliance with this chapter and all other laws and ordinances of the
city.
(1998 Code, § 98-62)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993)
§ 155.022  ISSUANCE; TIME LIMIT FOR COMPLETION OF WORK.
   Upon the filing of an application for a sign erection permit, the Building
Inspector shall:
   (A)   Examine the plans and specifications and the premises upon which the
proposed structure shall be erected; and
   (B)   Issue a permit if the proposed structure complies with the
requirements of this chapter and all other laws and ordinances of the city. If
the work authorized under an erection permit is not completed within six months
after the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void.
(1998 Code, § 98-63)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993)
§ 155.023  FEE.
   Every applicant, prior to issuance of a permit pursuant to §
155.022 of this chapter, shall pay to the city a non-refundable fee in
accordance with the SSBCI permit fee schedule on file with the Building
Official for each sign or other advertising structure regulated by this
chapter.
(1998 Code, § 98-64)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993)
§ 155.024  BOND OR LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   Every applicant for a sign permit shall, before the permit is granted, file
with the Building Inspector a continuing bond in the penal sum of $5,000,
executed by the applicant and a surety company to be approved by the City
Attorney and conditioned for the faithful observance of all laws and ordinances
relating to signs and other advertising structures, and which shall indemnify
and save harmless the city from any and all damages, judgments, costs or
expenses which the city may incur or suffer by reason of the granting of the
permit. A liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized
to do business in the state which conforms to the provisions of this section
may be permitted in lieu of a bond.
(1998 Code, § 98-65)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993)
§ 155.025  REVOCATION.
   The Building Inspector may revoke any permit issued under this chapter where
there has been a violation of the provisions of this chapter or a
misrepresentation of fact on the permit application.
(1998 Code, § 98-66)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993)
§ 155.026  SIGNS EXEMPTED FROM PERMITTING PROCESS.
   The following signs are exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter:
   (A)   Temporary signs not exceeding eight square feet in area which
advertise the sale, rental or lease of the premises upon which the sign is
located. Such signs shall be removed no later than seven days following sale or
rental of the subject property. These type signs must be located on private
property. Banners are not exempt and shall be permitted as a temporary sign as
set out in §
155.007 of this chapter;
   (B)   Temporary political signs concerning candidates for public office or
ballot issues as provided in this division (B). Such signs are exempt from the
permitting process if they are:
      (1)   Located in residential areas and the sign size is four square feet
or less, or located in commercial or open undeveloped land and the sign size is
32 square feet or less;
      (2)   Not erected earlier than 60 days prior to the election or
referendum;
      (3)   Removed seven days after the election or referendum; and
      (4)   Only located on private property.
   (C)   Temporary signs advertising the date, time and location of a garage or
yard sale and not exceeding four square feet in area. Such signs shall be
posted no more than three days prior to and removed one day after the sale;
   (D)   Signs attached to the inside of a window and not exceeding four square
feet in area which do not exceed 25% of the area of the window pane;
   (E)   Signs which are an integral part of the historic character of a
landmark building or historic district;
   (F)   Public signs regulating vehicular or pedestrian traffic or designating
or giving direction to streets, schools, hospitals, historical sites or public
facilities;
   (G)   Flags of any government or governmental agency or any patriotic,
religious, charitable, civic, educational or fraternal organization not
exceeding 40 square feet in area;
   (H)   Temporary signs in conjunction with special community events by non-
profit organizations, a campaign of a church, or other community activity. Such
signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, shall not be erected more than
ten days in advance of the event and shall be removed within one day after the
termination of the event. Temporary signs shall be securely anchored and shall
not exceed seven feet in height from ground level;
   (I)   Temporary displays or decorations customarily associated with any
national, state, local or religious holiday or celebration. Such signs shall be
erected no more than 45 days before and removed no later than 14 days after the
celebration;
   (J)   Handheld signs of a non-commercial nature not set on or affixed to the
ground and not exceeding ten square feet in area;
   (K)   Temporary signs identifying the architect, engineer, developer or
contractor when placed upon construction sites and not exceeding 64 square feet
in area. Such signs shall not be erected prior to approval of a site plan and
shall be removed no later than seven days after completion of the project;
   (L)   Commercial building occupational signs identifying the name and
profession of the occupant and not exceeding two square feet in area;
   (M)   Memorial or commemorative plaques or tablets denoting a building name
and/or date of erection or a location of historic significance and not
exceeding four square feet in area;
   (N)   Any sign for informational (non-advertisement) purposes not exceeding
one square foot in effective area with letters not exceeding four inches in
height; and
   (O)   Property identification signs indicating address and/or name and not
exceeding two square feet in area for residential land uses or five square feet
in area for non-residential land uses.
(1998 Code, § 98-67)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993; Ord. 94-22, passed 11-16-
1994; Ord. 99-28, passed 5-5-1999)
PROHIBITED SIGNS
§ 155.040  FAILURE TO OBTAIN PROPER PERMITS.
   No sign or other advertising structure shall be erected or maintained in
violation of the permit requirements of §
155.020 of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 98-91)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993)  Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.041  DAMAGED OR INADEQUATELY MAINTAINED SIGNS.
   No sign or other advertising structure shall be inadequately maintained so
as to show evidence of deterioration, including peeling, rust, dirt, fading,
discoloration or holes. Damaged signs shall be repaired or removed within 30
days of notice.
(1998 Code, § 98-92)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993)  Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.042  OUTDATED SIGNS.
   No sign or other advertising structure shall advertise a business or product
which is no longer in existence. Abandoned or outdated signs shall be replaced
or moved within 30 days of notice.
(1998 Code, § 98-93)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993)  Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.043  OBSTRUCTIONS TO DOORS, WINDOWS OR FIRE ESCAPES; ATTACHMENT TO
STANDPIPE OR FIRE ESCAPE.
   (A)   No sign or other advertising structure shall be erected, relocated or
maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or
fire escape.
   (B)   No sign of any kind shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
(1998 Code, § 98-94)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993)  Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.044  TRAFFIC HAZARDS.
   No sign or other advertising structure shall:
   (A)   Obstruct free and clear vision at any street intersection;
   (B)   Interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any
authorized traffic sign, signal or device because of its position, shape or
color; and/or
   (C)   Make use of the words “Stop”, “Look”, “Drive-in”, “Danger” or any
other word, phrase, symbol or character in a manner that interferes with,
misleads or confuses traffic.
(1998 Code, § 98-95)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993)  Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.045  UNSAFE SIGNS.
   No sign or other advertising structure shall constitute a hazard to safety
or health by reason of inadequate design, construction, repair or maintenance.
(1998 Code, § 98-96)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993)  Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.046  ILLUMINATED SIGNS.
   (A)   No sign or other advertising structure shall be illuminated with
lights which glare into or upon the surrounding area or any residential
premises or distract operators of vehicles or pedestrians on the public right-
of-way.
   (B)   This includes any private sign attached to or located on public
property or in a public right-of-way or easement.
(1998 Code, § 98-97)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993)  Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.047  FLASHING SIGNS.
   No sign or other advertising structure shall have lights or illuminations
that flash, move, scroll, rotate, scintillate, blink, flicker, vary in
intensity or color, or use intermittent electrical pulsations except as
provided in § 155.050 of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 98-98)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993; Ord. 99-28, passed 5-5-
1999)  Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.048  OBSCENE SIGNS.
   No sign or other advertising structure shall display any matter in which the
dominant theme of the material taken as a whole appeals to a prurient interest
in sex, or is patently offensive because it affronts contemporary community
standards relating to the description or representation of sexual matters, and
is utterly without redeeming social value.
(1998 Code, § 98-99)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993)  Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.049  VEHICULAR SIGNS.
   No sign shall be painted on or attached to a motor vehicle used primarily
for the display of such sign. This section shall not prohibit the
identification of a business or its products or services on its vehicles
operated and parked in a manner appropriate to the normal course of business.
No vehicle sign shall extend beyond the frame or body more than 12 inches.
(1998 Code, § 98-100)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993; Ord. 99-28, passed 5-5-
1999)  Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.050  MOVING SIGNS.
   No sign shall have visible moving, revolving or rotating parts or visible
mechanical movement of any kind, except for the movable hands on street clocks,
or other apparent visible movement achieved by electrical, electronic or
mechanical means, which changes every 15 seconds or less.
(1998 Code, § 98-101)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993; Ord. 99-28, passed 5-5-
1999)  Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.051  POSTING SIGNS ON TREES, UTILITY POLES OR OTHER FIXTURES.
   No person shall attach or maintain a sign upon any tree, street sign, bench,
fence, utility pole or other public or private amenity.
(1998 Code, § 98-102)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993; Ord. 99-28, passed 5-5-
1999)  Penalty, see §
155.999
ALLOWABLE SIGNS
§ 155.065  ON-PREMISES FREESTANDING SIGNS.
   (A)   General. The two common type ground/freestanding signs allowed are
pole-supported and monument style signs. These signs must be located on the
site where the goods or services are offered.
   (B)   Pole-supported signs.
      (1)   On-premises pole signs are permitted only in districts zoned D, D-
1, E, E-1, E-2, E-3, E-4, F, F-1, G, G-2 and H.
      (2)   Standards:
         (a)   One skirted sign is permitted for each development, with an
allowable total sign area of 80 square fee, including the frame. The skirted
sign may not exceed 20 feet in height. The skirt width shall be a maximum of
four feet and a minimum of two feet.
         (b)   Only one single pole for each single business is allowed and a
maximum of two poles is allowed for integrated business signs.
         (c)   No additional sign shall be permitted for a business that is
located on the corner of two streets.
         (d)   Signs shall have a maximum length to width ratio and width to
length ratio of three to one. The minimum bottom height of a pole sign shall be
nine feet.
         (e)   Integrated business developments (multi-tenant centers). Multi-
tenant centers may increase the area of the sign by a maximum of 15 square feet
per additional tenant, up to a maximum area of 155 square feet for six tenants.
For integrated business developments (multi-tenant centers) of more than six
tenants, a maximum of two signs is allowed with a 100-foot minimum separation.
Temporary business and portable signs shall be permitted according to §§
155.007 and
155.068 of this chapter.
   (C)   Monument signs.
      (1)   Number of signs. The only type of ground sign permitted in district
C, C-1, O-P and P-I is a monument sign. Only one monument sign may be installed
per premises or developed lot.
      (2)   Single-occupant parcels.
         (a)   Height. Detached monument signs, including the base, advertising
single occupancies, shall not exceed six feet in height above the average grade
of the development.
         (b)   Area. Signs may be single- or double-faced, with the actual sign
face not exceeding 60 square feet per side. Total cross-sectional area shall
not exceed five square feet.
         (c)   Location. The sign may be located five feet inside the property
line provided it does not create hazards to traffic or pedestrians. The
Building Official shall approve the exact location of the sign. A setback from
the corner of 45 feet is required at all intersection corners.
      (3)   Integrated business developments and multi-occupant parcels.
         (a)   Parcels having two or more businesses, as permitted by
individual certificate of occupancy permits, may have a multi-occupancy
(community) pedestal sign in place of a single-occupancy sign.
         (b)   A multi-occupancy pedestal sign shall not exceed six feet in
height above the average grade of the nearest public right-of-way. Signs may be
single- or double-faced, with the actual sign face not exceeding 60 square
feet, plus five square feet for each business in the center. Total cross
sectional area shall not exceed eight square feet.
         (c)   Multi-family developments with main entrances on different
streets or 250 feet apart shall be permitted one pedestal sign at each such
entrance.
   (D)   Detached accessory signs. A maximum of two detached accessory signs,
such as menu boards for drive-through restaurants, are permitted per lot or
tract. The sign shall not exceed six feet in height and shall be single-faced,
with the message area not exceeding 20 square feet. The signs shall not face a
public right-of-way which serves the front of the building.
   (E)   Businesses in the IH-45 Highway Corridor. For purposes of this
division (E), the HIGHWAY CORRIDOR shall mean an area adjacent to and either
side of the right-of-way line of IH-45 within the limits of the city. Within
the Highway Corridor, the maximum height of a ground sign shall be 42.5 feet
and a maximum square footage of 160 square feet. Pole signs shall be skirted.
(1998 Code, § 98-131)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993; Ord. 99-28, passed 5-5-
1999; Ord. 00-42, passed 7-19-2000; Ord. 01-16, passed 7-3-2001)
§ 155.066  ATTACHED SIGNS.
   This section shall apply to all attached signs, including painted wall signs
and temporary business signs.
   (A)   Number of signs.
      (1)   Single-occupancy buildings shall not be limited as to number of
signs allowed.
      (2)   A multi-occupant building may have up to one attached sign for each
occupant on each side of the building.
   (B)   Total area. Total effective area of attached signs shall not exceed
the lesser of the following:
      (1)   The total area of all attached signs on each side of a building
shall not exceed two square feet per length of wall on that side of the
building.
      (2)   In districts zoned E, E-1, E-2, E-3, E-4, F, F-1, G and H, no
single attached sign shall exceed 250 square feet in effective area.
      (3)   No attached sign shall exceed 100 square feet in effective area in
districts O-P, D, D-1 and P-I.
   (C)   Projection from building surface. All attached signs and their words
shall be mounted parallel to the building surface to which they are attached,
and shall project not more than 18 inches from the surface except as follows.
      (1)   Any on-premises or any non-residential occupancy may erect not more
than one attached sign projecting up to a maximum of four feet from a vertical
building surface, but not above the roof; provided that, the sign does not
exceed 20 square feet in effective area and that no part of the sign descends
closer to site grade than ten feet, or projects into or over any public right-
of-way.
      (2)   No business or non-residential occupancy may erect a sign above the
eaves or edge of the roof, or above a parapet, or above or below an edge of a
canopy.
(1998 Code, § 98-132)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993; Ord. 00-55, passed 9-20-
2000)  Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.067  OFF-PREMISES SIGNS.
   (A)   Off-premises signs shall only be allowed within 100 feet of the right-
of-way line of Interstate Highway 45, State Highway 3 and State Highway 146
south of Loop 197 North, FM 517 (from Gum Bayou to State Highway 146), and
State Highway (from Loop 197 north to State Highway 646), and only if the sign
is located in districts zoned E, E-2, E-3, E-4, F, F-1, G, H and S-P.
   (B)   Signs must be located a minimum of 100 feet from all other zoned
districts.
   (C)   Signs must be located a minimum of 300 feet from the intersection of
any state highways and 100 feet from the intersection of any non-state road or
street.
   (D)   Maximum face area of the sign shall not exceed 672 square feet per
side, including structural trim. Maximum height shall be 42.5 feet from ground
level.
   (E)   There shall be a minimum separation of 3,500 feet between off-premises
signs on the same side of the highway.
(1998 Code, § 98-133)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993; Ord. 04-54, passed 11-3-
2004)  Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.068  PORTABLE SIGNS.
   (A)   Permitted signs for businesses. Portable signs shall be permitted, on-
premises, on a temporary basis, one time per certificate of occupancy, for the
initial opening of a business for a period of time not exceeding 30 days; plus,
a portable sign may be used for a maximum continuous period of 30 days per
calendar year on-premises.
   (B)   Permitted signs for governmental agencies. Portable signs shall be
permitted on a temporary basis for use by governmental agencies for
notification of general public events and public information.
   (C)   Permitted signs for non-profit organizations. Portable signs shall be
permitted on a temporary basis for use by non-profit organizations with an
annual use of not more than 15 days.
   (D)   Location generally. The location of a portable sign must be approved
by the Building Official and may not constitute a traffic hazard.
   (E)   Area. The maximum area per side of the sign shall be 60 square feet.
   (F)   Location of business signs. Portable signs for businesses shall be
located on the site and shall be allowed only in districts zoned O-P, D, D-1,
P-I, E, E-1, E-2, E-3, E-4, F, F-1, G, G-1 and H.
   (G)   Construction standards. Portable signs shall be securely anchored and
constructed and erected in accordance with the City Building Code and
Electrical Code.
   (H)   Setbacks. Setbacks shall be in accordance with §
155.065(C) of this chapter, pertaining to monument signs.
   (I)   Permit fee. The permit fee for portable signs shall be $10, plus an
electrical permit fee of $5 if the sign is lighted.
(1998 Code, § 98-134)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993)
§ 155.069  GARAGE SALE SIGNS.
   The person holding a garage sale shall be entitled to post two on-premises
and two off-premises temporary signs on private property only. Said signs shall
not exceed two square feet in size. All signs must be removed by Sunday at 6:00
p.m. after the sale, or the holder of the sale is subject to penalties.
(1998 Code, § 98-135)  (Ord. 99-28, passed 5-5-1999)
§ 155.070  OFF-PREMISES SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION AND DIRECTIONAL SIGNS.
   (A)   Location. Off-premises signs shall not be located on public rights-of-
way and shall maintain a five-foot setback from public right-of-ways. Off-
premises signs will only be permitted on undeveloped private property with the
written consent of the property owner or agent for the owner of said property.
   (B)   Permit. A registered sign contractor shall submit a permit application
which shall include a site plan, sign specifications and a notarized copy of
the property owners consent form. A permit fee of $25 will be assessed for each
sign.
   (C)   Size. Off-premises signs will not exceed 64 square feet per sign face,
maximum height of 12 feet, minimum height of four feet to bottom of sign.
   (D)   Number of off-premises signs. For the purpose of marketing, a recorded
subdivision will be allowed two off-premises signs. Such permitted signs are
allowed for a maximum period of two years and upon expiration of such two-year
period shall be promptly removed. If the subdivision is less than 80% sold at
the end of such two-year period, the sign may be permitted for two additional
years. At the end of the additional two-year time period said sign will be
promptly removed.
   (E)   Off-premises sign information. The off-premises sign shall be limited
to the following information:
      (1)   Name of the subdivision;
      (2)   Location of the subdivision;
      (3)   Distance of the subdivision; and
      (4)   Directions (with directional map) to the subdivision.
(1998 Code, § 98-136)  (Ord. 04-10, passed 5-5-2004)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 155.085  NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.
   Any sign or other advertising structure except portable and temporary signs
legally in existence on 11-17-1993, shall be allowed to remain as a non-
conforming sign and may continue its non-conforming use status unless:
   (A)   The sign is damaged by more than 50% of its total replacement value;
   (B)   The sign has been issued a temporary permit or there are conditional
restraints;
   (C)   The sign is structurally altered to change it size, shape or height or
location; and
   (D)   Any existing sign which does not meet the requirements of §§
155.041 through
155.051 of this chapter shall be brought into compliance with these
requirements upon written notice by the Building Official or removed within 30
days of notice.
(1998 Code, § 98-31)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993)
§ 155.086  NOTICE OF VIOLATION; REMOVAL OR ALTERATION OF UNLAWFUL SIGNS.
   If the Building Official finds that any sign or other advertising structure
is prohibited by the provisions of this chapter, including signs in violation
of maintenance and outdated message provisions under §§
155.041 and
155.042 of this chapter, the Building Official shall give written notice to the
permittee or the owner of the property upon which the structure is located. If
the permittee or owner fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply
with the standards set forth in this chapter within ten calendar days after
such notice, the Building Official may undertake such removal or alteration as
is necessary to bring the structure into compliance and assess the costs to the
permittee or owner. The Building Official may cause any sign or other
advertising structure which presents an immediate peril to persons or property
to be removed or altered immediately and without notice.
(1998 Code, § 98-32)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993; Ord. 99-28, passed 5-5-
1999)
§ 155.087  PROTECTION OF FIRST AMENDMENT RIGHTS.
   Any sign allowed under this chapter may contain, in lieu of any other copy,
any lawful non-commercial message that does not direct attention to a business
operated for profit or to a commodity or service for sale and that complies
with all other requirements of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 98-33)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993)
§ 155.999  PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the
penalty set out in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(1998 Code, § 98-33)  (Ord. 93-69, passed 11-17-1993)
CHAPTER 156:  MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS
Section
General Provisions
   
156.01   Definitions
   
156.02   Trailers outside licensed park
   
156.03   Regulation of single-family and duplex industrialized housing
Mobile Home Parks
   
156.15   Compliance with chapter and zoning ordinance
   
156.16   Location
   
156.17   Off-street parking
   
156.18   Driveways
   
156.19   Walkways
   
156.20   Construction generally
   
156.21   Electrical outlets
   
156.22   Appurtenances to mobile homes
   
156.23   Natural or artificial barrier required along park boundaries
   
156.24   Water supply
   
156.25   Sewage disposal; sewer connections
   
156.26   Garbage receptacles
   
156.27   Fire protection
   
156.28   Animals running at large or committing nuisance
   
156.29   Maintenance
   
156.30   Register of occupants
   
156.31   Supervision
Mobile Home Park Licensing
   
156.45   Required
   
156.46   Filing and contents of application
   
156.47   Hearing on application
   
156.48   Standards for evaluation of application
   
156.49   Fee; issuance; conditions
   
156.50   Posting
   
156.51   Transfer
   
156.52   Revocation and reinstatement
   
156.53   Rules for park management required; responsibilities of operator
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LICENSEE. Any person licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home park
under the provisions of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, that was constructed on or after 6-15-1976,
transportable in one or more sections which, in the traveling mode, is eight
feet or more in width, or 40 feet or more in length, or when erected on site is
320 or more square feet in area and which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-
conditioning and electrical systems. The term does not include a recreational
vehicle.
   MOBILE HOME. A structure that was constructed before 6-15-1976,
transportable in one or more sections which, in the traveling mode, is eight
feet or more in width, or 40 feet or more in length, or when erected on site is
320 or more square feet in area and which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-
conditioning and electrical systems. The term does not include a recreational
vehicle.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. Any plot of ground upon which facilities are provided for
locating one or more mobile or manufactured homes to be occupied for dwelling
or sleeping purposes, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for the
accommodation.
   MOBILE HOME SPACE. A plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for
the accommodation of one mobile or manufactured home.
   MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any structure designed and intended to accommodate more
than one family, including, but not limited to, duplex buildings, group houses
and apartment buildings.
   NATURAL OR ARTIFICIAL BARRIER. Any embankment, fence, hedge or other feature
that serves to block direct pedestrian access or visibility.
   OPERATOR. The person in charge of operating any mobile home park either
under written or verbal lease or under any other arrangement whereby he
exercises control over the premises.
   OWNER. The person in whose name the title to the lot, block, tract or parcel
of land is shown to be.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a temporary permit is issued to maintain or
operate a mobile home park under the provisions of this chapter.
   TRAILER. A mobile or manufactured home.
(1998 Code, § 74-1)  (Ord. 02-53, passed 12-4-2002)
§ 156.02  TRAILERS OUTSIDE LICENSED PARK.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, maintain or live in any
manufactured home in any place in the city other than a duly licensed and
lawful mobile home park.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, maintain or live in any
mobile home in any place in the city other than a duly licensed and lawful
mobile home park, and only where the mobile home was lawfully located in said
mobile home park on 1-1-2003.
   (C)   Any owner of a mobile home lawfully located on a duly licensed and
lawful mobile home park on 1-1-2003, shall be allowed to replace the mobile
home with a manufactured home.
(1998 Code, § 74-2)  (Ord. 02-53, passed 12-4-2002)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.03  REGULATION OF SINGLE-FAMILY AND DUPLEX INDUSTRIALIZED HOUSING.
   (A)   Single-family or duplex industrialized housing must have all local
permits and licenses that are applicable to other single-family or duplex
dwellings.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, single-family or duplex industrialized
housing is real property.
   (C)   Any industrialized housing shall:
      (1)   Have a value equal to or greater than the median taxable value for
each single-family dwelling located within 500 feet of the lot on which the
industrialized housing is proposed to be located, as determined by the most
recent certified tax appraisal roll for the county;
      (2)   Have exterior siding, roofing, roof pitch, foundation fascia and
fenestration compatible with the single-family dwellings located within 500
feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located;
      (3)   Comply with city aesthetic standards, building setbacks, side and
rear yard offsets, subdivision control, architectural landscaping, square
footage and other site requirements applicable to single-family dwellings; and
      (4)   Be securely fixed to a permanent foundation.
   (D)   For purposes of division (C) above, VALUE means the taxable value of
the industrialized housing and lot after installation of the housing.
   (E)   (1)   Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, erect,
install or move any industrialized housing into the city shall first make
application to the Building Official and obtain the required permits.
      (2)   In addition to any other information otherwise required for said
permits, the application shall:
         (a)   Identify each single-family dwelling located within 500 feet of
the lot on which the industrialized housing is to be located, and show the
taxable value for each such dwelling as determined by the most recent certified
tax appraisal roll for the county;
         (b)   Describe the exterior siding, roofing, roof pitch, foundation
fascia and fenestration for each single-family dwelling located with 500 feet
of the lot on which the industrialized housing is to be located;
         (c)   Describe the permanent foundation and method of attachment
proposed for the industrialized housing;
         (d)   State the taxable value of the industrialized housing and the
lot after installation of the industrialized housing; and
         (e)   Indicate the deed restrictions otherwise applicable to the real
property on which the industrialized housing is to be located.
   (F)   A person commits an offense if the person:
      (1)   Fails to make an application for a permit as required by this
section; or
      (2)   Constructs, erects, installs or moves any industrialized housing
into the city which does not comply with this section.
   (G)   This chapter does not limit the authority of the city to adopt
regulations to protect historic properties or historic districts.
(1998 Code, § 74-80)  (Ord. 03-30, passed 8-6-2003)
MOBILE HOME PARKS
§ 156.15  COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER AND ZONING ORDINANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, conduct, operate or
maintain any trailer park within the corporate limits of the city without fully
complying with all the provisions of this chapter and with the provisions of
Ch. 160 of this code of ordinances.
(1998 Code, § 74-31)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.16  LOCATION.
   Mobile home parks may be located in any district of the city as prescribed
by the city zoning ordinance as amended, Ch. 160 of this code of ordinances.
(1998 Code, § 74-32)
§ 156.17  OFF-STREET PARKING.
   Off-street parking facilities in the ratio of one space for each mobile home
space shall be provided in each mobile home park.
(1998 Code, § 74-33)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.18  DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   All mobile home spaces within a mobile home park shall abut upon a
driveway of not less than 20 feet in width, which shall have unobstructed
access to a public street, alley or highway.
   (B)   All driveways within each mobile home park shall be provided with an
all-weather surface and lighted at night with electric lamps of not less than
25 watts each, spaced at intervals of not more than 100 feet.
(1998 Code, § 74-34)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.19  WALKWAYS.
   Walkways not less than two feet wide shall be provided from the mobile home
spaces to the service buildings within each mobile home park.
(1998 Code, § 74-35)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.20  CONSTRUCTION GENERALLY.
   All plumbing, electrical, building and other work on or at any camp licensed
under the provisions of this chapter shall be in conformity with the provisions
of this code, state law and city ordinances, rules and regulations regulating
the work.
(1998 Code, § 74-36)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.21  ELECTRICAL OUTLETS.
   Each mobile home park shall provide an electrical outlet supplying at least
110 volts for each mobile home space.
(1998 Code, § 74-37)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.22  APPURTENANCES TO MOBILE HOMES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person operating a mobile home park or
occupying a mobile home to construct or permit to be constructed in the park or
in connection with the mobile home any additional structure, building or
shelter in connection with or attached to a mobile home, except awnings of
canvas or metal suitably constructed.
(1998 Code, § 74-38)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.23  NATURAL OR ARTIFICIAL BARRIER REQUIRED ALONG PARK BOUNDARIES.
   Each boundary of a mobile home park, except those adjacent to a street or
highway right-of-way, shall be provided with a continuous natural or artificial
barrier.
(1998 Code, § 74-39)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.24  WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and sanitary purposes
shall be supplied by pipes to all buildings and mobile home spaces within the
mobile home park to meet the requirements of the park.
   (B)   Each of the individual mobile home spaces shall be provided with a
cold water tap at least four inches above the ground.
   (C)   An adequate supply of hot water shall be provided at all times in the
service buildings for all bathing, washing, cleansing and laundry facilities.
(1998 Code, § 74-40)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.25  SEWAGE DISPOSAL; SEWER CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Waste from showers, bathtubs, flush toilets, urinals, lavatories, slop
sinks and laundries in service and other buildings within each mobile home park
shall be discharged into a public sewer system in compliance with applicable
provisions of this code or into a private sewer and disposal plant or septic
tank system of such construction and in such manner as will present no health
hazard.
   (B)   Each mobile home space shall be provided with a trapped sewer at least
four inches in diameter, which shall be connected to receive the waste from the
shower, bathtub, flush toilet, lavatory and kitchen sink of the mobile home
harbored in the space and having any or all of the facilities. The trapped
sewer in each space shall be connected to discharge the mobile home waste into
a public sewer system in compliance with applicable provisions of this code or
into a private sewer disposal plant or septic tank system of such construction
and in such manner as will present no health hazard.
(1998 Code, § 74-41)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.26  GARBAGE RECEPTACLES.
   Metal garbage cans with tightfitting covers shall be provided in each mobile
home park in quantities adequate to permit disposal of all garbage and rubbish.
Garbage cans shall be located not further than 300 feet from any mobile home
space. The cans shall be kept in sanitary condition at all times. Garbage and
rubbish shall be collected and disposed of as frequently as may be necessary to
ensure that the garbage cans shall not overflow.
(1998 Code, § 74-42)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.27  FIRE PROTECTION.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Every mobile home park shall be equipped at all times with fire
extinguishing equipment in good working order, of such type, size and number
and so located within the park as to satisfy applicable reasonable regulations
of the Fire Department.
      (2)   No open fires shall be permitted at any place which may endanger
life or property.
      (3)   No fires shall be left unattended at any time.
   (B)   Bottled gas.
      (1)   Bottled gas for cooking purposes shall not be used at individual
mobile home spaces unless the containers are properly connected by copper or
other suitable metallic tubing. Bottled gas cylinders shall be securely
fastened in place.
      (2)   No cylinder containing bottled gas shall be located in a mobile
home space or within five feet of a door thereof.
      (3)   State and local regulations applicable to the handling of bottled
gas and fuel must be followed.
(1998 Code, § 74-43)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.28  ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE OR COMMITTING NUISANCE.
   No owner or person in charge of any dog, cat or other pet animal shall
permit it to run at large or commit any nuisance within the limits of any
mobile home park.
(1998 Code, § 74-44)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.29  MAINTENANCE.
   All service buildings and the grounds of each mobile home park shall be
maintained in a clean, sightly condition and kept free of any condition that
will menace the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance. 
Penalty, see §
10.99
(1998 Code, § 74-45)
§ 156.30  REGISTER OF OCCUPANTS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of each licensee or permittee under the
provisions of this chapter to keep a register containing a record of all mobile
home owners and occupants located within the mobile home park. The register
shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of each mobile home occupant;
      (2)   The name and address of the owner of each mobile home and the motor
vehicle by which it is towed;
      (3)   The make, model, year and license number of each mobile home and
motor vehicle;
      (4)   The state, territory or country issuing the licenses; and
      (5)   The date of arrival and of departure of each mobile home.
   (B)   The park shall keep the register available for inspection at all times
by law enforcement officers, public health officials and other officials whose
duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register.
The register record for each occupant registered shall not be destroyed for a
period of three years following the date of departure of the registrant from
the park.
(1998 Code, § 74-46)
§ 156.31  SUPERVISION.
   The licensee or permittee under the provisions of this chapter, or a duly
authorized attendant or caretaker, shall be in charge at all times and shall
keep the mobile home park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and
sanitary condition. The attendant or caretaker shall be answerable, with the
licensee or permittee, for the violation of any provision of this chapter to
which the licensee or permittee is subject.
(1998 Code, § 74-47)  Penalty, see §
10.99
MOBILE HOME PARK LICENSING
§ 156.45  REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a mobile home
park within the limits of the city unless the person shall first obtain a
license therefor.
(1998 Code, § 74-61)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 156.46  FILING AND CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   Applications for mobile home park licenses shall be filed in
triplicate with and issued by the Building Official.
   (B)   The application shall be in writing, shall be signed by the applicant
and shall include the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The location and legal description of the mobile home park;
      (3)   A complete plan of the park;
      (4)   Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements and
facilities constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park; and
      (5)   Any further information as may be requested to enable determination
that the proposed park will comply with legal requirements.
(1998 Code, § 74-62)
§ 156.47  HEARING ON APPLICATION.
   Upon the filing of an application for a mobile home park license, a public
hearing shall be set by the City Commission on the application. Prior thereto,
notice of the hearing shall be given to each property owner owning property
within 200 feet of the tract upon which the applicant proposes to establish a
trailer park by mailing to each property owner a written notice, by first class
mail, ten days before the hearing, at the address shown by the latest tax roll
of the City Tax Assessor and Collector. Additionally, notice shall be given by
publishing the notice in the official newspaper of the city one time at least
ten days prior to the hearing. The notice shall state the date, time, place and
purpose of the hearing. At the hearing, the applicant, witnesses for the
applicant, his or her attorney, those contesting the application and their
attorneys will be heard. Any documentary evidence advanced by either side,
including letters bearing on the subject of the hearing, will be filed and
considered.
(1998 Code, § 74-63)
§ 156.48  STANDARDS FOR EVALUATION OF APPLICATION.
   In passing upon the question of whether the application for a mobile home
park license should be granted, the City Commission shall consider the
following:
   (A)   The density of dwelling and commercial properties within the immediate
vicinity;
   (B)   Elevation and drainage of the proposed location;
   (C)   Size of the tract and the number of units proposed to be constructed
or installed thereon;
   (D)   The availability of public water and sanitary sewer facilities;
   (E)   The availability of water in volume for use in the event of fire;
   (F)   Health characteristics of the site; and
   (H)   Any other characteristics of the proposed trailer park use as the
Commission may deem proper.
(1998 Code, § 74-64)
§ 156.49  FEE; ISSUANCE; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   A fee in the sum of $100 shall accompany the application for a mobile
home park license when filed with the Building Official and shall not be
refundable even if the application is rejected.
   (B)   After a hearing, the City Commission shall have the power to issue a
license for the trailer park.
   (C)   However, if the City Commission deems it in the public interest,
before issuance of a license, the Commission may provide that reasonable
requirements or conditions shall be met so as to bring the site of the trailer
park as planned up to a good level of usefulness in keeping with the provisions
of this chapter. Within six months of this action, but not thereafter, the
Building Official shall issue the license upon satisfactory proof from the
applicant that all of the requirements or conditions have been met.
(1998 Code, § 74-65) (Ord. 13-10, passed 4-3-2013)
§ 156.50  POSTING.
   The license issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
conspicuously posted in the office of or on the premises of the mobile home
park at all times.
(1998 Code, § 74-66)
§ 156.51  TRANSFER.
   Upon application, in writing, for transfer of a license issued under the
provisions of this subchapter and payment of a fee of $25, the Building
Official shall issue a transfer if the transferee is of good moral character.
(1998 Code, § 74-67)
§ 156.52  REVOCATION AND REINSTATEMENT.
   The Building Official may revoke any license to maintain and operate a
mobile home park when the licensee has been found guilty by a court of
competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this chapter or applicable
provision of this code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation. After
the conviction, the license may be reissued if the circumstances leading to
conviction have been remedied and the park is being maintained and operated in
full compliance with law.
(1998 Code, § 74-68)
§ 156.53  RULES FOR PARK MANAGEMENT REQUIRED; RESPONSIBILITIES OF OPERATOR.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every person conducting or in control of a
mobile home park, or his or her manager or agent, to prescribe rules and
regulations for the management of the mobile home park, to make adequate
provisions for the enforcement of the rules and regulations and to furnish
copies of all the rules and regulations to the Health Department of the city.
   (B)   In addition to complying with all provisions and requirements of this
chapter and all future lawful ordinances and regulations adopted or promulgated
by the City Commission, every person owning or conducting or in the management
and control of any mobile home park shall, in connection with the mobile home
park, comply strictly with each and all of the following:
      (1)   Provide for regular and periodic inspections of the water and
sanitary conveniences in the mobile home park;
      (2)   Provide for the regular collection and removal of garbage and other
waste materials;
      (3)   Provide for the regular cleaning, painting, repairing and
disinfecting of all buildings;
      (4)   Take any other measures as may be deemed to be necessary by the
Health Department to preserve the health, comfort and safety of all persons
residing in the mobile home park and the general public; and
      (5)   Take proper measures to prevent and suppress lewd or disorderly
conduct within the mobile home park and report immediately to the Police
Department of the city all lewd acts or acts of disorderly character committed
by any person inside the mobile home park.
(1998 Code, § 74-69)
CHAPTER 157:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
157.01   Statutory authority
   
157.02   Findings of fact
   
157.03   Purpose of chapter
   
157.04   Methods of reducing flood losses
   
157.05   Definitions
   
157.06   Applicability of chapter
   
157.07   Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard
   
157.08   Development permit required
   
157.09   Compliance with chapter
   
157.10   Abrogation of existing agreements or restrictions; conflicting
regulations
   
157.11   Interpretation of chapter
   
157.12   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
157.25   Floodplain Administrator; duties
   
157.26   Application for development permit; standards for approval
   
157.27   Variances
Flood Hazard Reduction Provisions
   
157.40   General standards
   
157.41   Specific standards
   
157.42   Standards for subdivision proposals
   
157.43   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones)
   
157.44   Floodways
   
157.45   Coastal high-hazard areas
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 157.01  STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   The legislature of the state has, in Tex. Water Code §§ 16.311 et seq.,
commonly called the Flood Control and Insurance Act of Texas, delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to
minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Commission does ordain the
provisions of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 58-31)
§ 157.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
(1998 Code, § 58-32)
§ 157.03  PURPOSE OF CHAPTER.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area.
(1998 Code, § 58-33)
§ 157.04  METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following
methods:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve as such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(1998 Code, § 58-34)
§ 157.05  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter, or a request for a variance.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on a community’s
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a 1% chance or greater annual chance of
flooding to an average depth of one to three feet, where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may
be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed
ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone
A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equalled or exceeded in
any given year.
   BREAKAWAY WALL. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or supporting foundation system.
   COASTAL HIGH-HAZARD AREA. The area subject to high-velocity waters,
including but not limited to hurricane wave wash or tsunamis. The area is
designated on a FIRM as Zone V1-30, VE or V.
   CRITICAL FEATURE. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood
protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
   ELEVATED BUILDING.
      (1)   A non-basement building:
         (a)   Built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO,
AH, B, C, X and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a
building in Zones V1-30, VE or V to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal
structural member of the elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by
means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the
flow of the water; and
         (b)   Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity
of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood.
      (2)   In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, the
term ELEVATED BUILDING also includes a building elevated by means of fill or
solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of Zones V1-30, VE or V, the
term ELEVATED BUILDING also includes a building otherwise meeting the
definition of ELEVATED BUILDING , even though the lower area is enclosed by
means of breakaway walls, if the breakaway walls meet the standards of § 60.3
(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM, or before 1-1-1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. EXISTING
CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as EXISTING STRUCTURES .
   FLOOD and FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, and the water surface
elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map.
   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works for which funds
have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the
depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood-modifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
   FLOODPLAIN and FLOODPRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source. (See FLOOD and FLOODING .)
   FLOODWAY and REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than a designated height.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair
facilities, but does not include longterm storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   HABITABLE FLOOR. Any floor usable for the following purposes: working,
sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation or a combination thereof. A floor used
for storage purposes only is not a HABITABLE FLOOR .
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of levees and
associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are
constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR ; provided that, such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirement of § 60.3 of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain
management purposes, the term MANUFACTURED HOME also includes park trailers,
travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than
180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term MANUFACTURED HOME does
not include park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community’s flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For floodplain management purposes, structures for which
the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. Law No. 97-348)
being 16 U.S.C. §§ 3501 et seq., includes substantial improvement and means the
date the building permit was issued; provided, the actual START of
construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within
180 days of the permit date. The actual START means either the first placement
of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any
work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on
a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basements, footings, piers
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either
before the improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been
damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of
this definition, SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure.
      (2)   The term does not, however, include either any project for
improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health,
sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure
safe living conditions, or any alteration of a structure listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this
chapter, when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A
VARIANCE , therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise
prohibited by this chapter. (For full requirements, see § 60.6 of the National
Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or
other evidence of compliance required in § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3),
(e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
(1998 Code, § 58-35)
§ 157.06  APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the city.
(1998 Code, § 58-36)
§ 157.07  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood
Insurance Study for the City of Texas City, Texas”, dated 11-2-1982, with
accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM
and FBFM) and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 58-37)
§ 157.08  DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 58-38)
§ 157.09  COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other
applicable regulations.
(1998 Code, § 58-39)
§ 157.10  ABROGATION OF EXISTING AGREEMENTS OR RESTRICTIONS; CONFLICTING
REGULATIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
(1998 Code, § 58-40)
§ 157.11  INTERPRETATION OF CHAPTER.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the City Commission; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit, nor repeal, any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(1998 Code, § 58-41)
§ 157.12  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur, and flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the city or any official or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(1998 Code, § 58-42)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 157.25  FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR; DUTIES.
   (A)   Designation. The Chief Building Official is hereby appointed the
Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this
chapter and appropriate sections of 44 C.F.R. (the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
(1998 Code, § 58-61)
   (B)   Duties. Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
shall include, but not be limited to, the following.
      (1)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain and hold open for
public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review permit applications to
determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from
flooding.
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review, approve or deny all
applications for development permits required by this chapter.
      (4)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review permits for proposed
development to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those
federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is
required (including permits required under § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.).
      (5)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation.
      (6)   The Floodplain Administrator shall notify, in riverine situations,
adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, which is the State
Water Commission, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and
submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
      (7)   The Floodplain Administrator shall ensure that the flood-carrying
capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is
maintained.
      (8)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with §
157.07 of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available
from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
§§
157.40 through
157.45 of this chapter.
      (9)   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain
Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and
AE on the community’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative
effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
(1998 Code, § 58-62)
§ 157.26  APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT PERMIT; STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL.
   (A)   Application for a development permit shall be presented to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him or her and may include, but
shall not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
location, dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations and
existing and proposed structures, and their location in relation to areas of
special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
      (1)   Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
      (2)   Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any non-
residential structure shall be floodproofed;
      (3)   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the non-residential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing
criteria of §
157.41(B) of this chapter;
      (4)   A description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
      (5)   A record of all such information in accordance with §
157.25(B) of this chapter.
   (B)   Approval or denial of a development permit by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
      (1)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (3)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (4)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (5)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (6)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
      (7)   The expected height, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      (8)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (9)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
      (10)   The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan for
that area.
(1998 Code, § 58-63)
§ 157.27  VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Appeal Board as established by the city shall hear and render
judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   The Appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination
made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
   (C)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal
such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
   (D)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
   (E)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this section.
   (F)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous
to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in §
157.26(B) of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
   (G)   Upon consideration of the factors noted in this section and the intent
of this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
chapter as set out in §
157.03 of this chapter.
   (H)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (I)   Prerequisites for granting variances are as follows.
      (1)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of
the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      (3)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
   (J)   Variances may be issued by the city for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use; provided that:
      (1)   The criteria outlined in divisions (A) through (I) above are met;
and
      (2)   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety.
(1998 Code, § 58-64)
FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION PROVISIONS
§ 157.40  GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required
for all new construction and substantial improvements.
   (A)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
   (B)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage.
   (D)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering and accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (H)   All new construction or any substantial improvement located in a non-
special flood hazard shall be constructed at seven feet mean sea level or 18
inches above the curb of the street, whichever is greater.
(1998 Code, § 58-81)  (Ord. 08-16, passed 5-7-2008)
§ 157.41  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has
been provided as set forth in §§
157.07,
157.25(B) or
157.42 of this chapter, the following provisions are required.
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional
engineer, architect or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the
Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this division (A), as proposed in
§
157.26(A)(1) of this chapter, is satisfied.
   (B)   Non-residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other non-residential structure
shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above
the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
water-tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this division (B). A record of such certification which includes the
specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (C)   Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria.
      (1)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
      (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
      (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices; provided that, they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
   (D)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   All manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A shall be
installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the
purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored
to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
      (2)   All manufactured homes shall be in compliance with division (D)(1)
above.
      (3)   All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community’s FIRM shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
or above the base flood elevation, and shall be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of this
division (D).
(1998 Code, § 58-82)
§ 157.42  STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, shall be consistent with §§
157.02 through
157.04.
   (B)   All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet the development permit
requirements of §§
157.08 and
157.26 of this chapter and the provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals
and other proposed developments, including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, which are greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is
lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to §§
157.07 or
157.25(B)(8) of this chapter.
   (D)   All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
   (E)   All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage.
(1998 Code, § 58-83)
§ 157.43  STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO/AH ZONES).
   (A)   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in §
157.07 of this chapter are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas
have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of
flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident.
   (B)   Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore,
the following provisions apply.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to seven
feet mean sea level or 18 inches above the curb of the street; or above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community’s FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).
      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements of non-
residential structures shall:
         (a)   Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community’s FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or
         (b)   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
designed so that below the base flood level the structure is water-tight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads or effects of buoyancy.
      (3)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this
section, as proposed in §
157.26(A)(1) of this chapter, are satisfied.
      (4)   Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be required
around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
(1998 Code, § 58-84)  (Ord. 08-16, passed 5-7-2008)
§ 157.44  FLOODWAYS.
   (A)   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in §
157.07 of this chapter are areas designated as floodways.
   (B)   Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity
of floodwater, which carries debris and potential projectiles and has erosion
potential, the following provisions shall apply.
      (1)   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development, unless certification by a
registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that
encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      (2)   If division (B)(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this subchapter.
(1998 Code, § 58-85)
§ 157.45  COASTAL HIGH-HAZARD AREAS.
   (A)   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in §
157.07 of this chapter are areas designated as coastal high-hazard areas (Zones
V1-30, VE and/or V).
   (B)   These areas have special flood hazards associated with high-velocity
waters from tidal surges and hurricane wave wash; therefore, in addition to
meeting all provisions outlined in this subchapter, the following provisions
also apply.
      (1)   The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the bottom of the
lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and columns) of
all new and substantially improved structures shall be obtained, and whether or
not such structures contain a basement. The Floodplain Administrator shall
maintain a record of all such information.
      (2)   All new construction shall be located landward of the reach of mean
high tide.
      (3)   (a)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
elevated on pilings and columns so that:
            1.   The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the
lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated to or above the
base flood level; and
            2.   The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto
is anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the
effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building
components. Wind and water loading values shall each have a 1% chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (100-year mean recurrence interval).
         (b)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or
review the structural design, specifications and plans for the construction and
shall certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of
this division (B)(3).
      (4)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the
space below the lowest floor either free of obstruction or constructed with
non-supporting breakaway walls, open wood latticework or insect screening
intended to collapse under wind or water loads without causing collapse,
displacement or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building
or the supporting foundation system. For the purpose of this section, a
breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than ten
and not more than 20 pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which
exceed a design safe loading resistance of 20 pounds per square foot (either by
design or when so required by local or state codes) may be permitted only if a
registered professional engineer or architect certifies that the designs
proposed meet the following conditions:
         (a)   Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than
that which would occur during the base flood; and
         (b)   The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation
system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement or other structural
damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all
building components (structural and non-structural). Maximum wind and water
loading values to be used in this determination shall each have a 1% chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year (100-year mean recurrence
interval).
      (5)   If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall be
useable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. Such space
shall not be used for human habitation.
      (6)   The use of fill for structural support of buildings is prohibited.
      (7)   Human-made alteration of sand dunes and mangrove stands which would
increase potential flood damage is prohibited.
(1998 Code, § 58-86)
CHAPTER 158:  STORM WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
158.01   Purposes
   
158.02   Administration
   
158.03   Abbreviations
   
158.04   Definitions
   
158.05   Charges and fees
Prohibitions and Requirements
   
158.20   General prohibition
   
158.21   Specific prohibition and requirements
   
158.22   Release reporting and cleanup
   
158.23   Storm water discharges from construction activities; generally; one-
acre disturbances
   
158.24   Storm water discharges associated with industrial activities;
compliance monitoring
   
158.25   Citizen participation and publication
 
   
158.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 158.01  PURPOSES.
   The purpose and objectives of this chapter are as follows:
   (A)   To maintain and improve the quality of surface water and ground water
within the city, the county and the state;
   (B)   To prevent the discharge of contaminated storm water runoff from
industrial, commercial, residential and construction sites into the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) within the city;
   (C)   To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper
discharge of hazardous substances, petroleum products, household hazardous
waste, industrial waste, sediment from construction sites, pesticides,
herbicides, fertilizers and other contaminants into the storm sewers and
natural waters of the city;
   (D)   To encourage recycling of used motor oil and safe disposal of other
hazardous consumer products;
   (E)   To facilitate compliance with state and federal standards and permits
by owners and operators of industrial and construction sites within the city;
and
   (F)   To enable the city to comply with all federal and state laws and
regulations applicable to storm water discharges, under TPDES General Permit
No. TXR040024.
(1998 Code, § 50-210)  (Ord. 10-05, passed 3-17-2010)
§ 158.02  ADMINISTRATION.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the City Engineer or Storm Water
Manager shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(1998 Code, § 50-211)  (Ord. 10-05, passed 3-17-2010)
§ 158.03  ABBREVIATIONS.
   The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings.
   BMP. Best management practices.
   BTEX. Benzene, toluene, ethyl benzene and xylene.
   C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.
   EPA. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
   HHW. Hazardous household waste.
   mg/l. Milligrams per liter.
   MS4. Municipal separate storm sewer system.
   NOI. Notice of intent.
   NOT. Notice of termination.
   ppb. Parts per billion.
   PST. Petroleum storage tank.
   RQ. Reportable quantity.
   SWPPP. Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan.
   TPDES. Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
   TPH. Total petroleum hydrocarbons.
   U.S.C. United States Code.
(1998 Code, § 50-212)  (Ord. 10-05, passed 3-17-2010)
§ 158.04  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL STORM WATER RUNOFF. Any storm water runoff from orchards,
cultivated crops, pastures, range lands and other non-point source agricultural
activities, but not discharges from concentrated animal feeding operations as
defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.23 or discharges from concentrated aquatic animal
production facilities as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.24.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures and other management practice to prevent or
reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. BMPs also include
treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control plant
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw
material storage.
   CITY. The City of Texas City, Texas.
   CITY ENGINEER. The person appointed to the position of City Engineer by the
city, or his or her duly authorized representative.
   COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION. The disturbance of soils associated with
clearing, grading or excavating activities or other construction activities.
   COMMERCIAL. Any business, trade, industry or other activity engaged in for
profit.
   DISCHARGE. Any addition or introduction of any pollutant, storm water or any
other substance whatsoever into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)
or into waters of the United States.
   DISCHARGER. Any person, who causes, allows, permits or is otherwise
responsible for, a discharge, including, without limitation, any operator of a
construction site or industrial facility.
   DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Human excrement, gray water (from home clothes washing,
bathing, showers, dishwashing and food preparation), other wastewater from
household drains, and waterborne waste normally discharged from the sanitary
conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office
buildings, factories and institutions, that is free from industrial waste.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA). The United States Environmental
Protection Agency, the regional office thereof, any federal department, agency
or commission that may succeed to the authority of the EPA, and any duly
authorized official of EPA or such successor agency.
   FACILITY. Any building, structure, installation, process or activity from
which there is or may be a discharge of a pollutant.
   FINAL STABILIZATION. The status when all soil disturbing activities at a
site have been completed, and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a
density of 70% of the cover for unpaved areas and areas not covered by
permanent structures has been established, or equivalent permanent
stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions or geotextiles) have
been employed.
   FIRE DEPARTMENT. The Fire Department of the City of Texas City, or any duly
authorized representative thereof.
   FIRE PROTECTION WATER. Any water, and any substances or materials contained
therein, used by any person other than the Fire Department to control or
extinguish a fire.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling,
preparation, cooking, or consumption of food, including waste materials from
markets, storage facilities and the handling and sale of produce and other food
products.
   HAZARDOUS HOUSEHOLD WASTE (HHW). Any material generated in a household
(including single and multiple residences, hotels and motels, bunk houses,
ranger stations, crew quarters, camp grounds, picnic grounds and day use
recreational areas) by a consumer which, except for the exclusion provided in
40 C.F.R. § 261.4(b)(1), would be classified as a hazardous waste under 40
C.F.R. part 261.
   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE. Any substance listed in Table 302.4 of 40 C.F.R. part
302.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by
the EPA pursuant to 40 C.F.R. part 261.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE TREATMENT, DISPOSAL AND RECOVERY FACILITY. All contiguous
land and structures, other appurtenances and improvements on the land, used for
the treatment, disposal or recovery of hazardous waste.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any waterborne liquid or solid substance that results from
any process of industry, manufacturing, mining, production, trade or business.
   MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL. Any vehicle crankcase oil, antifreeze, transmission
fluid, brake fluid, differential lubricant, gasoline, diesel fuel, gasoline/
alcohol blend and any other fluid used in a motor vehicle.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). The system of conveyances
(including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs,
gutters, ditches, human-made channels or storm drains) owned and operated by
the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water, and
which is not used for collecting or conveying sewage.
   NON-POINT SOURCE. Any source of any discharge of a pollutant that is not a
“point source”.
   NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI). The notice of intent that is required by either the
industrial general permit or the construction general permit.
   NOTICE OF TERMINATION (NOT). The notice of termination that is required by
either the industrial general permit or the construction general permit.
   OIL. Any kind of oil in any form, including, but not limited to, petroleum,
fuel oil, crude oil or any fraction thereof which is liquid at standard
conditions of temperature and pressure, sludge, oil refuse and oil mixed with
waste.
   OPERATOR. The person or persons who, either individually or taken together,
meet the following two criteria:
      (1)   They have operational control over the facility specifications
(including the ability to make modifications in specifications); and
      (2)   They have the day-to-day operational control over those activities
at the facility necessary to ensure compliance with pollution prevention
requirements and any permit conditions.
   OWNER. The person who owns a facility or part of a facility.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local governmental
entities.
   PESTICIDE. A substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent,
destroy, repel or mitigate any pest, or any substance or mixture of substances
intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant or desiccant (as these terms
are defined in Tex. Agriculture Code § 76.001).
   PETROLEUM PRODUCT. A petroleum product that is obtained from distilling and
processing crude oil and that is capable of being used as a fuel for the
propulsion of a motor vehicle or aircraft, including motor gasoline, gasohol;
other alcohol blended fuels, aviation gasoline, kerosene, distillate fuel oil
and #1 and #2 diesel.
   POINT SOURCE. Any discernable, confined and discrete conveyance, including,
but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete
fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation,
landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft from which
pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include return flows
from irrigated agriculture or agricultural storm water runoff.
   POLLUTANT. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage,
sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and
industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. The term
POLLUTANT does not include tail water or runoff water from irrigation or
rainwater runoff from cultivated or uncultivated rangeland, pastures land and
farmland.
   POLLUTION. The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical or biological
quality of, or the contamination of, any water in the state that renders the
water harmful, detrimental or injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation or
property, or to the public health, safety or welfare, or impairs the usefulness
or the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose.
   QUALIFIED PERSONNEL. Persons who possess the appropriate competence, skills
and ability (as demonstrated by sufficient education, training, experience and/
or, when applicable, any required certification or licensing) to perform a
specific activity in a timely and complete manner consistent with the
applicable regulatory requirements and generally accepted industry standards
for such activity.
   RELEASE. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying,
discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or the waters of the United States.
   RUBBISH. Non-putrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consist of:
      (1)   Combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood,
excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves and similar
materials; and
      (2)   Non-combustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin
cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture and similar materials that do not burn at
ordinary incinerator temperatures (1,600 to 1,800°F).
   SANITARY SEWER or SEWER. The system of pipes, conduits and other conveyances
which carry industrial waste and domestic sewage from residential dwellings,
commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities and institutions,
whether treated or untreated, to the city sewage treatment plant (and to which
storm water, surface water and ground water are not intentionally admitted).
   SEPTIC TANK WASTE. Any domestic sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.
   SERVICE STATION. Any retail establishment engaged in the business of selling
fuel for motor vehicles that is dispensed from stationary storage tanks.
   SEWAGE or SANITARY SEWAGE. The domestic sewage and/or industrial waste that
are discharged into the city sanitary sewer system and passes through the
sanitary sewer system to the city sewage treatment plant for treatment.
   SITE. The land or water area where any facility or activity is physically
located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the
facility or activity.
   SOLID WASTE. Any garbage, rubbish, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment
plant, water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility, and
other discarded material, including, solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained
gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, mining and
agricultural operations, and from community and institutional activities.
   STATE. The State of Texas.
   STORM WATER. Storm water runoff, snowmelt runoff and surface runoff and
drainage.
   STORM WATER DISCHARGE ASSOCIATED WITH INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. The discharge
from any conveyance which is used for collecting and conveying storm water and
which is directly related to manufacturing, processing or raw materials storage
areas at an industrial plant which is within one of the categories of
facilities listed in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14), and which is not excluded from
EPA’s definition of the same term.
   STORM WATER MANAGER. The person appointed to the position of Storm Water
Manager by the city, or his or her duly authorized representative.
   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A plan required by either the
construction general permit or the industrial general permit and which
describes and ensures the implementation of practices that are to be used to
reduce the pollutants in storm water discharges associated with construction or
other industrial activity at the facility.
   UNCONTAMINATED. Not containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
   USED OIL or USED MOTOR OIL. Any oil that has been refined from crude oil or
synthetic oil that, as a result of use, storage or handling, has become
unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities or the loss of
original properties but that may be suitable for further use and is recyclable
in compliance with state and federal law.
   WATER IN THE STATE or WATER. Any ground water, percolating or otherwise,
lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico, inside the territorial
limits of the state, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or
artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or non-navigable, and
including the beds and banks of all watercourses and bodies of surface water,
that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or inside the
jurisdiction of the state.
   WATER QUALITY STANDARD. The designation of a body or segment of surface
water in the state for desirable uses and the narrative and numerical criteria
deemed by the state to be necessary to protect those uses, as specified in Tex.
Administrative Code Title 31, Ch. 307.
   WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES. All waters which are currently used, were used
in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce,
including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; all
interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use,
degradation or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or
foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the
United States under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified in
this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition;
and any waters within the federal definition of waters of the United States at
40 C.F.R. § 122.2; but not including any waste treatment systems, treatment
ponds or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the Federal Clean Water
Act.
   WETLAND. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or ground water
at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for
life in saturated soil conditions. WETLANDS generally include swamps, marshes,
bogs and similar areas.
   YARD WASTE. Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris, and brush that
results from landscaping maintenance and land-clearing operations.
(1998 Code, § 50-213)  (Ord. 10-05, passed 3-17-2010)
§ 158.05  CHARGES AND FEES.
   The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of
constructing, operating and maintaining the city’s MS4, and for reimbursement
of costs of implementing its storm water management program as required by EPA
or the state, and the cost of implementing this chapter, which costs may
include, but not be limited to, the following:
   (A)   Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures, including
the cost of collecting and analyzing discharges and reviewing monitoring
reports submitted by dischargers;
   (B)   Fees for spill and release reports and responding to spills and
releases of oil, hazardous and extremely hazardous substances, and other
pollutants; and
   (C)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained in this chapter. These fees relate solely to the matters
covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines and
penalties chargeable by the city.
(1998 Code, § 50-321)  (Ord. 10-05, passed 3-17-2010)
PROHIBITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
§ 158.20  GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   (A)   No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) any discharge that is not composed entirely
of storm water.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to any enforcement action for violation
of division (A) above that the discharge was composed entirely of one or more
of the following categories of discharges:
      (1)   A discharge authorized by, and in full compliance with, an TPDES
permit (other than the TPDES permit for discharges from the MS4);
      (2)   A discharge or flow resulting from firefighting by the Fire
Department;
      (3)   Agricultural storm water runoff;
      (4)   A discharge or flow from water line flushing, but not including a
discharge from water line disinfections by super chlorination or other means
unless the total residual chlorine (TRC) has been reduced to less than four mg/
l;
      (5)   A discharge or flow from lawn watering, or landscape irrigation, or
other irrigation water;
      (6)   A discharge or flow from a diverted stream flow or natural spring;
      (7)   A discharge or flow from uncontaminated pumped ground water or
rising ground water;
      (8)   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined as 40 C.F.R. §
35.2005(20)) to the MS4;
      (9)   Uncontaminated discharge or flow from a foundation drain, crawl
space pump, footing drain or sump pump;
      (10)   A discharge or flow from a potable water source not containing any
harmful substance or material from the cleaning or draining of a storage tank
or other container;
      (11)   A discharge or flow from air conditioning condensation that is
unmixed with water from a cooling tower, emissions scrubber, emissions filter
or any other source of pollutant;
      (12)   A discharge or flow from individual residential car washing;
      (13)   A discharge or flow from a riparian habitat or wetland;
      (14)   A discharge or flow from water used in street washing that is not
contaminated with any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, emulsifier,
dispersant or any other harmful cleaning substance;
      (15)   Storm water runoff from a roof that is not contaminated by any
runoff or discharge from an emissions scrubber or filter or any other source of
pollutant.
(1998 Code, § 50-231)  (Ord. 10-05, passed 3-17-2010)
§ 158.21  SPECIFIC PROHIBITION AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The specific prohibitions and requirements in this section are not
inclusive of all the discharges prohibited by the general prohibition in §
158.20 of this chapter.
   (B)   No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any
discharge that causes or contributes to causing the city to violate their TPDES
permit.
   (C)   No person shall dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge,
leach, dispose or otherwise introduce or cause, allow or permit to be
introduced any of the following substances into the MS4:
      (1)   Any used motor oil, antifreeze or any other motor vehicle fluid;
      (2)   Any industrial waste;
      (3)   Any hazardous waste, including hazardous household waste;
      (4)   Any domestic sewage or septic tank waste, grease trap waste or grit
trap waste;
      (5)   Any garbage, rubbish or yard waste;
      (6)   Any dumpster, or trailer overflow:
         (a)   All individuals, businesses and/or firms renting dumpsters in
the city shall be responsible for:
            1.   Keeping dumpster(s) covered at all times;
            2.   Maintaining their dumpster(s) and the area around their
dumpster(s) in a clean and sanitary condition; and
            3.   Providing an adequately sized dumpster with necessary pickups
in order to prevent the overflow of refuse.
         (b)   All individuals, businesses and/or firms utilizing trailers to
store or transport household refuse and/or construction debris, shall keep
trailers covered with a secured tarp at all times in order to prevent the
release of windblown refuse or debris.
         (c)   Any individual, business and/or firm failing to maintain a
dumpster or trailer in accordance with these regulations shall be subject to a
fine of up to $250.
      (7)   Any wastewater from a commercial carwash facility; from any vehicle
washing, cleaning or maintenance at any new or used automobile or other vehicle
dealership, rental agency, body shop, repair shop or maintenance facility; or
from any washing, cleaning or maintenance of any business or commercial or
public service vehicle, including a truck, bus or heavy equipment;
      (8)   Any wastewater from a commercial mobile power washer or from the
washing or other cleaning of a building exterior that contains any soap,
detergent, degreaser, solvent or any other harmful cleaning substance;
      (9)   Any wastewater from commercial floor, rug or carpet cleaning;
      (10)   Any wastewater from the wash down or other cleaning of pavement
that contains any harmful quantity of soap, detergent, solvent, degreaser,
emulsifier, dispersant or any other harmful cleaning substance; or any
wastewater from the wash down or other cleaning of any pavement where any
spill, leak or other release of oil, motor fuel or other petroleum or hazardous
substance has occurred, unless all harmful quantities of such released material
have been previously removed;
      (11)   Any effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor,
emissions scrubber, emissions filter or the blow down from a boiler;
      (12)   Any ready-mixed concrete, mortar, ceramic or asphalt base material
or hydro mulch material, or from the cleaning of vehicles or equipment
containing, or used in transporting or applying, such material;
      (13)   Any filter backwash from a swimming pool, fountain or spa;
      (14)   Any water from a water curtain in a spray room used for painting
vehicles or equipment;
      (15)   Any contaminated runoff from a vehicle wrecking yard;
      (16)   Any substance or material that will damage, block or clog the MS4;
      (17)   Any release from a petroleum storage tank (PST), or any leachate
or runoff from soil contaminated by a leaking PST, or any discharge of pumped,
confined or treated wastewater from the remediation of any such PST release,
unless the discharge satisfies all of the following criteria:
         (a)   Compliance with all state and federal standards and
requirements;
         (b)   No discharge containing a harmful quantity of any pollutant; and
         (c)   No discharge containing more than 50 parts per billion of
benzene; 500 parts per billion combined total quantities of benzene, toluene,
methylbenzene and xylem (BTEX); or 15 mg/l of total petroleum hydrocarbons
(TPH).
   (D)   No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any
harmful quantity of sediment, silt, earth, soil or other material associated
with clearing, grading, excavation or other construction activities, or
associated with land filling or other placement or disposal of soil, rock or
other earth materials, in excess of what could be retained on site or captured
by employing sediment and erosion control measures to the maximum extent
practicable.
   (E)   No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic or
industrial, to the MS4, or allow such a connection to continue.
   (F)   No person shall cause or allow any pavement wash water from a service
station to be discharged into the MS4 unless such wash water has passed through
a properly functioning and maintained, grease, oil and sand interceptor before
discharge into the MS4.
   (G)   Regulation of pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers.
      (1)   Any sale, distribution, application, labeling, manufacture,
transportation, storage or disposal of a pesticide, herbicide or fertilizer
must comply fully with all state and federal statutes and regulations
including, without limitation, the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and
Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) and all federal regulations promulgated pursuant to
FIFRA; Tex. Agriculture Code Ch. 75 and 76 and all state regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto; and any other state or federal requirement.
      (2)   Any license, permit, registration, certification or evidence of
financial responsibility required by state or federal law for sale,
distribution, application, manufacturer, transportation, storage or disposal of
a pesticide, herbicide or fertilizer must be presented to the Storm Water
Manager and any city law enforcement officer for examination upon request.
      (3)   No person shall use or cause to be used any pesticide or herbicide
contrary to any directions for use on any labeling required by state or federal
statute or regulation.
      (4)   No person shall use or cause to be used any pesticide, herbicide or
fertilizer in any manner that the person knows, or reasonably should know, is
likely to cause, or does cause, a harmful quantity of the pesticide, herbicide
or fertilizer to enter the MS4 or waters of the United States.
      (5)   No person shall dispose of, discard, store or transport a
pesticide, herbicide, or fertilizer, or a pesticide, herbicide or fertilizer
container, in a manner that the person knows, or reasonably should know, is
likely to cause or does cause, a harmful quantity of the pesticide, herbicide
or fertilizer to enter the MS4 or waters of the United States.
   (H)   Used oil regulation. No person shall:
      (1)   Discharge motor vehicle oil into the MS4 or a sewer, drainage
system, septic tank, surface water, ground water or watercourse;
      (2)   Knowingly mix or commingle used oil with solid waste that is to be
disposed of in a landfill or knowingly directly dispose of used oil on land or
in a landfill; and/or
      (3)   Apply used oil to a road or land for dust suppression, weed
abatement or other similar use that introduces used oil into the environment.
(1998 Code, § 50-241)  (Ord. 10-05, passed 3-17-2010)  Penalty, see §
158.99
§ 158.22  RELEASE REPORTING AND CLEANUP.
   (A)   The person in charge of any facility, vehicle or other source of any
spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, escaping,
leaching, dumping, disposing or any other release of any of the following
quantities of any of the following substances that may flow, leach, enter or
otherwise be introduced into the MS4 or waters of the United States, shall
immediately telephone and notify the Storm Water Manager concerning the
incident:
      (1)   An amount equal to or in excess of a reportable quantity of any
hazardous substance, as established under 40 C.F.R. part 302;
      (2)   An amount equal to or in excess of a reportable quantity of any
extremely hazardous substance, as established under 40 C.F.R. part 355;
      (3)   An amount of oil that either:
         (a)   Violates applicable water quality standards; or
         (b)   Causes a film or sheen upon or discoloration of the surface of
the water or an adjoining shoreline or causes a sludge or emulsion to be
deposited beneath the surface of the water or upon an adjoining shoreline.
      (4)   Any harmful quantity of any pollutant.
   (B)   The immediate notification required by division (A) above shall
include the following information:
      (1)   The identity or chemical name of the substance released, and
whether the substance is an extremely hazardous substance;
      (2)   The exact location of the release, including any known name of the
waters involved or threatened and any other environmental media affected;
      (3)   The time and duration (thus far) of the release;
      (4)   An estimate of the quantity and concentration (if known) of the
substance released;
      (5)   The source of the release;
      (6)   Any known or anticipated health risks associated with the release
and, where appropriate, advice regarding medical attention that may be
necessary for exposed individuals;
      (7)   Any precautions that should be taken as a result of the release;
      (8)   Any steps that have been taken to contain and/or cleanup the
released material and minimize its impacts; and
      (9)   The names and telephone numbers of the person or persons to be
contacted for further information.
   (C)   Within 15 days following such release, the responsible person in
charge of the facility, vehicle or other source of the release shall, unless
waived by the Storm Water Manager submit a written report containing each of
the items of information specified above, as well as the following additional
information:
      (1)   The ultimate duration, concentration and quantity of the release;
      (2)   All actions taken to respond to, contain and cleanup the released
substances, and all precautions taken to minimize the impacts;
      (3)   Any known or anticipated acute or chronic health risks associated
with the release;
      (4)   Where appropriate, advice regarding medical attention necessary for
exposed individuals;
      (5)   The identity of any governmental/private sector representatives
responding to the release; and
      (6)   The measures taken or to be taken by the responsible person(s) to
prevent similar future occurrences.
   (D)   The notifications required by this section shall not relieve the
responsible person of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be
incurred as a result of the release, including any liability for damage to the
city, to natural resources or to any other person or property; nor shall such
notification relieve the responsible person of any fine, penalty or other
liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter or to state or federal
law.
   (E)   Any person responsible for any release as described in this section
shall comply with all state, federal, and any other local law requiring
reporting, cleanup, containment and any other appropriate remedial action in
response to the release.
   (F)   Any person responsible for a release described in this section shall
reimburse the city for any cost incurred by the city in responding to the
release.
(1998 Code, § 50-251)  (Ord. 10-05, passed 3-17-2010)
§ 158.23  STORM WATER DISCHARGES FROM CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES; GENERALLY; ONE-
ACRE DISTURBANCES.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   All operators of construction sites shall use best management
practices to control and reduce the discharge, to the MS4 and to waters of the
United States, of sediment, silt, earth, soil and other material associated
with the clearing, grading, excavation and other construction activities to the
maximum extent practicable. Such best management practices may include, but not
be limited to, the following measures:
         (a)   Ensuring that existing vegetation is preserved and that
disturbed portions of the site are stabilized as soon as practicable in
portions of the site where construction activities have temporarily or
permanently ceased. Stabilization measures may include: temporary seeding,
permanent seeding, mulching, geotextiles, sod stabilization, vegetative buffer
strips, protection of trees, preservation of mature vegetation and other
appropriate measures;
         (b)   Use of structural practices to divert flows from exposed soils,
store flows or otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from the
site to the extent feasible;
         (c)   Minimization of the tracking of sediments off-site by vehicles,
the generation of dust and the escape of other windblown waste from the site;
         (d)   Prevention of the discharge of building materials, including
cement, lime, concrete and mortar, to the MS4 or waters of the United States;
         (e)   A single, on-site location, shall be erected with an appropriate
BMP, in order to allow for concrete truck washout, to ensure 0% leaching into
surrounding soil;
         (f)   Providing general good housekeeping measures to prevent and
contain spills of paints, solvents, fuels, septic waste and other hazardous
chemicals and pollutants associated with construction, and to assure proper
cleanup and disposal of any such spills in compliance with state, federal and
local requirements. All portable fueling tanks used to fuel on-site
construction equipment shall have secondary containment;
         (g)   Implementation of proper waste disposal and waste management
techniques, including covering waste materials and minimizing ground contact
with hazardous chemicals and trash;
         (h)   Timely maintenance of vegetation, erosion and sediment control
measures, and other best management practices in good and effective operating
condition; and
         (i)   Installation of structural measures during the construction
process to control pollutants in storm water discharges that will occur after
construction operations have been completed. Structural measures should be
placed on upland soils to the degree attainable. Such installed structural
measures may include, but not be limited to, the following: storm water
detention structures (including wet ponds); storm water retention structures;
flow attenuation by use of open vegetative swales and natural depressions;
other velocity dissipation devices; infiltration of runoff on site; and
sequential systems which combine several practices. Operators of construction
sites are only responsible for the installation and maintenance of storm water
management measures prior to final stabilization of the site, and are not
responsible for maintenance after storm water discharges associated with
construction activity have terminated.
      (2)   Qualified personnel (provided by the operator of the construction
site) shall inspect disturbed areas of any construction site that have not been
finally stabilized, areas used for storage of materials that are exposed to
precipitation, structural control measures, and locations where vehicles enter
or exit the site, at least once every 14 calendar days and within 24 hours of
the end of a storm that is one-half inch or greater. All erosion and sediment
control measures and other identified best management practices shall be
observed in order to ensure that they are operating correctly and are effective
in preventing significant impacts to receiving waters and the MS4. Based on the
results of the inspection, best management practices shall be revised as
appropriate, and as soon as is practicable.
      (3)   The city may deny approval of any building permit, grading permit,
certificate of occupancy, subdivision plat, site development plan or any other
city approval necessary to commence or continue construction, or to assume
occupancy, on the grounds that the management practices described in the plans
or observed upon a site inspection by the City Engineer or Storm Water Manager
are determined not to control and reduce the discharge of sediment, silt,
earth, soil and other materials associated with clearing, grading, excavation
and other construction activities to the maximum extent practicable.
      (4)   Any contractor or subcontractor on a site of construction activity,
who is not an owner or operator, but who is responsible under his or her
contract or subcontract for implementing a best management practices control
measure, is jointly and severally responsible for any willful or negligent
failure on his or her part to adequately implement that control measure.
(1998 Code, § 50-261)
   (B)   One-acre disturbances. All operators of sites of construction
activity, including clearing, grading and excavation activities, that result in
the disturbance of one or more acres of total land area, or that are part of a
common plan of development or sale within which one or more acres of total land
area are disturbed, or who are required to obtain an TPDES permit for storm
water discharges associated with construction activity, shall comply with the
following requirements.
      (1)   Any operator who intends to obtain coverage for storm water
discharges from a construction site under the TPDES general permit for storm
water discharges from construction sites (“the storm water quality permit”)
shall submit a signed copy of its notice of intent (NOI) to the City Engineer
at least seven days prior to the commencement of any construction activities.
      (2)   A storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be prepared
and implemented in accordance with the requirements of the TPDES construction
general permit issued for storm water discharges from the construction site,
and with any additional requirement imposed by or under this chapter and any
other city ordinance.
      (3)   Upon the City Engineer’s review of the SWPPP and any site
inspection that he or she may conduct, the city may deny approval of any
building permit, grading permit, certificate of occupancy, subdivision plat,
site development plan or any other city approval necessary to commence or
continue construction, or to assume occupancy, on the grounds that the SWPPP
does not comply with the requirements of the construction general permit, any
individual or group TPDES permit issued for storm water discharge from the
construction site, or any additional requirement imposed by or under this
chapter. Also, if at any time the City Engineer determines that the SWPPP is
not being fully implemented, the city may similarly deny approval of any
building permit, grading permit, certificate of occupancy subdivision plat,
site development plan or any other city approval necessary to commence or
continue construction, or to assume occupancy, at the site.
      (4)   (a)   All contractors and subcontractors identified in an SWPPP
shall sign a copy of the following certification statement before conducting
any professional service identified in the SWPPP:
“I certify under penalty of law that I understand the terms and conditions of
the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) permit that authorizes
the storm water discharges associated with activity from the construction site
identified as part of this certification, with the Storm Water Ordinance of the
City of Texas City, and with those provisions of the Storm water Pollution
Prevention Plan (SWPPP) for the construction site for which I am responsible.”
         (b)   The certification must include the name and title of the person
providing the signature; the name, address and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address of the site; and the date the certification is
made.
      (5)   The operator shall make the SWPPP and any modification thereto
available to the City Engineer or Storm Water Manager upon request.
      (6)   The City Engineer or Storm Water Manager may notify the operator at
any time that the SWPPP does not meet the requirements of the construction
general permit, any applicable individual or group TPDES permit issued for
storm water discharges from the construction site, or any additional
requirement imposed by or under this chapter. Such notification shall identify
those provisions of the permit or ordinance, which are not being met by the
SWPPP, and identify which provisions of the SWPPP require modifications in
order to meet such requirements. Within seven days of such notification from
the City Engineer or Storm Water Manager, the operator shall make the required
changes to the SWPPP and shall submit to the City Engineer a written
certification that the requested changes have been made.
      (7)   The operator shall amend the SWPPP whenever there is a change in
design, construction, operation or maintenance, which has a significant effect
on the potential for the discharge of pollutants to the MS4 or to the waters of
the United States, and which has not otherwise been addressed in the SWPPP, or
if the SWPPP proves to be ineffective in eliminating or significantly
minimizing pollutants, or in otherwise achieving the general objective of
controlling pollutants in storm water discharges associated with construction
activity. In addition, the SWPPP shall be amended to identify any new
contractor and/or subcontractor that will implement a measure in the SWPPP.
      (8)   Qualified personnel (provided by the operator of the construction
site) shall inspect disturbed areas of the construction site that have not been
finally stabilized, areas used for storage of materials that are exposed to
precipitation, structural control measures, and locations where vehicles enter
or exit the site, at least once every 14 calendar days and within 24 hours of
the end of a storm event of one-half inch or greater. Disturbed areas and areas
used for storage of materials that are exposed to precipitation shall be
inspected for evidence of, or the potential for, pollutants entering the
drainage system. Erosion and sediment control measures identified in the SWPPP
shall be observed to ensure that they are operating correctly. Where discharge
locations or points are accessible, they shall be inspected to ascertain
whether erosion control measures are effective in preventing significant
impacts to receiving waters or the MS4. Locations where vehicles enter or exit
the site shall be inspected daily for evidence of off-site sediment tracking,
remediation of tracking on city streets shall be sweep, picked up and disposed
of properly.
      (9)   Based on the results of the inspections required by division (A)(2)
above, the site description and/or the pollution prevention measures identified
in the SWPPP shall be revised as appropriate, but in no case later than seven
calendar days following the inspection. Such modifications shall provide for
timely implementation of any changes to the SWPPP within seven calendar days
following the inspection.
      (10)   A report summarizing the scope of any inspection required by
division (A)(2) above, and the name(s) and qualifications of personnel making
the inspection, the date(s) of the inspection, major observations relating to
the implementation of the SWPPP and actions taken in accordance with above
shall be made and retained as part of the SWPPP for at least three years from
the date that the site is finally stabilized. Such report shall identify any
incidence of non-compliance. Where a report does not identify any incidence of
non-compliance, the report shall contain a certification that the facility is
in compliance with the SWPPP, the facility’s TPDES permit and this chapter. The
report shall be certified and signed by the person responsible for making it.
      (11)   The operator shall retain copies of any SWPPP and all reports
required by this chapter or by the TPDES permit for the site, and records of
all data used to complete the NOI, for a period of at least three years from
the date that the site is finally stabilized.
      (12)   Where a site has been finally stabilized and all storm water
discharges from construction activities that are authorized by this chapter and
by the TPDES permit for those construction activities are eliminated, or where
the operator of all storm water discharges at a facility changes, the operator
of the construction site shall submit to the City Engineer a notice of
termination (NOT) that includes the information required for notices of
termination by Part II Section F of the construction general permit.
      (13)   Upon final stabilization of the construction site, the owner (or
the duly authorized representative thereof) shall submit written certification
to the City Engineer that the site has been finally stabilized. (See definition
of “final stabilization” in this chapter.) The city may withhold a certificate
of occupancy or use permit for any premises constructed on the site until such
certification of final stabilization has been filed and the City Engineer has
determined, following any appropriate inspection, that final stabilization has,
in fact, occurred and that any required permanent structural controls have been
completed.
      (14)   Weekly on site meetings shall be conducted to ensure compliance
with TPDES permit and city ordinance guidelines.
(1998 Code, § 50-232)
(Ord. 10-05, passed 3-17-2010)
§ 158.24  STORM WATER DISCHARGES ASSOCIATED WITH INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITIES;
COMPLIANCE MONITORING.
   (A)   Right of entry; inspection and sampling. The Storm Water Manager shall
have the right to enter the premises of any person discharging storm water to
the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or to waters of the United
States to determine if the discharger is complying with all requirements of
this chapter, and with any state or federal discharge permit, limitation or
requirement. Dischargers shall allow the Storm Water Manager ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying, and for the performance of any additional duties.
Dischargers shall make available to the Storm Water Manager, upon request, any
SWPPP, modifications thereto, self-inspection reports, monitoring records,
compliance evaluations, notices of intent and any other records, reports and
other documents related to compliance with this chapter and with any state or
federal discharge permit.
      (1)   Where a discharger has security measures in force which require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
discharger shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, Storm Water Manager will be
permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing his or her
responsibilities.
      (2)   The Storm Water Manager shall have the right to set up on the
discharger’s property, or require installation of, such devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the discharger’s operations.
      (3)   The Storm Water Manager may require any discharger to the MS4 or
waters of the United States to conduct specified sampling, testing, analysis
and other monitoring of its storm water discharges, and may specify the
frequency and parameters of any such required monitoring.
      (4)   The Storm Water Manager may require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary at the discharger’s expense. The facility’s
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All
devices used to measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to
ensure their accuracy.
      (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
discharger at the written or verbal request of the Storm Water Manager and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
discharger.
      (6)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Storm Water Manager access to
the discharger’s premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Search warrants. If the Storm Water Manager has been refused access to
any part of the premises from which storm water is discharged, and he or she is
able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of
this chapter or any state or federal discharge permit, limitation or
requirement, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify
compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the
overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the Storm
Water Manager may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent
jurisdiction.
(1998 Code, § 50-271)  (Ord. 10-05, passed 3-17-2010)
§ 158.25  CITIZEN PARTICIPATION AND PUBLICATION.
   (A)   Citizen reports of violations.
      (1)   All citizens are encouraged to report to the Storm Water Manager or
his or her delegate any spills, releases, illicit connections, other instances
of anyone discharging pollutants into the MS4 or waters of the United States,
and any other violation of this chapter of which they become aware.
      (2)   The Storm Water Manager will designate an individual or office
within his or her department to receive all such citizen reports by telephone,
in writing, and in person. A written record of each citizen report will be
prepared and kept on file for a period of three years, and a copy of the city’s
record of the report will be furnished to the reporting citizen upon request.
Also upon request, the Storm Water Manager will inform the reporting citizen of
any action undertaken by the city in response to the citizen’s report.
   (B)   Publication of dischargers in significant non-compliance. The Storm
Water Manager may periodically publish, in a daily newspaper generally
distributed within the city, a list of owners and operators of discharges to
the MS4 or waters of the United States from sites of construction and
industrial activity which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant
non-compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The term SIGNIFICANT NON-
COMPLIANCE shall mean:
      (1)   Introducing or causing to be introduced into the waters of the
United States any discharge that violates a water quality standard;
      (2)   Introducing or causing to be introduced into the MS4 any discharge
that causes or contributes to causing the city to violate a water quality
standard, the city’s TPDES permit, or any state-issued discharge permit for
discharges from the city’s MS4;
      (3)   Any connection of a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic or
industrial, to the MS4, or allowing any such connection to continue;
      (4)   Any discharge of pollutants to the MS4 or waters of the United
States that has caused an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons or to the environment, or has resulted in the Storm Water
Manager’s exercise of his or her emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge;
      (5)   Any violation that has resulted in injunctive relief, civil
penalties or criminal fine being imposed as a judicial remedy under §
158.99 of this chapter;
      (6)   Any other violation(s), which the Storm Water Manager determines to
be chronic or especially dangerous to the public or to the environment; or
      (7)   Any failure to comply with a compliance schedule, whether imposed
by the city or by a court.
(1998 Code, § 50-281)  (Ord. 10-05, passed 3-17-2010)
§ 158.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Administrative enforcement remedies.
      (1)   Notification of non-compliance. When the City Engineer or Storm
Water Manager finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, the City Engineer or
Storm Water Manager may serve upon that person a written notice of non-
compliance. The person shall take corrective action to correct the issue of
non-compliance.
      (2)   Cease and desist orders.
         (a)   When the City Engineer or Storm Water Manager finds that any
person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or
any order issued hereunder, or that the person’s past violations are likely to
recur, and that the person’s violation(s) have caused or contributed to an
actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or waters of the United States which
reasonably appears to present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the
health or welfare of persons or to the environment, the City Engineer or Storm
Water Manager may issue an order to the violator directing it immediately to
cease and desist all such violations and directing the violator to:
            1.   Immediately comply with all ordinance requirements; and
            2.   Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
         (b)   Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it under
this division (A)(2) shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its
endangering discharge. In the event of a discharger’s failure to immediately
comply voluntarily with the emergency order, the City Engineer or Storm Water
Manager may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to
the MS4 or waters of the United States, and/or endangerment to persons or to
the environment, including immediate termination of a facility’s water supply,
sewer connection or other municipal utility services. The City Engineer or
Storm Water Manager may allow the person to recommence its discharge when it
has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City Engineer or Storm Water
Manager that the period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination
proceedings are initiated against the discharger under this chapter. A person
that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes
of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence, to the City Engineer or Storm Water Manager within five days of
receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order
shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the violator.
      (3)   Red tags. Whenever the City Engineer or Storm Water Manager finds
that any operator of a construction site has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of §
158.22 of this chapter, or any order issued thereunder, the City Engineer or
Storm Water Manager may order that a “red tag” be issued to the operator,
posted at the construction site and distributed to all city departments and
divisions whose decisions affect any activity at the site. Unless express
written exception is made by the City Engineer or Storm Water Manager, the “red
tag” shall prohibit any further construction activity at the site and shall bar
any further inspection or approval by the city associated with a building
permit, grading permit, subdivision plat approval, site development plan
approval or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue
construction or to assume occupancy at the site. Issuance of a “red tag” order
shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the violator.
(1998 Code, § 50-291)
   (B)   Judicial enforcement remedies.
      (1)   Civil remedies.
         (a)   Whenever it appears that a person has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this chapter that relates to:
            1.   The preservation of public safety, relating to the materials
or methods used in construction of any structure or improvement of real
property;
            2.   The preservation of public health or to the fire safety of a
building or other structure or improvement;
            3.   The establishment of criteria for land subdivision or
construction of buildings, including street design;
            4.   Dangerously damaged or deteriorated structures or
improvements;
            5.   Conditions caused by accumulations of refuse, vegetation or
other matter that creates breeding and living places for insects and rodents;
or
            6.   Point source effluent limitations or the discharge of a
pollutant, other than from a non-point source, into the MS4.
         (b)   Pursuant to Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 54.016, the city may obtain
against the owner or the operator of a facility a temporary or permanent
injunction, as appropriate, that:
            1.   Prohibits any conduct that violates any provision of this
chapter that relates to any matter specified in divisions (B)(1)(a)1. through
(B)(1)(a)6. above; or
            2.   Compels the specific performance of any action that is
necessary for compliance with any provision of this chapter that relates to any
matter specified in divisions (B)(1)(a)1. through (B)(1)(a)6. above.
      (2)   Criminal penalties.
         (a)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
by a fine of not less than $250, nor more than $2,000, for each violation. Each
day in which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense.
Prosecution or conviction under this section shall not preclude any civil
remedy or relief for a violation of this chapter.
         (b)   Any person who has knowingly made any false statement,
representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or
other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this
chapter, or any order issued hereunder, or who has falsified, tampered with or
knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor offence and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $250, nor more than
$2,000, for each violation.
         (c)   In determining the amount of any fine imposed hereunder, the
Court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not
limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and
duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation,
corrective actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator, the
knowledge, intent, negligence or other state of mind of the violator, and any
other factor as justice requires.
      (3)   Civil suit under the Texas Water Code. Whenever it appears that a
violation or threat of violation of any provision of Tex. Water Code § 26.121,
or any rule, permit or order of the State Commission on Environmental Quality,
has occurred or is occurring within the jurisdiction of the city exclusive of
its extraterritorial jurisdiction, the city, in the same manner as the State
Commission on Environmental Quality, may have a suit instituted in a State
District Court through its City Attorney for the injunctive relief or civil
penalties or both authorized in Tex. Water Code § 26.123(a), against the person
who committed or is committing or threatening to commit the violation. This
power is exercised pursuant to Tex. Water Code § 26.124. In any suit brought by
the city under this division (B), the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
is a necessary and indispensable party.
      (4)   Remedies non-exclusive. The remedies provided for in this chapter
are not exclusive of any other remedies that the city may have under state or
federal law or other city ordinances. The city may take any, all or any
combination of these actions against a violator. The city is empowered to take
more than one enforcement action against any violator. These actions may be
taken concurrently.
(1998 Code, § 50-301)  (Ord. 10-05, passed 3-17-2010)
   (C)   Supplemental enforcement action.
      (1)   Performance bonds. The City Engineer or Storm Water Manager may, by
written notice, order any owner or operator of a source of storm water
discharge associated with construction or industrial activity to file a
satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value
determined by the City Engineer or Storm Water Manager to be necessary to
achieve consistent compliance with this chapter, any order issued hereunder,
any required best management practice and/or any SWPPP provision, and/or to
achieve final stabilization of the site. The city may deny approval of any
building permit, grading permit, certificate of occupancy, subdivision plat,
site development plan or any other city permit or approval necessary to
commence or continue construction or any industrial activity at the site, or to
assume occupancy, until such a performance bond has been filed.
      (2)   Liability insurance. The City Engineer or Storm Water Manager may,
by written notice, order any owner or operator of a source of storm water
discharge associated with construction or industrial activity to submit proof
that it has obtained liability insurance, or other financial assurance, in an
amount not to exceed a value determined by the City Engineer or Storm Water
Manager, that is sufficient to remediation, restore and abate any damage to the
MS4, the waters of the United States, or any other aspect of the environment
that is caused by the discharge.
      (3)   Public nuisances. A violation of any provision of this chapter, or
any order issued hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be
corrected or abated as directed by the Storm Water Manager. Any person(s)
creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the city code
governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred
in removing, abating or remedying said nuisance.
(1998 Code, § 50-311)  (Ord. 10-05, passed 3-17-2010)
CHAPTER 159:  SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
159.001   Authority
   
159.002   Purpose
   
159.003   Enforcement
   
159.004   Jurisdiction
   
159.005   Requirement for subdivision plat
   
159.006   Consistency with Comprehensive Plan, policies and zoning ordinance
   
159.007   Conflicting regulations
   
159.008   Definitions
   
159.009   Severability
Platting Procedures
   
159.020   Pre-submittal conference
   
159.021   General application process
   
159.022   Subdivision Master Plan
   
159.023   Preliminary plat
   
159.024   Final plat
   
159.025   Replat
   
159.026   Amending plat
   
159.027   Administrative minor plat
   
159.028   Vacating plat
   
159.029   Abandonment of public right-of-way
   
159.030   Extraterritorial jurisdiction regulations
   
159.031   Park/open space requirements
   
159.032   Variances
Design Standards
   
159.045   General
   
159.046   Streets
   
159.047   Sidewalks
   
159.048   Pedestrian access
   
159.049   Blocks
   
159.050   Lots
   
159.051   Utility easements
   
159.052   Utility lines
   
159.053   Water system
   
159.054   Sanitary sewer system
   
159.055   Minimum first floor elevation
   
159.056   Drainage
Private Street Developments
   
159.070   Intent and purpose
   
159.071   Design and construction standards
   
159.072   Homeowners association
   
159.073   Private streets
   
159.074   Construction and maintenance cost
   
159.075   Utilities
   
159.076   Improvements and inspections
   
159.077   Signs
   
159.078   Access provisions
   
159.079   Entrance design standards
   
159.080   Waiver of services
   
159.081   Petition to convert to public streets
   
159.082   Hold harmless
Construction Plans and Improvements
   
159.095   General
   
159.096   Construction plans
   
159.097   Survey monuments
   
159.098   Payment of improvement costs
   
159.099   Inspection
   
159.100   Engineer’s certificate
 
   
159.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 159.001  AUTHORITY.
   (A)   This chapter is adopted under the Constitution and laws of the state,
including particularly Tex. Local Gov’t Code Ch. 212.
   (B)   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Art. I, § 2 of
the Charter of the city.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.002  PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the safe, efficient and
orderly development of the city, and the provision of adequate streets,
utilities, services and facilities, all in accordance with the Comprehensive
Plan and ordinances of the city.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.003  ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The city shall withhold the issuance of building permits from any
subdivision until such subdivision has been approved by the municipal authority
responsible for approval of the final plat of such subdivision and the
recording of such plat in the office of the County Clerk.
   (B)   Neither the city, its officials or any public utility or any other
entity that provides water, sewer, electric, gas or other utility service,
shall serve or connect any land with such service unless presented with a copy
of a recorded final subdivision plat containing a certificate showing approval
of such plat by the municipal authority of the city responsible for approval of
such final subdivision plat or, unless presented with or otherwise holds a
certificate pursuant to Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 212.0115 indicating that a plat
is not required for the land or that a plat is required and has been reviewed
and approved by the municipal authority of the city responsible for approval of
a final subdivision plat of the land.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the
issuance of permits for any lots upon which a residence building exists and was
in existence prior to 12-1-1971, or to prohibit the repair, maintenance or
installation of any street or public utility services for, to or abutting any
lot, the last recorded conveyance of which prior to passage of such ordinance
was by metes and bounds, and any subdivision, or lot therein, recorded or
unrecorded, which subdivision was in existence prior to 12-1-1971.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.004  JURISDICTION.
   These regulations shall govern any and every person, firm, corporation or
organization owning any tract of land within the corporate limits of the city
who may hereafter divide the same into two or more parts for the purpose of
laying out any subdivision of any tract of land or any addition to said city,
or for laying out suburban lots or building lots, or any lots, and street,
alleys or parks or other portions intended for public use, or the use of
purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto. These
regulations shall also govern any and every person, firm, corporation or
organization constructing any street, right-of-way improvement or any related
roadway improvement, whether or not a subdivision as defined herein is being
created.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.005  REQUIREMENT FOR SUBDIVISION PLAT.
   (A)   Every owner of any tract of land who may divide said tract into two or
more lots or tracts, or create from said tract one or more lots of record, for
the purpose of transfer of ownership, dedication of streets, alleys, easements,
parks or other areas dedicated to public use, or for use for building
development, shall cause a plat to be made in accordance with this chapter.
   (B)   A subdivision plat shall be required for the construction or placement
of any new building, regardless of square footage, on a tract or parcel not
currently occupied by a building or buildings.
   (C)   A subdivision plat shall be required to alter any aspect of a recorded
plat, meeting all applicable requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   (1)   A subdivision plat shall not be required for the division of
land into parts greater than five acres or more, where each part has access and
no public improvement is being dedicated.
      (2)   The term PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT shall mean any right-of-way, easement
or physical improvement of any kind intended for public use.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.006  CONSISTENCY WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN, POLICIES AND ZONING ORDINANCE.
   It is the intent that this chapter shall provide for the implementation of
the City Comprehensive Plan, including the Future Land Use Map, Thoroughfare
Plan and other applicable elements; and any supplemental land use and community
development policies that may be hereafter adopted by the City Commission, and
shall be consistent with
Ch. 160 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.007  CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   Whenever the standards and specifications in this chapter conflict with
those contained in another ordinance, the most stringent or restrictive
provision shall govern.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.008  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to
abutting property.
   BLOCK. A tract or parcel of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of
streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, highways, streams
or corporate boundary lines. There may be more than one numbered BLOCK as shown
on a plat falling within a single BLOCK , as herein defined. The City Engineer
serves as the city’s authority as to the determination of questions regarding
the limits or extent of a BLOCK .
   BOARD. The Planning Board of the city.
   BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind.
   BUILDING LINE or SETBACK LINE. The rear line of a required front yard which
is generally parallel to the street line that forms the front lot line. No
building or structure may be permitted in the area between the building line
and the street right-of-way.
   BUILDING LOT. A single tract of land located within a single block which,
(at time of filing for a building permit) is designed by its owner or developer
as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, under single
ownership or control. It shall front upon a public street or other approved
place. Therefore, a BUILDING LOT may be subsequently subdivided into two or
more BUILDING LOTS , and a number of BUILDING LOTS may be cumulated into one
BUILDING LOT , subject to the provisions of this chapter and Ch. 160 of this
code of ordinances.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Building Inspections Department head and the
administrative official charged with responsibility for issuing permits and
enforcing Ch. 160 of this code of ordinances and Building Codes of the city.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY OR COMPLIANCE. An official certificate issued by
the city through the enforcing official which indicates conformance with or
approved conditional waiver from zoning regulations and which authorizes legal
use of the premises for which it is issued.
   CITY. The City of Texas City, Texas.
   CITY COMMISSION. The elected Mayor and Commission members, the governing
body with the legislative authority of the city.
   CITY ENGINEER. The professional civil engineer representing the city.
   CITY PLANNER. The professional urban planner representing the city.
   COMMISSION. The City Commission with the legislative authority of the city.
   COMMON AREA. Real property and/or improvements thereon, including, but not
limited to, private storm drains, streets, sidewalks, utilities, parks, lakes
and/or screening walls; open space; trails and/or floodplain management areas.
COMMON AREA is either owned in fee, controlled as an easement or is property
leased by the property owners association for the common use, enjoyment and
benefit of the members of the property owners association. All COMMON AREAS
shall be maintained by the members of the property owners association, not the
city.
   CONCEPT PLAN. A plan that establishes the general development intent. It
serves as a guide for the approval of future site plans and plats relating to
the property.
   COUNTY. Galveston County.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A local street with only one primary outlet and having a
terminal of sufficient width for the reversal of traffic movement.
   DEAD-END STREET. A street having right-of-way or pavement which terminates
abruptly at one end without intersection with another street, but has no
terminal of sufficient width for the reversal of traffic movement.
   DEDICATION. The act transmitting property or interest to the city or other
entity.
   DEVELOPER , DEVELOPMENT or TO DEVELOP. Includes the construction of a new
building or any structure on a building lot, the relocation of an existing
building to another building lot or the use of open land for a new use. TO
DEVELOP is to create a development. DEVELOPER is the person or legal entity
undertaking to develop real property in the city.
   DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE. A committee consisting of city staff, utility
company representatives and other public officials who review all plats and
site plans submitted for municipal approval.
   EASEMENT. A right given by the owner of a parcel of land to another person,
public agency or private corporation for specific and limited use of that
parcel.
   FINAL ACCEPTANCE. The acceptance by the city of all capital improvements
constructed by a developer in connection with the development of land.
   FIRE MARSHAL. The official Fire Marshal or designated representative of the
city.
   FLAG LOT. A lot that is designed in a manner such that the main structure on
the lot is accessible only by a long, narrow strip leading from a public
street.
   FLOODPLAIN. The area subject to inundation by flood, having a given
percentage of probability of occurrence in any given year, based on existing
conditions of development within the watershed area, as determined by the
Floodplain Administrator and/or the City Engineer.
   FLOODWAY. The channel and adjacent areas of watercourse within which no
obstructions to flow are allowed, so that the 100-year flood may pass without
cumulatively increasing the 100-year floodplain elevation. The FLOODWAY will be
defined by the Floodplain Administrator and/or the City Engineer.
   GEOMETRIC DESIGN STANDARDS. The minimum allowable engineering geometric
standards adopted by the city affecting the functional traffic level operation,
service and safety of highways, roads, alleys and streets in the city.
   HOMEOWNERS OR PROPERTY OWNERS ASSOCIATION (HOA OR POA). A formal non-profit
organization operating under recorded land agreements established to maintain
or improve a given tract of real property.
   INFRASTRUCTURE. All streets, alleys, sidewalks, storm drainage facilities,
water and wastewater facilities, utilities, lighting, transportation and such
other facilities as required by the city.
   LOT. Any plot of land occupied or intended to be occupied by one building or
a group of buildings, any accessory buildings and uses and having its principal
frontage on a street.
   LOT OF RECORD. An area of land designated as a lot on a plat of a
subdivision recorded, pursuant to statutes of the state, with the County Clerk
or an area of land held in single ownership described by metes and bounds upon
a deed recorded or registered with the County Clerk prior to annexation by the
city.
   MONUMENT. A permanent structure set on a line to define the location of
property lines, important horizontal subdivision control points and other
important features on a plat.
   MUTUAL ACCESS EASEMENT. A grant of one or more of the property rights by the
property owner or owners to and/or for the use or benefit by the public, for
access between and/or across two or more lots or tracts of land.
   PLANNING BOARD. The City Planning Board appointed by the City Commission to
study and advise the Commission in matters of city planning and zoning and
which is authorized to review/approve subdivision plats and site plans.
   PLAT. A plan of a subdivision of land creating building lots or tracts and
showing all essential dimensions and other information essential to comply with
the subdivision standards of the city subject to review/approval by the
Planning Board and City Commission. Reference to a PLAT in the chapter means an
official plat of record which has been reviewed/approved by the Planning Board
and or the City Commission and filed in the plat records of the county. A PLAT
includes a REPLAT .
   PLAT, AMENDING. A plat making minor corrections to a previously approved
plat in accordance with Tex. Local Gov’t Code Ch. 212.
   PLAT, FINAL.
      (1)   A map of a land subdivision prepared in a form suitable for filing
of record with necessary affidavits, dedications and acceptances.
      (2)   A FINAL PLAT is a legal document that describes a tract of land by
bearings and distances, locates and defines easements, and dedicates the
necessary rights-of-way for streets and alleys.
      (3)   The FINAL PLAT determines conformance to subdivision regulations,
the zoning ordinance, other related codes and city policies.
   PLAT, MINOR. A plat involving four or fewer lots fronting on an existing
street and not requiring the creation of any new street or the extension of
municipal facilities.
   PLAT, PRELIMINARY.
      (1)   A map of a proposed land subdivision showing the character and
proposed layout of the tract in sufficient detail to indicate the suitability
of the proposed development.
      (2)   It is intended to provide a review of the overall lot
configuration, water and sewer services and street patterns.
      (3)   The review will determine conformance with the city’s subdivision
and development regulations.
      (4)   A PRELIMINARY PLAT allows the city and the developer to estimate
future participation in infrastructure costs.
   PLAT, VACATING. To cancel, rescind or render an act that has the effect of
voiding a subdivision plat as recorded in the County Clerk’s office.
   PUBLIC PARK. Any publicly owned or controlled park, playground, parkway,
greenbelt or roadway within the jurisdiction and control of the city.
   REPLAT. A legal document that describes a tract of land by bearings and
distances; locates and defines easements and dedicates the necessary rights-of-
way for streets and alleys and which is prepared is to accommodate changes in
lots, blocks, utility easements, boundary lines, rights-of-way or street names
of the subdivision of a tract which has been previously platted.
   ROADWAY. The portion of any street or road, between curbs or shoulders,
designated for vehicular traffic.
   STREET. A public right-of-way which affords a primary means of access to
abutting property. A driveway or alley which serves only to give secondary
vehicular access to a building lot or to an accessory parking or loading
facility, or to allow vehicles to take or discharge passengers at the entrance
to a building shall not be considered a STREET .
   STREET, ARTERIAL. A street intended as the primary urban traffic-carrying
system between major traffic centers.
   STREET, COLLECTOR. A street intended to provide circulation within
neighborhoods, to carry traffic from minor or local streets to arterial streets
or to carry traffic through or adjacent to commercial or industrial areas.
   STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS. A street which is parallel to and adjacent to an
arterial street, which primarily provides access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
   STREET, MINOR OR LOCAL. A street is used primarily for access to abutting
residential property.
   STREET, PRIVATE. A street which has no publicly dedicated right-of way.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person, partnership, firm, association, corporation (or
combination thereof), or any officer, agent, employee, servant or trustee
thereof, who performs or participates in the performing of any act toward the
subdivision of land, within the intent, scope and purview of these regulations.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of any tract of land situated within the corporate
limits of the city or within the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction, into two
or more parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision of any tract of
land or any addition, or for laying out suburban, building or other lots, and
to lay out streets, alleys or parks or other portions intended to be dedicated
for public use, or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon
or adjacent thereto for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of creating
building sites. SUBDIVISION includes RESUBDIVISION .
   THOROUGHFARE PLAN. As depicted in the city’s Comprehensive Plan and Land Use
Map is the official plan for the orderly physical development of highways,
roads and streets in the city.
   VARIANCE. A form of relief which may be granted to a subdivider by the
Planning Board or City Commission.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.009  SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, clause, paragraph, sentence or phrase of this chapter shall,
for any reason, be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalid
section, clause, paragraph, sentence or phrase is hereby declared to be
severable; and any such invalid or unconstitutional section, clause, paragraph,
sentence or phrase shall in no way affect the remainder of this chapter; and it
is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Commission that the
remainder of this chapter would have been passed notwithstanding the invalidity
or unconstitutionality of any section, clause, paragraph, sentence or phrase
thereof.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
PLATTING PROCEDURES
§ 159.020  PRE-SUBMITTAL CONFERENCE.
   (A)   Prior to submitting an application for any type of a subdivision plan
or plat, the subdivider shall consult with the City Planner and the City
Engineer or their duly authorized representatives concerning the ultimate land
use of the proposed development, the most advantageous subdivision plan, the
suitability of the location of the proposed subdivision, the arrangement of
streets, alleys and lots, the layout of utility lines and drainage facilities
and applicable regulations and policies of the city regarding development.
   (B)   The subdivider shall also coordinate with all utility companies that
have franchise agreements with the city to determine recommended easement and
utility locations.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.021  GENERAL APPLICATION PROCESS.
   (A)   The applicant shall submit to the City Planner, or designee, a
complete application packet prepared in the manner prescribed by the city.
Applications for plat approval shall be available in the office of the City
Planner.
   (B)   A complete application shall include the certification of payment of
all taxes and fees as prescribed by the city.
   (C)   The date of filing for plat approval shall be the date a fully
completed application is actually received by the city. No incomplete
application shall be deemed as submitted until any and all deficiencies are
corrected.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.022  SUBDIVISION MASTER PLAN.
   (A)   The purpose of a Subdivision Master Plan is to review and approve a
general plan for the development of large tracts of property, including the
layout of streets, lots, open space and sites for public facilities and
utilities.
   (B)   Unless a subdivider chooses to file a preliminary plat application, a
Subdivision Master Plan shall be prepared by the subdivider as a condition
precedent to approval of any application for a plat, when any of the following
conditions exist:
      (1)   The tract of land to be subdivided contains 20 or more acres;
      (2)   The tract of land to be subdivided has the potential by the
existing or proposed zoning to accommodate 60 or more single-family dwellings;
or
      (3)   In the opinion of the City Engineer or the City Planner the tract
of land to be subdivided is complicated by unusual physical, utility, land use,
ownership or other conditions.
   (C)   Formal application and the required information for a Subdivision
Master Plan shall be made to the City Planner by the applicant on forms
prescribed by the city.
   (D)   (1)   Within 30 days following the date of filing of a completed
application for a Subdivision Master Plan, it shall be submitted to the
Planning Board for review and a recommendation to the City Commission. The
Planning Board shall make a recommendation for approval, disapproval or
approval with modifications.
      (2)   The City Commission shall make the final determination regarding
Subdivision Master Plans, which determination may include approval, disapproval
or approval with modifications.
   (E)   Approval of a Subdivision Master Plan shall not constitute automatic
approval of a preliminary or final plat. The subdivider shall be required to
submit a preliminary and final plat, including construction plans where
applicable, for each section or phase of development.
   (F)   (1)   Approval of a Subdivision Master Plan shall be valid for 12
months from the date of City Commission approval.
      (2)   Any application for a preliminary plat or final plat approval
subject to a Subdivision Master Plan must be formally filed with the City
Planner before the 12-month period expires in order for the Subdivision Master
Plan to remain valid.
   (G)   Reapproval of a Subdivision Master Plan may be applied for at any time
after the approved Plan becomes invalid. The Planning Board or the City
Commission may require changes in the reapproval of a Subdivision Master Plan
in light of new or significant information or requirements, or changed
conditions.
   (H)   Applications for preliminary and final plats within an area for which
a Subdivision Master Plan has been adopted shall be in substantial conformity
with such adopted plan; unless otherwise approved by the City Commission.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.023  PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   A preliminary plat shall be prepared by the subdivider as a condition
precedent to approval of any final plat, when any of the following conditions
exist:
      (1)   The tract of land to be subdivided contains 20 or more lots;
      (2)   The tract contains 40 or more acres, regardless of the number of
lots; or
      (3)   The Planning Board or City Commission, upon recommendation by the
City Planner, City Engineer or designee, determines that planning
considerations necessitate employment of the preliminary plat review process to
adequately safeguard public health and safety issues relating to development of
the tract.
   (B)   Unless the preliminary plat application is a part of an approved
Subdivision Master Plan, the preliminary plat shall depict the owner’s or
subdivider’s entire property holding.
   (C)   Formal application and the required information for a preliminary plat
shall be made to the City Planner by the applicant on forms prescribed by the
city.
   (D)   The City Engineer may require the following additional plans, studies
and analyses in conjunction with a preliminary plat application. The documents
shall include all information deemed necessary by the City Engineer to
adequately protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare of the
applicant and any property impacted by the proposal, and to assure compliance
with the provisions of this chapter. Additional plans, studies and analyses:
      (1)   Preliminary drainage study;
      (2)   Preliminary water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and drainage
capacity calculations; and
      (3)   Traffic impact analysis (TIA).
   (E)   (1)   Within 30 days following the date of filing of a completed
application for a preliminary plat approval, it shall be submitted to the
Planning Board for review and final decision. The Planning Board shall approve,
disapprove or approve with modifications.
      (2)   If approved by the Planning Board, the following special notes and
signature block shall be placed on the preliminary plat:
      Approval of this Preliminary Plat by the Planning Board and City
Commission shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout submitted on
the preliminary plat as a guide to the final engineering of streets, water,
sewer and other required improvements and utilities and to the preparation of
the final plat. Approval of this preliminary plat shall not constitute
automatic approval of the final plat, nor be considered authorization to begin
construction or sell lots. Approval of the preliminary plat shall not
constitute a guarantee or warranty, either implied or otherwise that all other
applicable codes and ordinances of the City of Texas City have been complied
with. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to ensure that all
applicable requirements of the City of Texas City relative to the subdividing
and development of property have been met.
      On the                    day of                                , 20     
   , this preliminary plat was duly approved by the Planning Board of the City
of Texas City.
      Signed:                                                                  
               
            Secretary of the City of Texas City Planning Board
      Signed:                                                                  
               
            Chairperson of the City of Texas City Planning Board
   (F)   Approval of a preliminary plat shall be valid for 12 months from the
date of City Commission approval. A final plat application must be formally
filed with the City Planner before the 12-month period expires in order for the
preliminary plat to remain valid.
   (G)   Reapproval of a preliminary plat may be applied for at any time after
the previously approved preliminary plat becomes invalid. The Planning Board or
the City Commission may require changes in the reapproval of a preliminary plat
in light of new or significant information or requirements, or changed
conditions.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.024  FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   After obtaining approval or conditional approval of a preliminary plat
and fulfilling all requirements of the preliminary plat approval, the applicant
may, if wishing to proceed with the subdivision, submit an application for a
final plat. The application for final plat approval shall be in accordance with
all ordinance requirements.
   (B)   Applications for approval of final plats shall be made to the City
Planner on forms prescribed by the city.
   (C)   At the time of final plat application, all required engineering plans
must be approved by the City Engineer and shall be subject to compliance review
and approval by the City Engineer.
   (D)   The City Engineer may require the following additional plans, studies
and analyses in conjunction with a final plat application. The documents shall
include all information deemed necessary by the City Engineer to adequately
protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare of the applicant and
any property impacted by the proposal. Additional plans, studies and analyses:
      (1)   Drainage study;
      (2)   Water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and drainage capacity
calculations; and
      (3)   Traffic impact analysis (TIA).
   (E)   The final plat instrument becomes the official, accurate, permanent
record of the division of land. It shall substantially conform in all aspects
to the preliminary plat, shall be clearly reproducible on a material acceptable
to the County Clerk’s office and shall be certified as hereinafter provided. It
may include all or only a portion of the area of the approved preliminary plat.
   (F)   The final plat shall be in accordance with the approved preliminary
plat; provided, however, that, the Planning Board or City Commission may
authorize minor adjustments to street and alley alignments, length and lot
lines where the Board or Commission determines such adjustments are consistent
with the intent and general layout of the approved preliminary plat. Where the
final plat deviates from the approved preliminary plat to the extent that the
Board or Commission finds such deviation to be significant and not consistent
with the intent and general layout of the approved preliminary plat, such final
plat shall not be approved until it reflects the originally approved
preliminary plat, or a new preliminary plat has been approved in accordance
with this chapter.
   (G)   (1)   When a subdivision contains common areas, drainage ways,
screening walls, landscaping, subdivision entryway features or other facilities
not located within the public right-of-way nor subject to city maintenance, the
common areas and improvements shall be shown on the final plat along with an
adequate form for dedication thereof. This dedication form shall accomplish the
following purposes:
         (a)   Save the title to common area properties for the responsibility
and benefit of the homeowners association;
         (b)   Express a definite undertaking by the developer to convey the
common properties and responsibilities to the homeowners association; and
         (c)   Tie the covenants and homeowners use provisions to the plat so
that collection of fees and denying use is legally supportable.
      (2)   Prior to recording the plat, the developer shall:
         (a)   Create an incorporated non-profit homeowners association; and
         (b)   Record covenants which automatically make every lot owner a
mandatory member of the association, give the property owner the right to use
the common property and establish his or her voting rights and his or her
obligations to pay assessments.
      (3)   The homeowners association’s restrictive covenants shall provide
for continuous maintenance and control of the common areas by a responsible
body, in perpetuity, for the benefit of the homeowners without using public
funds. Membership in the homeowners association shall run with the title to
each lot. Membership in the homeowners association is not voluntary and its
primary source of operating funds is a periodic assessment levied against each
parcel of land within the development under recorded covenants which shall be
incorporated into each deed and which shall run with the land to bind each and
every owner of it and which are enforceable as a lien against the land.
      (4)   A homeowners association (HOA) shall be responsible for maintenance
of all landscaping, buffering, screening, irrigation and associated
improvements adjacent to residential subdivisions along public thoroughfares
and shall have an HOA fee to be levied against each property owner within the
subdivision. The HOA covenants shall include a provision that if the HOA
defaults, the city shall have the rights of the association to either file a
lien on property within the subdivision or assess property owners within the
subdivision. This shall include the open space common area designated for
screening and buffering. The developer shall establish the HOA, which meets the
approval of the City Attorney, prior to the acceptance of all public
improvements.
      (5)   The articles of incorporation of the homeowners association, its
bylaws and the restrictive covenants shall be submitted to the City Attorney
for approval along with the final plat and shall be recorded as a part thereof.
      (6)   In the approval of the above documents, the city shall determine
that the proper legal position is ensured and that the proposed homeowners
association will function properly both during and after the time in which the
developer is active in the subdivision. The city may require the association to
provide ongoing reporting of budgetary actions, financial reports and
collection activity on homeowners’ assessments. Should the funding of the
common areas maintenance not support the level of maintenance required by
applicable ordinance, the city may require additional security for the
provision of such maintenance.
      (7)   In lieu of creating a homeowners association, the developer may
retain responsibility for the common areas, provided the developer guarantees
adequate security, to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, to provide for
continuous maintenance and control of the common areas by a responsible body,
in perpetuity, for the benefit of the homeowners without using public funds.
   (H)   A completed application for final plat approval shall be acted on by
the Planning Board within 30 days following its submittal. The Planning Board
shall approve, deny or approve with modifications or conditions. The final plat
shall not be filed with the County Clerk until all the following steps are
completed:
      (1)   Required improvements have been made by the subdivider;
      (2)   The improvements have been inspected and approved by the city;
      (3)   All utility impact fees have been paid; and
      (4)   The plat has been signed by the Mayor on behalf of the City
Commission.
   (I)   (1)   A surveyor’s certificate in the following form shall be placed
on the subdivision plat:
      KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: I, the undersigned                      
                           , a Registered Professional Land Surveyor in the
State of Texas, hereby certify that this plat is true and correctly made under
my supervision and in compliance with City and State survey regulations and
laws and made on the ground and that the corner monuments were properly placed
under my supervision.
      (Seal)                                          
      Registered Professional Land Surveyor No.                        
      (2)   An engineer’s certificate in the following form shall be placed on
the subdivision construction plans:
      KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: I, the undersigned, ________________, a
Professional Engineer Registered in the State of Texas, hereby certify that
proper engineering consideration has been given to these plans and all
engineering aspects are in compliance with City and State engineering
regulations and laws.
      (Engineer Seal)                                                          
   Registered Professional Engineer
      P.E. Registration No.                                                  
      (3)   An owner’s acknowledgment and certificate of dedication in the
following form shall be placed on the subdivision plat:
      That (OWNER’S NAME) action herein by and through its duly authorized
officers, does hereby adopt this plat designating the herein above described
property as (SUBDIVISION NAME), an addition to the City of Texas City, Texas
and does hereby dedicate, in fee simple to the public use forever, the streets,
alley, and public use areas, shown hereon, and does hereby dedicate the
easements shown on the plat for the purposes indicated to the public use
forever, said dedications being free and clear of all liens and encumbrances
except as shown herein. No buildings, fences, trees, shrubs or other
improvements shall be constructed or placed upon, over, or across the easements
on said plat. Utility easements may also be used for the mutual use and
accommodation of all public utilities desiring to use or using the same unless
the easement limits the use to a particular utility or utilities, said use by
public utilities being subordinate to the public’s and City of Texas City’s use
thereof. The City of Texas City and any public utility shall have the right to
remove and keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, trees, shrubs, or
other improvements or growths which in any way endanger or interfere with the
construction, maintenance or efficiency of its respective system on any of
these easements. The City of Texas City and any public utility shall at all
times have the right of ingress and egress to and from and upon any said
easement for the purpose of using, constructing, reconstructing, inspecting,
patrolling, maintaining and adding to or removing all of part of its respective
system without the necessity at any time of procuring the permission of anyone.
   (OWNER’S NAME) does hereby bind itself, its successors and assigns to
forever warrant and defend all and singular the above described streets,
alleys, easements and rights unto the public against every person whomsoever
lawfully claiming or to claim the same or any part thereof. This plat approved
subject to all platting ordinances, rules, regulations, and resolutions of the
City of Texas City.
      WITNESS MY HAND THIS                    DAY OF                          
                , 20             .
      Signature of Owner
                                                                               
           
      Position in Corporation (if applicable)
                                                                               
           
      Name of Corporation (if applicable)
                                                                               
           
      Lien Holder (if applicable)
      If there is no lien holder, add the following statement:
      To the best of my knowledge, there are no liens against this property.
                                                                               
           
      Signature of Owner
      (4)   Notary certificate:
      STATE OF                                                                
                     
      COUNTY OF                                                               
                   
      Before me, the undersigned authority, a Notary Public in and for the said
County and State on this day personally appeared                              
                                                         , known to me to be
the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument and
acknowledged to me that he/she executed the same in the capacity therein
stated.
      Given under my hand and seal of office, this                day of      
                               , 20         .
                                                                               
           
      Notary Public in and for the State of                                  
      My commission expires:                                                  
      (5)   Homeowners association form, if applicable, shall be prescribed by
the city.
      (6)   Planning Board signature block.
      On the ______ day of ____________, 20___, this plat was duly approved by
the Planning Board of the City of Texas City.
      Signed:                                                                  
                     
            Secretary of the City of Texas City Planning Board
      Signed:                                                                  
                     
            Chairperson of the City of Texas City Planning Board
      (7)   Construction compliance:
      It is understood that if the final plans for (Subdivision Name) are
approved by the City Engineer and Planning Board of the City of Texas City, the
undersigned will in all things comply with all provisions of such plat and
construction plans and will duly perform all construction called for therein,
fully and completely. No changes shall be made in construction plans without
the consent in writing of the City Engineer being first had and obtained.
                                                                               
                                                 
      Owner                           Developer
      Witnesses:
                                                               
                                                               
      On the _____ of _____________, 20___.
      (8)   Certification of approval of City Commission and authority for City
Secretary to file plat.
      This is to certify that all improvements to (name of subdivision)
Subdivision have been completed and accepted by the City of Texas City, Texas,
and this subdivision plat is ready for the City Secretary to file said plat in
the County Clerk’s office.
                                                               
      Mayor, City of Texas City Texas
   (J)   Expiration and request for reapproval:
      (1)   Approval of the final plat shall expire unless the plat is recorded
in the office of the County Clerk within a period of 30 months after the date
of approval by the Planning Board. Any final plat not filed within such time
shall be considered invalid. An extension may be requested upon evidence of
substantial completion of public improvements.
      (2)   Reapproval of a final plat by the Planning Board may be applied for
at any time after the approved plat becomes invalid. If the Planning Board,
during consideration of the reapproval of any such plat, should deem changes
necessary in the reapproval of a final plat in light of new or significant
information or requirements, or changes in conditions, it shall so inform the
subdivider. A final plat submitted for reapproval shall be prepared in
accordance with, and comply with, the requirements of this chapter, the zoning
ordinance and all other applicable requirements in effect at the time such
application for reapproval is formally filed with the city.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.025  REPLAT.
   (A)   Replat required. A replat is required to alter or create new lot
lines, add or remove easements, or alter any other aspects of a recorded plat,
and shall meet the requirements of Tex. Local Gov’t Code Ch. 212. An amending
plat may be submitted in lieu of a replat if the amending plat meets the
requirements of Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 212.016.
   (B)   Content, review and decision making process.
      (1)   An application for approval of a replat shall contain the same
information as is required for an application for final plat approval with the
following additional requirements:
         (a)   Exact name of previous plat, which shall be retained in the
title of the replat identified;
         (b)   Blocks, lots and portions thereof which are being replatted,
shall be identified;
         (c)   Recording information applicable to the previous plat, including
volume and page number;
         (d)   Original plat information being deleted, abandoned or changed by
the replat, (lots and blocks, rights-of-way and the like), shall be shown
lightly sketched or dotted on the drawing with a note of explanation; and
         (e)   The word “replat” shall be shown in the title block.
      (2)   At the time of application for a replat, all required engineering
plans must be approved by the City Engineer.
      (3)   The replat shall be reviewed by the Planning Board in accordance
with the final plat requirements of §
159.024 of this chapter; except that, any required public hearings and
notification shall be in accordance with Tex. Local Gov’t Code Ch. 212.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.026  AMENDING PLAT.
   (A)   Authority for amending plats. An application for an amending plat may
be submitted to the city in accordance with Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 212.016.
   (B)   Content, review and decision making process.
      (1)   An application for approval of an amending plat shall contain the
same information as required for an application for final plat approval
pursuant to §
159.024 of this chapter with the following additional requirements:
         (a)   A note identifying what element(s) of the plat is (are) being
amended;
         (b)   A graphic representation encircling the area of the plat being
amended; and
         (c)   The words “Amending Plat” shall be shown in the title block.
      (2)   In accordance with Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 212.0065, the city
delegates to the City Planner and City Engineer the authority to approve
amending plats, if such amending plat conforms to the requirements of this
chapter and applicable provisions of Tex. Local Gov’t Code Ch. 212.
      (3)   The City Planner and City Engineer may, for any reason, elect to
present the amending plat to the Planning Board for approval.
      (4)   (a)   The City Planner and City Engineer shall not disapprove an
amending plat application.
         (b)   Any application for approval of an amending plat that the City
Planner and City Engineer determine should be disapproved shall be referred to
the Planning Board for consideration, prior to the expiration of 30 days from
the date of filing of the application.
      (5)   (a)   If an amending plat is approved by the City Planner and City
Engineer, the signature block and signature of the Chairperson of the Planning
Board shall not be required.
         (b)   The following signature shall, however, appear on the amending
plat.
      On the                  day of                                    , 20   
     , this amending plat was approved by the City Planner and City Engineer of
the City of Texas City.
      Signed:                                                                
            City Planner of Texas City
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.027  ADMINISTRATIVE MINOR PLAT.
   (A)   Authority for administrative minor plats. An application for an
administrative minor plat may be submitted to the city in accordance with Tex.
Local Gov’t Code § 212.0065.
   (B)   Content, review and decision making process.
      (1)   The administrative minor plat shall contain the same information in
accordance with the final plat requirements of §
159.024 of this chapter.
      (2)   In accordance with Tex. Local Gov’t Code § 212.0065, the city
delegates to the City Planner and City Engineer the authority to approve
administrative minor plats which:
         (a)   Involve four or fewer lots;
         (b)   Front onto an existing street; and
         (c)   Do not require the creation of any new street or the extension
of municipal facilities.
      (3)   The City Planner and City Engineer may, for any reason, elect to
present the administrative minor plat to the Planning Board for approval.
      (4)   The City Planner and City Engineer shall not disapprove the
administrative minor plat and shall be required to refer any administrative
minor plat application which he or she refuses to approve to the Planning Board
for consideration.
      (5)   If the administrative minor plat is approved by the City Planner
and City Engineer, the signature block and signature of the Chairperson of the
Planning Board shall not be required. The following signature shall, however,
appear on the administrative minor plat.
      On the                  day of                                , 20       
, this administrative minor plat was approved by the City Planner and City
Engineer of the City of Texas City.
      Signed:                                                                  
     
            City Planner of the City of Texas City
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.028  VACATING PLAT.
   (A)   Authority for vacating plats. An application to vacate a previously
recorded plat may be submitted to the city in accordance with Tex. Local Gov’t
Code § 212.013.
   (B)   Content, review and decision making process.
      (1)   The vacating plat shall contain the same information required for
final plats as set forth in §
159.024 of this chapter with the following additional requirements:
         (a)   A note identifying the original plat being vacated shall be
indicated; and
         (b)   The words “Vacating Plat” shall be shown in the title block.
      (2)   An application for approval of a vacating plat shall be submitted
to the Planning Board for review and final decision. The Planning Board shall
approve, disapprove or approve with modifications.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.029  ABANDONMENT OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Abandonment procedure. Any person desiring to seek abandonment of a
public right-of-way by the city shall follow the procedures set forth in the
section.
   (B)   Application content.
      (1)   An application for the abandonment of a public street or public
alley right-of-way may be initiated only by the property owners abutting such
right-of-way. The application shall contain the signatures of the owners all
properties that abut the subject right-of-way, and shall include proof of such
ownership.
      (2)   All public utilities must consent in writing to the abandonment.
      (3)   The application shall include a plat depicting the location and
physical configuration of the right-of-way to be abandoned drawn to a scale
that clearly defines the limits of the abandonment. The plat shall also contain
a proper metes and bounds legal description, prepared by a registered surveyor,
of the proposed abandonment. If the abandonment is approved, a copy of such
plat shall be attached as an exhibit to the ordinance approving such
abandonment.
   (C)   Process.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a complete application including all support
documentation as required by division (A) above, a public hearing shall be
scheduled with the Planning Board.
      (2)   Notice of the public hearing shall be provided to the owners of all
property abutting the subject right-of-way.
      (3)   The Planning Board shall also consider the impact upon properties
that do not physically abut the right-of-way sought to be abandoned, with
special consideration being given to the ease and availability of access to
such properties in the event the requested abandonment is approved.
      (4)   To be considered, written correspondence in favor of or in
opposition to the request must be submitted on or before the date of the
Planning Board’s public hearing.
      (5)   Upon recommendation by the Planning Board, the request shall be
submitted to the City Commission for final action.
      (6)   Abandonment of right-of-way, if approved by the City Commission,
shall be by ordinance, which shall be filed following adoption with the County
Clerk.
      (7)   The Mayor is authorized to execute and deliver a quitclaim deed to
any abutting property owner, for that portion of the abandonment, if requested
by the property owner.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.030  EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION REGULATIONS.
   The regulation of subdivisions within the city’s extraterritorial
jurisdiction shall be in accordance with an agreement with the county as
approved by the city on 10-23-2002, and as amended.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.031  PARK/OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Dedication of park/open space dedicated.
      (1)   Any subdivider who seeks approval of a plat for the development of
a residential subdivision which has a Master Plan potential greater than 100
residential lots shall dedicate by warranty deed a minimum of one-half acre of
land to the homeowners association for public neighborhood park use for each
100 lots or fraction thereof. The subdivider shall be responsible for
development of said park(s) and maintenance of said park(s) until such time
that a homeowners association is established which shall assume maintenance
responsibilities. The location of the open space shall be approved with the
final plat.
      (2)   Any subdivider who seeks approval of a plat for the development of
a residential subdivision which has a Master Plan potential for 100 or fewer
residential lots shall make a payment in lieu dedication in accordance with
division (E) below.
   (B)   Recreation sites. Land reserved for recreation purposes shall be of a
character and location suitable for use as a playground, playfield or for other
recreation purposes, and shall be relatively level and dry. The Recreation and
Tourism Department of the city and/or the Recreation and Tourism Board shall be
involved in the process for determining what land will be dedicated under the
provisions of this section. All land to be reserved for dedication to the city
for park purposes shall be clearly depicted on the plat: “Reserved for Park
And/or Recreation Purposes”.
   (C)   Applicability of land utilizing average density. Any subdivision plat
in which the principle of average density of flexible zoning has been utilized
shall not be exempt from the provisions of its section, except as to such
portion of land which is actually dedicated to the city for park and recreation
purposes.
   (D)   Other recreation reservations. The provisions of this section are
minimum standards. None of divisions (A) through (C) above shall be construed
as prohibiting a developer from reserving other land for recreation purposes in
addition to the requirements of this section.
   (E)   Alternative payment in lieu of land dedication.
      (1)   Subject to approval of the City Commission, a landowner or
developer responsible for park/open space dedication under division (A) above
may elect to apply to the city to meet the park/open space requirement, in
whole or in part, by a cash payment in lieu of land. Such cash payment shall be
based upon $10,000 per acre of park/open space required, or fraction thereof.
      (2)   Such payment in lieu of land dedication shall be deposited in a
Park and Recreation Improvement Fund to be established by the city. The cash in
lieu of land shall be used by the city for improvement of a neighborhood park,
playground or recreation area, located in the general neighborhood of the
development. The city may use the funds for the acquisition of property for
this purpose. The neighborhood park, playground or recreation area shall be
available to, and directly benefit, the persons in the subdivision for which
payment was made.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.032  VARIANCES.
   (A)   The City Commission may authorize a variance from any provision in
this chapter when, in its opinion, undue hardship would result from requiring
strict compliance. In granting a variance, the City Commission shall prescribe
only conditions that it deems necessary or in the public interest. In making
the findings required in this section, the Commission shall take into account
the nature of the proposed use of the land involved, existing uses of land in
the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed
subdivision and the probable effect of the variance upon traffic conditions and
upon the public health, safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity. The
staff and Planning Board shall first review the request for a variance, conduct
land use studies and make a written recommendation to the City Commission.
   (B)   No variance shall be granted unless the Planning Board finds and
recommends, and the City Commission concurs:
      (1)   There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land
involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter
would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his or her land;
      (2)   The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the applicant;
      (3)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety or welfare, or injuries to other property in the area; and
      (4)   The granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing
the orderly subdivision of other land in the areas in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   The findings of the Planning Board and City Commission, together with
the specific facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated
into the official minutes of the meetings at which such variance is recommended
and granted. Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this chapter, so that the public health, safety and
welfare may be secured and substantial justice served. Pecuniary hardship to
the subdivider, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue
hardship.
   (D)   Notwithstanding division (B) above, the City Commission may grant a
variance or variances to the provisions of this chapter in conjunction with the
approval of a planned unit development zoning ordinance (rezoning). If a
Planned Unit Development is approved, the City Commission need not consider and
approve each variance contained within.
   (Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 159.045  GENERAL.
   (A)   Conformity to design requirements. No plat shall be approved by the
Planning Board or City Commission, and no completed improvements shall be
accepted by the City Engineer, unless they conform to the following design
requirements and applicable standards, or unless waived by the City Commission
in accordance with §
159.031 of this chapter. Although the intention of this subchapter is to
establish uniform design standards, it neither replaces the need for
engineering judgment nor precludes the use of information not presented.
Improvements shall also be designed in accordance with all applicable city
design standards and details. Other accepted engineering procedures may be used
if approved by the City Engineer, and such procedures are not inconsistent with
the minimum requirements contained herein.
   (B)   Adequate public facilities policy. The land to be divided or developed
must be served adequately by essential public facilities and services. No
subdivision shall be approved unless and until adequate public facilities exist
or provision has been made for water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, drainage,
electric and road facilities which are necessary to serve the development
proposed, whether or not such facilities are to be located within the property
being platted or off-site. This policy may be defined further and supplemented
by other ordinances adopted by the city. Wherever the subject property adjoins
undeveloped land, or wherever required by the city to serve the public good,
utilities and drainage systems shall be extended to adjacent property lines to
allow connection of these utilities and drainage systems by adjacent property
owners when such adjacent property is platted and/or developed.
   (C)   Provision for future subdivisions. If a tract is subdivided into
parcels larger than ordinary building lots, these parcels shall be arranged to
allow for the extension of future streets and utilities.
   (D)   Reserve strips. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to
land dedicated or intended to be dedicated to public use.
   (E)   Subdivision names. Subdivision names shall not duplicate or cause
confusion with the names of existing subdivisions. All subdivision names shall
be approved by the Planning Board or City Commission upon recommendation of the
City Planner.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.046  STREETS.
   (A)   Layout. Adequate streets shall be provided by the subdivider, and the
arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of each shall conform
to the Comprehensive Plan and transportation plan of the city and shall be
considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical
conditions and to public safety and convenience, and in their appropriate
relationship to the proposed uses of land to be served by the streets. The
street layout shall be devised for the most advantageous development of the
entire neighborhood. The subdivider shall apply sound access management and
traffic principles to street and intersection layouts.
   (B)   Relation to adjoining street system. Where necessary to the
neighborhood pattern, existing streets in adjoining areas shall be continued
and shall be at least as wide as the existing streets and in alignment
therewith.
   (C)   Projection. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement
of streets in the subdivision shall make provision for the proper projection of
streets into the unsubdivided areas.
   (D)   Jogs. Whenever possible, street jogs with centerline offsets of less
than 125 feet shall be avoided.
   (E)   Half streets or adjacent streets. In the case of collector, minor or
marginal access streets, no new half streets shall be platted.
   (F)   Intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles
as practicable, giving due regard to terrain and topography.
   (G)   Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as
short stubs to permit future expansion. In no case shall the length of such
street exceed 250 feet. If such street exceeds 150 feet, then a temporary
turnaround which meets Fire Department standards shall be provided.
   (H)   Cul-de-sac.
      (1)   In general, a cul-de-sac shall not exceed 600 feet in length. Cul-
de-sac length shall be measured as the distance from the center of the cul-de-
sac to the nearest intersecting street right-of-way line.
      (2)   In residential areas, the cul-de-sac shall have a minimum right-of-
way radius of 50 feet and a minimum driving surface radius of 40 feet.
   (I)   Location and width of streets shown on the Comprehensive Plan and
Transportation Plan. Where a subdivision embraces a street as shown on the
Comprehensive Plan and Transportation Plan of the city, this street shall be
platted in the location and of the width indicated by these plans.
   (J)   Minor streets. Minor streets shall be laid out so as to discourage
their use by through traffic.
   (K)   Pavement widths and rights-of-way.
      (1)   Arterial streets shall have a right-of-way width of at least 80
feet, with a pavement width of at least 45 feet back to back of curbs.
      (2)   Collector streets shall have a right-of-way of at least 60 feet and
a pavement width of at least 37 feet back to back of curbs.
      (3)   Minor streets shall have a right-of-way of at least 60 feet and a
pavement width of at least 30 feet back to back of curb.
   (L)   Pavement, right-of-way widths. Streets forming part of the boundary of
the adjacent subdivision boundary shall have the following pavement widths and
rights-of-way widths.
      (1)   The subdivider shall dedicate a right-of-way of 40 feet in width
for new adjacent arterial streets, and two thoroughfare lanes shall be paved.
      (2)   New adjacent collector and minor streets shall be full width and
conform to division (K) above.
      (3)   Where the proposed subdivision abuts upon an existing street or
half street that does not conform to division (K) above, the subdivider shall
dedicate right-of-way sufficient to make the full right-of-way width conform to
division (K) above, and there shall be paved so much of such right-of-way as to
make the full pavement width comply with division (K) above. Before any
pavement is laid to widen existing flexible base pavement, the existing
pavement shall be cut back two feet to ensure an adequate subbase and pavement
joint.
   (M)   Construction requirements. The minimum standard residential street
shall be a 30-foot curb-and-guttered street constructed in accordance with the
city’s standards. The City Commission may grant permission to the subdivider to
build open ditch, road section streets, conforming to minimum specifications.
However, the subdivider must show good and sufficient cause to the City
Commission before it will grant permission to build open ditch, road section
streets. Additional construction requirements will be promulgated by the City
Engineer in accordance herewith and the city’s design standards and details.
   (N)   Curbs. Curbs shall be installed by the subdivider on both sides of all
interior streets, and on the subdivision side of all streets forming part of
the boundary of the subdivision, unless the subdivider has permission from the
City Commission not to install curbs.
   (O)   Names. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or cause confusion
within the names of existing streets, unless the new streets are a continuation
of or in alignment with existing streets, in which case names of existing
streets shall be used.
   (P)   Streetlights. Streetlights shall be installed by the subdivider at all
street intersections within the subdivision and at adjacent intersections on
the north and east boundaries of the subdivision.
   (Q)   Street name and traffic control signs. Street name and required
traffic control signs shall be installed by the subdivider within or abutting
the subdivision.
   (R)   Minimum elevation. The minimum elevation of streets (top of curb or
centerline) shall be five and one-half feet above mean sea level in locations
behind and protected by the storm tide protection levee (seawall).
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.047  SIDEWALKS.
   Sidewalks having a minimum width of four feet shall be required along any
street upon which a lot abuts and shall be designed and installed in accordance
with all applicable city design standards.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.048  PEDESTRIAN ACCESS.
   (A)   A pedestrian access easement having a minimum of six feet shall be
dedicated where deemed necessary by the Planning Board or City Commission to
provide circulation or access to schools, parks, shopping centers,
transportation and other community facilities, or to provide pedestrian
circulation within the subdivision.
   (B)   The pedestrian access easement shall be paved with a concrete
sidewalk, minimum of six feet in width.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.049  BLOCKS.
   (A)   Block lengths shall be not less than 300 feet or more than 1,200 feet.
However, block lengths may exceed 1,200 feet along arterial thoroughfares, as
designated on the Comprehensive Plan and the Transportation Plan.
   (B)   The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to:
      (1)   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs
of the type of use contemplated;
      (2)   Zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions; and
      (3)   Need for convenient and safe access, circulation and control of
street traffic.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.050  LOTS.
   (A)   Adequate provisions. Lots shall be designed in a manner to provide
adequate width, depth and shape to provide open area, to eliminate
overcrowding, and to be appropriate for the type of development and use
contemplated, and in accordance with the zoning ordinance.
   (B)   Minimum area and dimensions. Every lot shall meet the minimum area and
dimension standards as set forth in the zoning ordinance for the district in
which the lot is located. The Planning Board shall have the authority to
recommend and the City Commission shall have the authority to approve a
subdivision plat where lots have area, dimensions or setbacks greater than the
minimum standards set forth in
Ch. 160 of this chapter.
   (C)   Extra depth and width in certain cases. Where a lot in a residential
area backs up to a railroad right-of-way, a drainage easement, high voltage
electric transmission line, high-pressure gasoline, oil or gas line, an
arterial street, an industrial area or other land use which has a depreciating
effect on the residential use of the property, and where no marginal access
street other street, or substantial buffer is provided at the rear of the lot,
additional depth shall be required in the amount determined by the Planning
Board. Where a lot sides to any of the uses mentioned in this subsection,
additional width shall be required by the Planning Board.
   (D)   Street frontage.
      (1)   Every lot shall have frontage on, and access to, a public street.
However, where existing conditions make it impractical for one or more lots to
have frontage on a public street or where in-fill development can be
accommodated, the City Commission may authorize a flag lot configuration.
      (2)   The minimum width of the flag lot shall be 60 feet. The main
structure of the flag lot shall be served by a paved drive of sufficient width
and appropriate design so as not to deter access by emergency vehicles or any
other public services.
      (3)   The main structure served by a flag lot shall contain a sprinkler
system or other fire suppression system as approved by the Fire Marshal or
designee.
   (E)   Non-conforming single family lots. Where a lot, served by sanitary
sewer service has less area than provided for in this chapter or required by
the zoning ordinance and was in separate ownership at the time of the passage
of the original zoning ordinance, dated 1-26-1946, this section shall not
prohibit the erection of a single-family dwelling.
   (F)   Lots without access to sanitary sewer service.
      (1)   Where off-lot sanitary sewer service is not required, and is not
provided, residential lots shall have an area of at least two acres, and shall
be at least 200 feet wide. The minimum width shall be measured at the front
building line.
      (2)   All on-site sanitary sewer facilities shall be approved by the
County Health District.
      (3)   The following is the sole variance procedure specific to lots
without access to sanitary sewer service.
         (a)   The City Commission may authorize a variance from the two-acre
or 200-foot width requirements for on-site sanitary sewer facilities when, in
its opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In
granting a variance, the Commission shall prescribe only conditions that it
deems necessary or desirable to protect the public interest.
         (b)   In making the findings required in this section, the Commission
shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved,
existing uses of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside at
the proposed location, and the probable effect of the variance upon the public
health, safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity.
         (c)   The Planning Board shall first review the request for a variance
and make a written recommendation to the City Commission.
         (d)   No variance shall be granted unless the Commission finds:
            1.   There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the
land involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this
chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his or her land;
            2.   The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment
of a substantial property right of the applicant;
            3.   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area;
and
            4.   The granting of the variance will not have the effect of
preventing the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
         (e)   In consideration of a variance, the Commission shall also be
provided the following evidence and information:
            1.   The County Health District has approved the on-site sanitary
sewer facilities;
            2.   The applicant agrees that if platting is required by state law
or city ordinance, any granting of a variance is conditional on the property
being platted, approved by the city and recorded in the County Deed Records;
            3.   The applicant has paid all property taxes; and if
            4.   The property is in excess of one acre of undeveloped land
area, excluding water bodies (ponds, lakes, streams and the like); and, one of
the following guidelines applies:
               a.   The subject property perimeter is bounded by undevelopable
property which if it were combined with the subject property would cause it to
exceed the minimum size requirement above. Undevelopable property includes
natural bodies of water, highway, railway or other right-of-way, or other
characteristics of the land that substantially prevent the property from being
developed by any property owner; or
               b.   Other factors (other than economic hardship) exist that
would prohibit the applicant from purchasing enough additional property to meet
the requirements of this section.
         (f)   The findings of the City Commission, together with the specific
facts upon which the findings are based, shall be incorporated into the
official minutes of the Commission meeting at which the variance is granted.
         (g)   Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of the city code, so that the public health, safety and
welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. Pecuniary hardship to the
subdivider, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.051  UTILITY EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Each block that does not contain an alley as provided for herein shall
have a utility easement at the rear of all lots reserved for the use of all
public utility companies and the city.
   (B)   Utility easements shall be a minimum of 16 feet in width, taking eight
feet from each lot where the rear of two lots abut each other, and shall be
continuous for the entire length of the block. Easements shall parallel as
closely as possible the street line frontage of the block. Additional easement
areas may be required to accommodate utility equipment pads and boxes.
   (C)   Where utility easements are not straight within a block, or if an
easement does not connect on a straight course with the utility easements of
adjoining blocks, then an additional easement shall be provided for the placing
of guy wires on lot division lines in order to support poles set on curving or
deviating rights-of-way or alleys.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.052  UTILITY LINES.
   (A)   All utility lines that pass under a street or alley shall be installed
before the street or alley is paved.
   (B)   When it is necessary that utility lines pass under the street or alley
pavement, they shall be installed to a point at least ten feet beyond the edge
of the pavement.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.053  WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   (1)   All subdivisions shall be provided with potable water systems
approved by the City Engineer and the Director of Utilities.
      (2)   Water systems shall conform to the Water Distribution Plan,
technical specifications of the City Engineer and Director of Utilities in
accordance with this section and all other relevant city ordinances.
   (B)   The distribution system shall provide for fire flow with minimum six-
inch mains to serve all fire hydrants.
   (C)   Fire hydrants shall be located within 500 feet of all building sites.
   (D)   Minimum size water line shall be two inches.
   (E)   The maximum number of house connections on a looped two-inch line
shall be ten, and on a dead-end two-inch line it shall be five.
   (F)   Minimum pressure in the system under a peak domestic consumption of
450 gallons per capita per day shall be 40 pounds per square inch.
   (G)   A flushing device shall be provided at the end of all dead-end lines.
   (H)   Water lines shall be interconnected at intervals not to exceed 1,000
feet, or as prescribed by the City Engineer or the Director of Utilities.
   (I)   Valves shall be placed on all branches from feeder mains of six inches
or greater and on all leads from feeder mains to fire hydrants.
   (J)   There shall be no line greater than 800 feet without valve control.
   (K)   All water lines shall be looped whenever the extension of 350 feet of
two-inch line would accomplish the looping.
   (L)   All water services shall be installed by, and at the expense of, the
developer.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.054  SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
   (A)   All subdivisions shall be provided with a sanitary sewer system
approved by the City Engineer and the Director of Utilities. Sanitary sewer
systems shall conform to the sanitary sewer plan, technical specifications of
the City Engineer and Director of Utilities in accordance with this section and
all other relevant city ordinances.
   (B)   Connections with the sanitary sewer system shall be required, except
where the City Engineer or Director of Utilities determines that the connection
will require unreasonable expenditure when compared with other methods of
sewage disposal. Where on-site sanitary sewer facilities are installed, the
plans for the system shall be approved by the County Health District in
accordance with all state and county laws, rules and regulations, prior to
approval of the final plat by the City Commission.
   (C)   Minimum size of sewers shall be eight inches.
   (D)   Minimum velocities in sewer pipes flowing full shall be 1.7 feet per
second, and minimum “n” value shall be 0.013.
   (E)   Maximum manhole spacing shall be 500 feet.
   (F)   Manholes shall be placed at points of change of grade, size or
direction, and at junctions with other lines.
   (G)   All sewer pipe joints shall be die cast joints or factory-made
coupling joints approved by the Director of Utilities.
   (H)   Sewer pipe material shall be approved by the city.
   (I)   Minimum cover shall be three feet.
   (J)   Single house services shall be four inches minimum on a slope of 1%.
Double house services shall be six-inch pipe.
   (K)   All sewer service lines shall be installed extending to the lot lines.
These sewer services shall be installed at the expense of the subdivider.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.055  MINIMUM FIRST FLOOR ELEVATION.
   (A)   The minimum first floor elevation of all developments outside the
storm tide protection levee (seawall) shall be one foot above the 100-year
flood as shown on the Flood Insurance Study Map, Coastal Areas—Gulf of Mexico,
prepared for the Federal Emergency Management Agency by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, Galveston, Texas, dated May 1970. For general information only, this
minimum first floor elevation is 15.6 feet mean sea level at State Highway 146
and Dickinson Bayou and 14.3 feet mean sea level at State Highway 146 and Gulf
Freeway (Interstate Highway 45).
   (B)   The minimum first floor elevation for all new development inside and
protected from hurricane flood tides by the storm tide protection levee
(seawall) shall be seven feet mean sea level, but the elevation shall also be
not less than one foot six inches above the top of the curb of the street
abutting the property upon which the new development is being constructed.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.056  DRAINAGE.
   (A)   Easements for open ditches or watercourses. Where a subdivision is
traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, natural channel or stream, there shall
be provided an easement or right-of-way conforming substantially to the limit
of such a watercourse, plus an additional width to accommodate future needs.
Easements for open ditches or watercourses shall have a 15-foot working space
provided adjacent to one bank. In no case shall an open ditch or watercourse be
located in an easement of less than 30 feet in width.
   (B)   Off-site drainage.
      (1)   Easements and drainage facilities shall be provided by the
subdivider. The owner or developer of property to be developed shall be
responsible for all storm drainage discharge flowing on such subdivider’s
property. This responsibility includes the drainage directed to that property
by prior development as well as drainage naturally flowing through the property
by reason of topography.
      (2)   Adequate consideration shall be given by the owner in the
development of property to determine how the discharge leaving the proposed
development will affect downstream property.
   (C)   Design standards for drainage facilities. Drainage facilities shall
conform to the technical specifications of the City Engineer and Director of
Public Works in accordance herewith and with the following requirements.
      (1)   Runoff criteria. Storm sewers, ditches and other drainage
structures shall be designed for one cubic foot per second per acre runoff for
residential land use and two cubic feet per second per acre for commercial land
use.
      (2)   Ditch slope. Minimum ditch slope shall be one-tenth foot fall per
100 feet. Ditch banks shall have a maximum slope of one vertical on two
horizontal.
      (3)   Ditch depth. Minimum ditch depth shall be four inches from the flow
line of the ditch to the edge of the road shoulder. The maximum in any street
right-of-way for ditches adjacent and parallel to any street shall be two feet
from the flow line of the ditch to the edge of the road shoulder. Ditches of
greater depth than two feet shall be enclosed in those cases.
      (4)   Curb and gutter streets.
         (a)   The maximum distance storm water shall run in gutters before
entering an inlet is 1,000 feet.
         (b)   Minimum slope on gutters for asphaltic surfaced, flexible base
streets shall be 0.25% (0.25 foot fall per 100 feet). Minimum slope on gutters
for concrete streets shall be 0.2%. Minimum fall around a curb return shall be
one-tenth foot.
      (5)   Minimum inlet size. There shall be no less than one and one-half
square feet of throat opening in any inlet. No more than 800 feet of gutter
shall drain into an inlet of this minimum size. Laterals discharging from such
minimum size inlets shall be not less than 18 inches.
      (6)   Valley gutters. Valley gutters shall not be permitted without the
approval of the City Engineer and the Director of Public Works. When permitted,
they shall be of concrete of not less than two-foot width on each side of the
flow line (four-foot overall width).
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
PRIVATE STREET DEVELOPMENTS
§ 159.070  INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the intent and purpose of these private street regulations to:
      (1)   Allow private street developments to occur within the city on a
limited and restrictive basis;
      (2)   Provide for private street developments as one type of residential
development mechanism to allow the city to continue to be competitive in the
development market; and
      (3)   Provide a broader variety of residential areas to meet the needs of
the residents of the city.
   (B)   The location of each private street development will be subject to the
approval of the City Commission on a case-by-case basis, based on, among other
matters, the criteria described in this chapter.
   (C)   The term private street shall include alleys, if provided.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.071  DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Private streets shall be designed in accordance with the city’s
Comprehensive Plan, these subdivision regulations, design standards and all
other applicable development standards as prescribed and utilized by the city.
   (B)   The development plan shall not impede the current or future street
circulation needs of the area, especially any needed collector or arterial
street route, or adequate access to any adjoining tract.
   (C)   All streets, alleys, sidewalks, drainage ways, water and sewer line
and improvements shall be designed, placed and constructed in accordance with
the general design standards of the city.
   (D)   Name(s) of new street(s) shall not duplicate or cause confusion within
the name(s) of existing street(s) unless the new street(s) are a continuation
of or in alignment with existing street(s), in which the case, the name(s) of
the existing street(s) shall be used.
   (E)   (1)   Streets designated on the Comprehensive Plan and the
Thoroughfare Plan as an arterial or collector shall not be used, maintained or
constructed as private streets.
      (2)   The Planning Board or the City Commission may deny the creation of
a private street development if it makes a finding of fact, based upon the
evidence provided, that it would:
         (a)   Negatively affect traffic circulation on public streets;
         (b)   Impair access to property either on-site or off-site of the
subdivision;
         (c)   Impair access to or from public facilities including schools,
parks and libraries;
         (d)   Delay the response time of emergency vehicles; or
         (e)   Other good cause.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.072  HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION.
   (A)   Residential subdivisions developed with private streets shall
establish a mandatory homeowners association. The association shall own and be
responsible for the maintenance of the private streets and sidewalks. Lot deeds
shall convey membership in the association and provide for deed restrictions
that shall include provisions for the payment of dues and assessments required
by the association, including city assessments against the association.
   (B)   Every owner of a lot within the private street development shall be a
member of the homeowners association.
   (C)   The manager or president of the homeowners association shall be
required to maintain and file a fidelity bond. The name of the association’s
president shall be submitted to the Public Works Department and City Engineer
and updated annually.
   (D)   The following notice shall appear in bold print on each deed to
property in the subdivision, on the plat of the subdivision and on each
contract on the sale of land within the subdivision:
      Notice:  The lots within this subdivision are governed by a homeowners
association requiring the payments of fees. Failure to pay such fees subjects
you to attachment of a lien on your property by the association.
   (E)   The association documents shall establish a reserve fund for the
maintenance of streets and other improvements, and contain provisions for
reliable access to provide city services and to other utility service providers
with appropriate identification. The association may not be dissolved, and no
portion of the association documents pertaining to this section may be amended
without the written consent of the city. The deed restrictions shall expressly
state this requirement.
   (F)   A Reserve Fund balance report shall be submitted to the City Finance
Director annually to ensure that adequate fund reserves are being maintained
for future repairs and/or replacement costs of the private streets and
sidewalks.
   (G)   In the event the association fails to maintain the streets, sidewalks
and streetlights in accordance with city standards, the city may repair and
maintain and charge the cost to the association. If the association fails to
pay for the maintenance cost, after notice to the property owners, the city may
assess adjacent property owners in the manner of regular city street assessment
costs. The association shall post and maintain a performance bond, in form and
amount to the satisfaction of the city, to guarantee this maintenance
requirement.
   (H)   The homeowners association documents shall indicate that the streets
are private, owned and maintained by a homeowners association and the city has
no obligation to maintain or reconstruct the private streets.
   (I)   The homeowners association documents shall indicate that the city may,
but is not obligated to, inspect private streets, and require repairs necessary
to insure that the same are maintained to the city’s standards.
   (J)   No portion of the homeowners association documents pertaining to the
maintenance of the private streets shall be amended without the written consent
of the city.
   (K)   The association documents shall be reviewed and approved by the City
Attorney and the City Planner to ensure that they conform to this and other
applicable city ordinances, and shall be filed of record prior to the approval
of the final plat.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.073  PRIVATE STREETS.
   (A)   Private streets shall be constructed within a designated separate
“private street reserve”, which shall be owned by the homeowners association.
Every lot shall have frontage on, and access to, said private street reserve in
lieu of a public street.
   (B)   An easement encompassing the private street reserve shall be granted
to the city providing unrestricted use of the property for utilities and their
maintenance. The right shall extend to all utility providers, including
telecommunication companies operating within the city. The easement shall also
provide the city with the right of access for any purpose related to the
exercise of a governmental service or function, including, but not limited to,
fire and police protection, inspection, animal control and code enforcement.
The easement shall permit the city to remove any vehicle or obstacle within the
private street reserve that impairs emergency access.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.074  CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE COST.
   (A)   The city shall not pay for any portion of the cost of constructing or
maintaining a private street, sidewalk or roadside drainage.
   (B)   All city regulations relating to the sharing of improvements costs
shall be in accordance with §
159.098 of this chapter, with the exception of those applying to street
construction.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.075  UTILITIES.
   (A)   (1)   Water, sewer, drainage facilities and water meters shall be
placed within the “private street reserve” and shall be dedicated to the city
upon final acceptance of the subdivision by the city.
      (2)   Installation of approved water meters shall be required.
   (B)   The location of all drainage, water and sewer improvements shall be
shown on the subdivision layout prior to final approval by the city.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.076  IMPROVEMENTS AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Developments proposed with private streets shall comply with §§
159.045 through
159.056 and
159.095 through
159.100 of this chapter.
   (B)   The city may periodically inspect and make soil samples of private
streets and require repairs necessary to ensure emergency access and to ensure
that the streets are being maintained to the satisfaction of the Director of
Public Works and the City Engineer.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.077  SIGNS.
   All private traffic signs and marking shall conform to the Texas Manual on
Uniform Traffic-Control Devices, as approved and directed by the city. The
entrances to all private streets shall be marked with a sign stating that it is
a private street and that the street maintenance and liability are the
responsibility of the association and not the city. Cost of signage shall be
the responsibility of the association.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.078  ACCESS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Guard houses, access control gates and cross arms may be constructed
within a “private street reserve”. All restricted access entrances must be
manned 24 hours every day, or provided with an alternative means of ensuring
access to the subdivision by the city, U.S. Postal Service, government
employees in pursuit of the official duties, and other utility service
providers with appropriate identification. Alternate access must be approved by
Fire, Building Inspection and Police Departments.
   (B)   Residential access gates shall be maintained in accordance with
standards approved by the Fire, Building Inspection and Police Departments to
ensure continuous and unimpeded ingress and egress by emergency vehicles at all
times. If the association fails to maintain reliable access as required to
allow city services, the city may enter the subdivision and remove any gate or
device that is a barrier to access at the sole expense of the association, as
provided for in the association documents.
   (C)   The subdivision shall provide a minimum of two points of access, one
of which may be used for emergency access only as approved by the Fire
Department.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.079  ENTRANCE DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Any private street with an access control gate shall have a minimum
uninterrupted pavement width of 30 feet at the location of the access control
device. All restricted access gates shall be approved by the Fire, Public Works
and Police Department and meet access requirements for emergency vehicles.
Entry codes for gates shall be provided to the Police Department and updated as
necessary. Construction plans for access gates must be submitted for review and
approval by the city in accordance herewith.
   (B)   There shall be neither exposed gears nor overhead electrical wiring in
any gate system. Electric gates shall be equipped with a single key, city-
approved emergency access system designed to open and lock open both the entry
and exit gates. The key switch shall be installed in a location approved by the
Fire Department. In addition, a system key controlled “fail safe” mechanism
shall be installed to allow the gate to be manually opened in the event of a
power or mechanical failure. All fittings for system padlocks shall have a
minimum one-half inch diameter hole. The city-approved control access system
shall be operational and pass inspections of both the Chief Building Official
as well as the Chief of the Fire Department before the gate may be placed in
operation.
   (C)   Secondary emergency access gates shall be equipped with city-approved
emergency access system padlocks and shall be unobstructed at all times. These
gates shall be equipped with a positive mechanical latch to lock them in the
open position. All fire lane width, turning radius, setback and turnaround
requirements of this chapter shall apply to the portion of the private street
where the gate is installed.
   (D)   Overhead barriers shall not be allowed.
   (E)   Internal storage for three vehicles shall be provided between the
right-of-way line and the point of the access control device. An additional
setback between the point of the access control device and the access gate
shall be required to allow a vehicle that is denied access to safely turn
around and exit onto a public street.
   (F)   On lots adjacent to access gates, screening walls may exceed 30 inches
in height, up to a maximum of eight feet within the front yard setback of the
adjacent lot. Such wall shall be constructed of wrought iron with brick
columns. Solid fencing panels shall not be allowed.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.080  WAIVER OF SERVICES.
   The subdivision final plat, property deeds and property owner association
documents shall note that certain city services shall not be provided on
private streets. Among the services that the city will not provide are: street
maintenance, traffic pavement markings and signs, roadside ditch and drainage
maintenance and mowing, and driveway culvert maintenance. Depending on the
characteristics of the proposed development, other services may not be
provided.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.081  PETITION TO CONVERT TO PUBLIC STREETS.
   (A)   The association documents shall allow the association to request the
city to accept private streets and alleys and the associated property as public
streets and right-of-way upon written notice to all association members and
upon the favorable vote of 51% of the membership.
   (B)   Acceptance of the dedication of the private street shall be at the
sole discretion of the city. In no event shall the city accept the dedication
of a private street as public unless said street has been constructed and
maintained to city standards. Should the city elect to accept a private street
as public, the city may inspect the private street and assess the lot owners
for the expense of needed repairs concurrent with the city’s acceptance of the
streets and alleys.
   (C)   The city shall be the sole judge of whether repairs are needed. The
city may also require, at the association’s expense, the removal of
guardhouses, access control devices, landscaping or other aesthetic amenities
located within the street lot at the homeowners association expense.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.082  HOLD HARMLESS.
   (A)   Language shall be placed on the subdivision final plat whereby the
homeowners association, as owner of the private streets and appurtenances,
agrees to release, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, any
governmental entity and public utility for damages to the private street
occasioned by the reasonable use of the private street by the city,
governmental entity or public utility; for damages and injury (including death)
arising from the condition of said private street; for damages and injury
(including death) arising out of the use by the city, governmental entity or
public utility of any restricted access gate or entrance; and for damages and
injury (including death) arising out of any use of the subdivision by the city,
government entity or public utility.
   (B)   Further, such language shall provide that all lot owners shall release
the city, governmental entities and public utilities for such damages and
injuries. Such language shall include the statement:
      The indemnification contained in this paragraph shall apply regardless of
whether or not such damages and injury (including death) are caused solely by
the negligent act or omission of the city, governmental entity or public
utility, or their representative officers, employees or agents.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND IMPROVEMENTS
§ 159.095  GENERAL.
   (A)   The developer shall prepare, or have prepared, and submit the
appropriate number of copies in accordance with the requirements of the city,
of the complete engineering plans of streets, alleys, screening walls, curbs
and gutters, storm sewers and drainage structures, and water and sanitary sewer
improvements for the area covered by the plat.
   (B)   The developer shall have such plans prepared by an engineer registered
in the state, subject to approval of the plans by the city. The City Engineer
shall review the plans and specifications, and, if approved, shall mark them
approved and return one set to the developer. If not approved, the copies shall
be marked with the objections noted and returned to the developer for
correction.
   (C)   After approval of the final construction plans and the final plat, the
developer shall install the facilities in accordance with such approved plans,
and these regulations. The City Engineer or his or her designee shall inspect
the installation of the improvements. Such construction shall be rejected if it
fails to comply with the standards and specifications contained or referred to
herein and as otherwise established by the city.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.096  CONSTRUCTION PLANS.
   (A)   Approval. No construction shall commence nor building permits issued
on a site until the engineering plans have been approved.
   (B)   Engineering plans. Engineering plans showing details of streets,
alleys, culverts, bridges, storm sewers, water mains, sanitary sewers and all
engineering details, other than buildings, of the proposed subdivision shall be
submitted to the City Engineer along with the final plat application of the
subdivision. Such plans shall be prepared by an engineer registered in the
state, and shall conform to the design standards of the city.
   (C)   Streets, alleys, sidewalks and monuments. Copies of plans and profiles
of all required streets, alleys, sidewalks, crosswalk ways and monuments shall
be provided. The right-of-way and paved width of all streets and street names
shall be shown, including their top of curb grade and distances with the
elevations indicated at all intersections and grade breaks. Such plans shall
show the location of all proposed curbs and gutters.
   (D)   Sanitary sewer lines. Copies of plans and profiles of proposed
sanitary sewer lines, indicating depths and grades of lines, shall be provided.
Minimum two foot contour intervals, the location and dimensions of existing
sanitary sewer lines, manholes, and the location and size of existing mains to
which the system will be connected shall be shown.
   (E)   Water lines.
      (1)   Copies of plans for all water lines in public property, valves and
fire hydrants shall be provided. Minimum two foot contour intervals, the
location and size of existing water lines, valves and fire hydrants, and the
location and size of existing mains to which the system will be connected shall
be shown.
      (2)   When a separate water system is planned, or when connection to a
water system other than to the city water system is proposed, copies of the
plans and specifications, including fire hydrants, of such system shall be
provided.
   (F)   Drainage.
      (1)   Copies of the proposed plan and profiles, indicating minimum two
foot contours based on city datum shall be submitted to the City Engineer and
utility companies. All street widths and grades shall be indicated on the
plans, and runoff figures shall be indicated on the outlet and inlet side of
all drainage ditches, storm sewers and at all points in the street at changes
of grade or where the water enters another street storm sewer or drainage
ditch. Drainage easements shall indicate width.
      (2)   A general location map of the subdivision showing the entire
watershed.
      (3)   Calculations shall show the anticipated storm water flow, including
watershed area, runoff co-efficient, time of concentration, and intensity. When
a drainage ditch or storm sewer is proposed, calculations showing the basis for
design shall be submitted to the City Engineer;
      (4)   When a drainage channel or storm sewer is proposed, complete plans,
profiles, cross sections, grades and specifications shall be submitted, showing
complete construction details.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.097  SURVEY MONUMENTS.
   (A)   In all subdivisions and additions, except in an amending plat or a
vacating plat, all block and lot corners shall be established and set. All
corners, except those comprising the perimeter of the subdivision, shall
consist of iron rods of a diameter and set at a depth below the finished grade
as prescribed by the city.
   (B)   Perimeter markers shall be monuments set in accordance with design
standards of the city.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.098  PAYMENT OF IMPROVEMENT COSTS.
   (A)   On-site improvements. The subdivider shall bear the costs of all
improvements inside his or her subdivision as required by this chapter. If the
city requires improvements of greater size, capacity, depth or other
requirements beyond the needs of the subdivision in question, the city shall
bear the cost of the additional requirements.
   (B)   Off-site improvements. It is the general intent of the city to extend
city utilities to subdivisions to the extent that the City Commission feels it
is economically justified or otherwise in the best interest of the city.
   (C)   Street improvements. The subdivider shall improve all streets leading
to and from his or her subdivision. Streets forming part of the boundary of the
subdivision (adjacent) shall be improved as required in § 159.046 of this
chapter. Where the city requires oversize pavement beyond the needs of the
subdivision, it shall bear the additional cost.
   (D)   Drainage improvements. The subdivider shall pay for all off-site
improvements required by his or her subdivision, with the city paying for the
additional costs of oversize facilities it requests.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.099  INSPECTION.
   (A)   The city shall be given opportunity to inspect all phases of the
construction of improvements for subdivisions. The subdivider, or his or her
contractor, shall maintain daily contact with the City Engineer and Director of
Public Works during construction of improvements.
   (B)   No sanitary sewer, water or storm sewer pipe shall be covered without
approval of the City Engineer and the Director of Utilities. No concrete shall
be poured for streets, structures or curbs and gutters without their approval.
No flexible base material shall be placed on the street subgrade, or asphaltic
surface applied to the flexible base of a street, without such approval.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.100  ENGINEER’S CERTIFICATE.
   Upon the completion of construction of the street or alley, a certificate
shall be provided, signed by the subdivision’s engineer, who shall be
registered in the state, that any and all improvements constructed in the
subdivision have been completed in accordance with the approved construction
plans, and that all monuments and lot markers have been properly located and
placed in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 159.999  PENALTY.
   Any person or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter, or fails to comply herewith, or with any of the requirements hereof,
or who shall build or alter any building or use in violation of any plan or
plat submitted and approved hereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be liable for a fine of not more than $2,000, and each day or portion
thereof such violation shall exist shall constitute a separate offense. The
owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof, where anything in
violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect,
builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection
therewith, and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation,
shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction shall be fined as
herein provided.
(Ord. 08-29, passed 10-21-2009)
CHAPTER 160:  ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
160.001   Title
   
160.002   Purpose
   
160.003   Empowerment to zone
   
160.004   Compliance
   
160.005   Applicability to existing regulations
   
160.006   Definitions
Zoning Districts, Uses and Area Regulations
   
160.020   Establishment of zoning districts
   
160.021   Zoning district map description; interpretation
   
160.022   Newly annexed territory
   
160.023   Summary of area regulations
   
160.024   District A, Single-Family Residential
   
160.025   District A-1, Single-Family Residential
   
160.026   District A-2, Patio Homes
   
160.027   District B, Single-Family Attached, Duplex Residential
   
160.028   District B-1, Townhouse Residential
   
160.029   District C, Multi-Family Residential
   
160.030   District C-1, Multi-Family Residential
   
160.031   District MH, Mobile Home
   
160.032   District O-P, Office-Professional
   
160.033   District D, Neighborhood Service
   
160.034   District D-1, Limited Service
   
160.035   District E, General Business
   
160.036   District E-1, Central Business
   
160.037   District E-2, Freeway Commercial
   
160.038   District E-3, Outdoor Commercial
   
160.039   District E-4, Commercial Warehouse
   
160.040   District LGBD, Limited General Business District
   
160.041   District F, Light Industrial
   
160.042   District F-1, Outdoor Industrial
   
160.043   District P-I, Planned Industrial
   
160.044   District G, Waterfront
   
160.045   District G-2, Recreational Waterfront
   
160.046   District IBD, Industrial Business District
   
160.047   District CIMU, Commercial/Industrial/Mixed Use for the Dickinson
Bayou Transition Area
   
160.048   District H, Heavy Industrial
   
160.049   District O, Open Space
   
160.050   District I (PUD), Planned Unit Development
   
160.051   District S-P, Site Plan
   
160.052   Environmental Overlay District
   
160.053   Development plan
   
160.054   Sixth Street Revitalization District
“GWY” Gateway Overlay District
   
160.065   Intent and purpose
   
160.066   Principal and accessory uses
   
160.067   Screening requirements
   
160.068   Miscellaneous requirements
   
160.069   Location of the Gateway Overlay District
Supplemental Provisions and Requirements
   
160.080   Temporary uses
   
160.081   Off-street parking requirements
   
160.082   Off-street loading requirements
   
160.083   Accessory buildings
   
160.084   Required screening
   
160.085   Corner lots
   
160.086   Projections into required yards
   
160.087   Alternative standards
   
160.088   Landscaping requirements
   
160.089   Non-conforming uses
   
160.090   Height regulations
   
160.091   Front, side and rear yard regulations and exceptions
   
160.092   Completion and restoration of existing buildings
   
160.093   Gasoline or diesel storage tanks
Administration and Enforcement
   
160.105   Zoning Commission
   
160.106   Procedure for zoning change and amendments
   
160.107   Fees
   
160.108   Protest
   
160.109   Enforcement
   
160.110   Board of Adjustment
   
160.111   Permits
   
160.112   Certificate of occupancy
   
160.113   Interpretation and intent
   
160.114   Savings clause
   
160.115   Repealing clause
   
160.116   Emergency
 
   
160.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Illustrations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 160.001  TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the “Revised
Zoning Ordinance of the City of Texas City”.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-1)
§ 160.002  PURPOSE.
   The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been adopted
for the following purposes:
   (A)   To promote the health, safety, morals and the general welfare of the
city;
   (B)   To ensure the safe, orderly, and efficient development and expansion
of the city in accordance with, and pursuant to its Comprehensive Plan;
   (C)   To lessen congestion in the streets;
   (D)   To secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers;
   (E)   To provide adequate light and air;
   (F)   To prevent the overcrowding of land;
   (G)   To avoid the undue concentration of population;
   (H)   To facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements;
   (I)   To conserve, protect, develop and utilize natural resources in keeping
with the public interest;
   (J)   To protect and conserve the value of land and buildings throughout the
city, and to minimize the conflicts among the uses of land and buildings; and
   (K)   To promote a desirable visual environment through creative development
techniques.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-2)
§ 160.003  EMPOWERMENT TO ZONE.
   (A)   The City Commission, as the governing body of the city, shall have
such authority as is consistent with state law, the Charter of the city and the
code of ordinances, to initiate, undertake and decide all legislative matters
pertaining to the regulation of the use and development of the land.
   (B)   This chapter shall be drawn with reasonable consideration to the
character of each district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses and
to encourage the most appropriate use of land. The regulations in this chapter
shall be uniform throughout each district for each class, or kind of buildings
or structures, or uses of land, but the regulations in one district may differ
from those in other districts.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-3)
§ 160.004  COMPLIANCE.
   All development of land within the incorporated boundaries of the city shall
conform to the requirements of this chapter, and no person may use, occupy,
sell or develop land, buildings or appurtenances or authorize or permit the
use, occupancy, sale or development of land, buildings or appurtenances under
his or her control, except in accordance with all applicable provisions of this
chapter. Within the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction, no person may sell,
develop or authorize or permit the sale or development of land, except in
accordance with all applicable provisions of this chapter.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-4)
§ 160.005  APPLICABILITY TO EXISTING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   To avoid undue hardships on planned developments, all unexpired, valid
building permits, plats and requests for zoning changes which have been granted
conditional approval by the City Commission, but not yet been approved by
ordinance, and were duly filed prior to the enactment of this chapter, shall be
processed under procedures therein established, and shall be evaluated and
approved or disapproved under the standards and requirements contained in such
regulations, notwithstanding the adoption of this chapter.
   (B)   Those plats which were complete and duly filed prior to the adoption
of this chapter shall only be exempt from meeting any new or more restrictive
lot width, depth or square footage requirements. Site plans which were reviewed
and approved by the Zoning Commission and the City Commission prior to the
adoption of this chapter, shall be exempt from meeting any new requirements
established by this chapter for one year after the adoption of this chapter.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-5)
§ 160.006  DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (B)   All words used in the present tense shall include the future; all
words in the singular number include the plural number and all words in the
plural number include the singular number; the word “person” includes
“corporation”, “copartnership”, “association” and “individual”; the word
“shall” is mandatory and not discretionary. Terms not defined herein shall have
the meaning assigned to them in the Building Code of the city.
   (C)   Terms not defined herein or in the Building Code shall have the
meaning customarily assigned to them.
      ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. A subordinate building or structure,
attached to or detached from the main building, and having a use customarily
incidental to and located on the same lot occupied by the main building; or a
use customarily incidental to the main use of the property. ACCESSORY BUILDINGS
shall include any and all parking garages and adjacent farm structures, and in
a residence district accessory buildings or uses shall include garages for
automobile storage, tool houses, greenhouses, home workshops, children’s
playhouses, storage houses or garden shelters, but not including the conduct of
a business.
      ACCESSORY USE. A use secondary and incidental to the legal primary use of
the main building or to the primary use of the premises, and located on the
same lot as the primary use.
      ADDITION. Any construction which increases the size of a building or
structure in terms of site coverage, height, length, width or gross floor area.
      AIRPORT or HELIPORT. A landing facility for aircraft approved by the
United States Federal Aviation Agency.
      ALLEY. A public space or public way which affords only secondary means of
access to property abutting thereon, which has been deeded or dedicated to the
public for public use.
      ALTERATION. Any addition, removal, extension or change in the location of
any exterior or interior wall of a main building or accessory building, or
change or modification in construction or occupancy.
      APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms within an apartment house arranged,
intended, designed for or used as the place of residence of a single-family or
group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit.
      APARTMENT HOUSE. A building arranged, intended, designed for or occupied
by more than two families.
      ASSOCIATIONS. A group of property owners bound together by a written
agreement relating to the use, maintenance and guaranteed protection of the
Planned Unit Development in any of its common open spaces.
      ATTACHED. Having physical connection above the top of the floor line of
the first floor.
      AUTOMOBILE. A four-wheeled, self-propelled vehicle designed for passenger
transportation and commonly propelled by an internal combustion engine.
      AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGE. An establishment providing major or minor
automobile repair services to all motor vehicles, except heavy load vehicles.
      AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. A place or establishment where gasoline, oil,
grease or motor vehicle accessories are sold, supplied or dispensed to the
retail motor vehicle trade, and where the minor repair or washing of motor
vehicles incidental to such gasoline service station is performed. A truck
terminal or truck stop shall not be considered a gasoline service station.
      BANK, SAVINGS AND LOAN  or  CREDIT UNION. An establishment for the
custody, loan, exchange or issue of money, the extension of credit and/or
facilitating the transmission of funds.
      BED AND BREAKFAST. An owner occupied private home built more than 50
years ago and/or is of historical significance, which offers lodging for paying
guests, which serves meals to these guests, and which allows for limited social
functions as regulated in this chapter.
      BLOCK. A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways
or streets, other than alleys. In cases where the platting is incomplete or
disconnected, the City Engineer shall determine the outline of the BLOCK .
      BOARD. The Board of Adjustment of the city.
      BOARDINGHOUSE and ROOMINGHOUSE. A residence structure other than a hotel
where lodging and/or meals for four or more persons are provided for
compensation.
      BREEZEWAY. A covered passage one story in height connecting a main
structure and an accessory building.
      BRICK OR STONE, EXTERIOR FACADE. An exterior wall surface laid up unit by
unit, set in mortar and composed of the following:
         (a)   Units of clay or concrete brick with a minimum thickness of
three inches;
         (b)   Natural stone with a minimum thickness of two inches; or
         (c)   Concrete masonry units which have a split face, ribbed, scored
or burnished finish, with a minimum thickness of three inches.
      BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter and enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind. When subdivided in
a manner sufficient to prevent the spread of fire, each portion so subdivided
may be deemed a separate BUILDING .
      BUILDING COVERAGE. The proportion of a lot or site covered or permitted
to be covered by a building or structure.
      BUILDING LINE. A line designated on an approved subdivision plat which is
parallel or approximately parallel to a street, beyond which buildings may not
be erected.
      BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Building Official of the city.
      BUSINESS SERVICE. Establishments primarily engaged in providing services
not elsewhere classified, to business enterprises on a fee contract basis
including, but not limited to, advertising agencies, computer programming and
software services, and office equipment rental or leasing.
      CABANA. A secondary structure on a lot incidental to a swimming pool or
recreational area, but excluding sleeping and kitchen facilities.
      CARNIVAL. A temporary traveling show or exhibition usually housed in
tents and which has no permanent structure or installation.
      CARPORT. A permanent roofed structure entirely open on at least two
sides, designed for or occupied by private passenger vehicles.
      CARWASH. A structure or facility used to wash automobiles, motorcycles,
trucks and other light load vehicles.
      CEMETERY. Property which is used for the interment of the deceased.
      CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. Official certification which permits the use of
a building in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and which
certifies compliance with the provisions of law for the use and occupancy of
the building in its several parts together with any special stipulations or
conditions of the building permit.
      CHILD CARE INSTITUTION. A child care facility that provides care for more
than 12 children for 24 hours a day, including facilities known as children’s
homes, half-way houses, residential treatment camps, emergency shelters and
training or correctional schools for children.
      CHURCH, SYNAGOGUE or TEMPLE. A building for regular assembly for
religious worship which is used primarily for such purpose and those accessory
activities which are customarily associated therewith, and the place of
residence for ministers, priests, nuns or rabbis on the premises. Accessory
uses may include a parsonage/rectory or fellowship hall.
      CIRCUS. A temporary traveling show or exhibition usually housed in tents
and which has no permanent structure or installation.
      CITY. The City of Texas City.
      CITY COMMISSION. The City Commission of Texas City.
      CLINIC. An institution of facilities for examining, consulting with and
treating patients, including offices, laboratories and out-patient facilities,
but not including hospital beds and rooms for acute or chronic care.
      CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT. A development pattern in which the uses are grouped
or bunched together through a density transfer to provide for community green
or open space, shared parking and access or other amenities.
      COLLEGE or UNIVERSITY. An institution established for educational
purposes offering courses for study beyond the secondary education level, but
excluding trade schools and commercial schools.
      COMMERCIAL. Any business, other than a customary home occupation or
manufacturing business, which involves the exchange of goods or services for
the remuneration of a person occupying the premises upon which the transaction
or part thereof takes place.
      COMMERCIAL AMUSEMENT. An amusement enterprise offering entertainment or
games of skill to the general public for a fee or charge.
      COMMON OPEN SPACE (COMMON PROPERTY). A parcel or parcels of land or an
area of water, or a combination of land and water within the site designated
for a PUD (planned unit development) District, and designated and intended for
the use or enjoyment of the PUD (planned unit development). COMMON OPEN SPACE
may contain such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and
appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of residents of the planned unit
development. COMMON OPEN SPACE may be referred to in this chapter as COMMON
PROPERTY or COMMON OPEN SPACE , meaning the same.
      CONCRETE OR ASPHALT BATCHING PLANT (PERMANENT). A permanent manufacturing
facility for the production of concrete or asphalt.
      CONCRETE OR ASPHALT BATCHING PLANT (TEMPORARY). A temporary manufacturing
facility for the production of concrete or asphalt during construction of a
project, and to be removed when the project is completed.
      CONDOMINIUM. A multiple-family dwelling designed primarily to offer each
purchaser individual fee ownership of a living unit within a structure together
with an undivided ownership in common with all other unit owners of the site
and all of the portions of the structures used in common by the occupants, such
as dividing walls, halls, stairways, elevators and the like.
      CONVALESCENT HOME. Any structure, other than a hospital, used for or
occupied by persons recovering from illness or suffering from the infirmities
of old age.
      COOPERATIVE. A type of ownership and organization for a home ownership
involving less than fee ownership on the part of the home or unit owner.
      COURT. A space open and unoccupied to the sky bounded on more than two
sides by the walls of the building. An INNER COURT is a court entirely
surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An OUTER COURT is a court
having one side open to a street, alley, yard or other permanently open space.
      CUL-DE-SAC. A local street with only one outlet and having a terminal of
sufficient width for the reversal of traffic movement as required by the
subdivision ordinance.
      CURB LEVEL. The mean level of the curb in front of the lot, or in case of
a corner lot, along the abutting street where the mean curb level is the
highest.
      CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATION. See HOME OCCUPATION .
      DAY CARE CENTER or DAY NURSERY. An establishment where five or more
children under 14 years of age are left for care, training, education, custody
or supervision during the day or any portion thereof. Hours of operation shall
not exceed the period between 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. The term DAY CARE
CENTER or DAY NURSERY shall not include overnight lodging, medical treatment,
counseling or rehabilitative services, and does not apply to any school, public
or private, as herein defined.
      DENSITY. The total number of residential buildings allowed upon a given
tract of land usually expressed in total number of units per gross acre or net
acre.
      DETACHED. Having no physical connection above the top of the floor line
of the first floor with any other building or structure.
      DISTRICT. A zone or geographic area in the city within which certain
zoning or development regulations apply.
      DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT. Any structure and premises specifically designed for
the preparation and dispensing of food and meals primarily for the service to,
and consumption in, a vehicle parked on the premises, or taken away for
consumption in the home or other places. Such an establishment may also provide
for indoor seating and service areas.
      DUPLEX. A detached building having separate accommodations for two
single-family dwellings or occupied by two families.
      DWELLING. Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed for use for
residential purposes.
      DWELLING, ATTACHED. A dwelling having any portion of one or more walls in
common with adjoining dwellings.
      DWELLING, DETACHED. A dwelling having open space on all sides.
      DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building designed for occupancy by three or
more families.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED. A detached building having separate
accommodations for, and occupied by not more than two families, whereby each
individual dwelling unit is located on a separate lot of record as a result of
the property line being coincident with the common wall separating each
dwelling unit, such that dwelling units may be individually owned. Not more
than one wall of such dwelling unit shall be coincident with a property line.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED. A detached building having
accommodations for, and occupied by one family, and located on a lot or tract
and having no physical connection to a building located on any other separate
lot or tract.
      DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for a family including permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking and sanitation.
      EASEMENT. A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property
owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation, or another person or
entity.
      ENCLOSED BUILDING. A structure which is floored, roofed and surrounded by
outside walls, which contains no opening larger than 120 square feet in area
normally open to the air and which contains no series of openings forming a
divided opening larger than 120 square feet in area normally open to the air.
      FAMILY. Any number of individuals living together as a single
housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse,
lodginghouse or hotel, as defined herein.
      FLAMMABLE OR COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS. Flammable material is any material that
will readily ignite from common sources of heat, or that will ignite at a
temperature of 600°F or less. FLAMMABLE LIQUID is any liquid having a flash
point below 100°F and having a vapor pressure not exceeding 40 pounds per
square inch (absolute) at 100°F. COMBUSTIBLE LIQUID is any liquid having a
flash point at or above 100°F.
      FOURPLEX. Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed, built,
rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied as four apartments, or which is
occupied as the home or residence of four families living independently of each
other and maintaining separate cooking facilities.
      FRONT YARD. An open space, unoccupied (except as hereinafter provided)
across the full width of the lot extending from the front line of the building
to front street line of the lot.
      FRONTAGE. All of the property measured along the property line abutting
on one side of the street upon which such property is addressed.
      GARAGE COMMUNITY. Any building or premises, other than a public, private
or storage garage providing storage for motor vehicles with facilities for
washing, but not other services, such garage to be in lieu of private garages
within a block or portion of block.
      GARAGE FRONT ENTRY. A structure or portion thereof for the accessory use
of storing or parking of private motor vehicles owned by the occupant of the
premises, located in front of or beside the living area, the access thereto is
from the front property line.
      GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or a portion of a main building
for the storage or parking of motor vehicles as may be required in connection
with the permitted use of the main building, excluding any commercial use
within.
      GARAGE, REAR ENTRY. A structure or portion thereof for the accessory use
of storing or parking of private motor vehicles owned by the occupant of the
premises, with access or door facing the side or rear property line, said
structure shall be located partially or totally behind any portion of the
living area.
      GASOLINE SERVICE STATION. See AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION .
      GOVERNMENTAL BUILDING. A building which is owned or operated by a city,
county, state, federal government or school district which is open for use by
the general public.
      GROSS ACRE. A calculation indicating total acreage of a particular
housing type including those land areas for parking, streets, easements,
building and recreation development, being part of the Planned Unit Development
site requirements.
      GROSS AREA. The total land area of a proposed single housing type and
including streets, parking spaces, easements, building site areas and
recreation or common open spaces. It is the total land area of a project or its
segment.
      GUEST QUARTER. A secondary structure on a lot which may contain dwelling
accommodations for the occupancy by guests not for rent or lease or permanent
occupancy. Such building shall not have a separate utility meter.
      HALFWAY HOUSE. A facility for the housing, rehabilitation and/or training
of three or more persons, who are on probation or parole or are pre-released
inmates from correctional institutions or other persons found guilty of
criminal offenses; or for the housing, rehabilitation, training, counseling or
treatment of three or more persons for alcohol, chemical or drug abuse and/or
dependencies. HALFWAY HOUSE shall not include a hospital licensed by the state
or a state licensed physician’s office which office does not have facilities
for patients to stay overnight.
      HEAVY LOAD VEHICLE. A self-propelled vehicle having a manufacturer’s
recommended gross vehicle weight (GVW) of greater than 11,000 pounds, such as
large recreational vehicles, tractor-trailers, buses, vans, earth-moving
equipment and other similar vehicles. The term TRUCK shall be construed to mean
HEAVY LOAD VEHICLE unless specifically stated otherwise.
      HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS. The vertical distance measured from the highest of
the following three levels:
         (a)   From the street curb level;
         (b)   From the established or mean street grade in case the curb has
not been constructed; and
         (c)   From the average finished ground level adjoining the building
where it sets back from the street line, to the level of the highest point of
the roof beams of flat roofs or roofs inclining not more than one inch to the
foot and to the mean height level of the top of the main plate and highest
ridge for other roofs.
      HEIGHT OF YARD OR COURT. The vertical distance from the lowest level of
such yard or court to the highest point of any boundary wall.
      HOME OCCUPATION. A business activity customarily carried on in the home
by a member of the occupant’s family without structural alterations in the
building or any of its rooms, without the installation or outside storage of
any machinery, equipment or materials other than that customary to normal
household operations, without the employment of persons not residing in the
home, without the use of a sign to advertise the occupation, and which does not
cause the generation of noise, odor, electrical interference or additional
traffic.
      HOSPITAL. An institution providing primary health services and medical or
surgical care to persons, primarily in-patients, suffering from illness,
disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical or mental conditions,
and including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities such
as laboratories, out-patient facilities or training facilities as licensed by
the state.
      HOTEL. A building occupied or used as a temporary abiding place of
individuals or groups of individuals who are lodged, with or without meals, and
in which there are more than 12 sleeping rooms.
      KINDERGARTEN, PRIVATE. School for children of preschool age, in which
constructive endeavors, object lessons and helpful games are prominent features
of the curriculum. Shall not provide provisions for overnight stay.
      KIOSK. A small, freestanding, one-story structure having a maximum floor
area of 350 square feet and used for commercial purposes or the posting of
temporary information and/or posters, notices and announcements. If a KIOSK is
to be occupied, it shall have a minimum floor area of 25 square feet.
      LANDSCAPE AREA. An area devoted to or developed with plant material or
natural landscaped features; including lawn, ground cover, gardens, trees,
shrubs and other plant materials.
      LICENSED GROUP DAY CARE HOME. A facility that provides care for seven to
12 children under 14 years of age for less than 24 hours a day between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
      LIGHT LOAD TRUCK. A self-propelled vehicle having a manufacturer’s
recommended gross vehicle weight (GVW) not greater than 11,000 pounds, and
having no more than two axles, such as pickup trucks, vans, recreational
vehicles, campers and other similar vehicles, but not including automobiles and
motorcycles.
      LIGHT MANUFACTURING. Manufacturing of finished products or parts,
predominantly from previously prepared materials, including fabrication,
assembly and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales and
distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing. Such
operations shall meet the bulk controls and other requirements of this chapter.
      LOADING SPACE. An off-street space or berth used for the loading or
unloading of vehicles.
      LOT. A tract of land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its
accessory buildings, and including such open spaces as are required under this
chapter, and having its principal frontage upon a public street or officially
approved place.
      LOT AREA. The net horizontal area of the lot excluding portions of
streets and alleys, and easements for streets and alleys.
      LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection. A CORNER LOT shall be deemed to front on that street on which it
has its least dimension, unless otherwise specified by the City Engineer.
      LOT COVERAGE. The percentage of the total area of a lot occupied by the
base (first story or floor) of buildings located on the lot.
      LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
line.
      LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
      LOT LINES. A line dividing one lot from another or from a street or
place.
      LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is created by an approved subdivision, the
plat of which has been duly recorded in the office of the appropriate County
Clerk.
      LOT, THROUGH. An interior lot having frontages on two streets.
      LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance measured between side lot lines
parallel to the front lot line, and measured from the point on the building
line which is closest to the front lot line.
      MASONRY EXTERIOR FACADE. A form of construction composed of concrete,
hollow clay, tile, concrete block or tile, concrete pre-cast panels or other
similar building units laid up unit by unit with the exterior surface having a
split face, ribbed, scored or burnished finish. Cementitious stucco on metal
lathe shall be considered as an acceptable MASONRY EXTERIOR FACADE .
      MAUSOLEUM. Property used for the interring of the dead where bodies are
interred above ground in stacked vaults.
      MEDICAL OFFICE. An establishment dispensing health services, including
medical, surgical, dental and other services.
      MINIWAREHOUSE. Small individual storage units for rent or lease,
restricted solely to the storage of items. The conduct of sales, business or
any other activity within the individual storage units, other than storage,
shall be prohibited.
      MOBILE HOME. A movable or portable dwelling which is constructed on a
chassis, and designed to be towed over roads and highways. It is designed for
year-round occupancy, primarily to be used without a permanent foundation, and
to be connected to utilities. It may consist of one or more units that can be
telescoped when transported and expanded later for additional capacity, or of
two or more units, separately transportable, but designed to be joined together
into one integral unit. The following shall not be included in this definition:
         (a)   Travel trailers, pickup coaches, motor homes, camping trailers
or other recreational vehicles; and
         (b)   Manufactured modular housing which is designed to be set on a
permanent foundation, and which uses standard sheathing, roofing, siding and
electrical, plumbing and heating systems which comply with the official
Building Code adopted by the city.
      MOBILE HOME PARK. An area of not less than five acres, nor more than 25
acres, approved for occupancy by mobile homes and accessory structures related
thereto.
      MORTUARY or FUNERAL PARLOR. A place for the storage of human bodies prior
to their burial or cremation, or a building used for the preparation of the
deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected
therewith before burial or cremation.
      MOTEL. A building or group of two or more detached, semi-detached or
attached buildings containing guest rooms with automobile storage space
provided in connection therewith, which building or group is designed, intended
or used primarily for the accommodation of automobile travelers; including
groups designated as auto cabins, motor courts and similar designations.
      MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL. An establishment which charges for the
transportation of goods by motor truck from one city to another, designed for
storing and handling of goods so transported or to be transported, and for the
parking, storing and maintenance of motor trucks engaged in such
transportation.
      MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. See DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY .
      NET AREA (NET SITE AREA). That portion of the proposed project or
development as delineated for a single housing type, not including perimeter
streets. Any internal street in the project area is allowable in the NET AREA
calculation.
      NON-CONFORMING USE. A building, structure or use of land lawfully
occupied at the time of the effective date of this chapter or amendments
thereto, and which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which
it is situated.
      NURSERY. An establishment, including a building, part of a building or
open space, for the growth, display and/or sale of large plants, shrubs and
trees, and other materials used in indoor or outdoor planting.
      NURSING HOME. An institution where persons suffering from generally
permanent types of illness, injury, deformity, deficiency of age, are given
care and treatment on a prolonged or permanent basis, and which is licensed by
the state.
      OCCUPANCY. The use or intended use of the land or buildings by
proprietors or tenants.
      OFFICE, ADMINISTRATION OR PROFESSIONAL. A room or group of rooms used for
the provision of administrative, executive, management and/or professional
services.
      OUTLINE PLAN. The preliminary or tentative development plan for the
proposed Planned Unit Development District for which a rezoning application has
been made.
      OUTSIDE STORAGE. The storage of commodities, goods and/or refuse outside
of an enclosed building.
      PARCEL. See LOT .
      PARKING SPACE. An all-weather surfaced area used for parking a vehicle,
not on a public street or alley, together with an all-weather surfaced driveway
connecting the area with a street, permitting free ingress and egress without
encroachment on the public street, right-of-way or alley.
      PATIO HOME. See ZERO LOT LINE HOME .
      PERSONAL CARE FACILITY. An establishment, including a board and care home
that: furnishes, in one or more facilities, food and shelter to four or more
persons who are unrelated to the proprietor of the establishment; and provides
personal care services. PERSONAL CARE SERVICES means: assistance with meals,
dressing, movement, bathing or other personal needs or maintenance; the
administration of medication by a person licensed to administer medication or
the assistance with or supervision of medication; or general supervision or
oversight of the physical and mental well-being of a person who needs
assistance to maintain a private and independent residence in a personal care
facility or who needs assistance to manage the person’s personal life,
regardless of whether a guardian has been appointed for the person.
      PLANNING BOARD. The Planning Board of the city.
      PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE. A building or structure, the use of which is a
principal use.
      PRINCIPAL USE. The main or predominant use of any building, lot or
structure.
      PROFESSIONAL SERVICE. Work performed which is commonly identified as a
profession, and which may be licensed by the state.
      PUBLIC BUILDING. Any building (except a building used primarily for
general office purposes) which is owned, leased, primarily used and/or
primarily occupied by the state, the United States, the city or any subdivision
or agency of the state, the United States or the city, or by any public or
quasi-public utility.
      PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT or PUD DISTRICT. An area of land to
be developed as a single entity for location thereon of a number of dwelling
units and a limited commercial area reserved for neighborhood and business
uses, primarily to serve the residents of the PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) .
Such a PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT is planned and developed in a single
development operation or a programmed series or phases of development. A
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT may consist of dwelling units and detached, attached,
semi-attached, multi-family, row houses, townhouses or any combination thereof
and may also include non-residential uses such as religious, cultural,
recreational and limited commercial uses, compatibly and harmoniously
incorporated into the unitary design of the planned unit development as set
forth in this chapter.
      RADIO, TELEVISION AND MICROWAVE TOWERS AND/OR ANTENNAS. For the purpose
of this section, either antenna, mast or tower or any two of these combined to
constitute a structure designed for radio, television, cellular or microwave
reception or transmission.
      RAILROAD FACILITY. Any place or premises for the loading and unloading of
materials on trains, including freight terminals, freight docks and freight
depots; railroad equipment storage yards, including the storage of railway
cars, boxcars, engines and related equipment; sidings, team tracks, switching
yards, maintenance and repair facilities.
      REAR YARD. An open space, unoccupied (except as hereinafter provided)
between the rear lot line and the rear line of the principal building and the
side lot lines.
      REAR YARD DEPTH. The minimum horizontal distance from the rear line of
the principal building to the rear lot line.
      REGISTERED FAMILY HOME. A facility that regularly provides care in the
caretaker’s own residence for not more than six children under 14 years of age,
excluding the caretaker’s own children, and that provides care after school
hours for not more than four additional elementary school siblings of the other
children given fare. However, the total number of children, including the
caretaker’s own, provided care at such facility shall not exceed 12 at any
given time. The facility shall conform to Tex. Human Resources Code §§ 42.001
et seq., as amended, and in accordance with such standards as may be
promulgated by the State Department of Human Resources. Hours of operation
shall be from 6:00 a.m. to 6:30 p.m.
      RESIDENCE. See DWELLING .
      RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. A district where the primary purpose is residential
use.
      RESTAURANT , CAFÉ or CAFETERIA. An eating establishment where customers
are primarily served at tables or self-served and food is consumed on the
premises, which may include a drive-in window.
      RETAIL STORES AND SHOPS. An establishment engaged in the selling of goods
and merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and
rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods.
      REZONING APPLICATION. An official form signed by the landowner which
requests the change of a district’s boundary, the change from one zoning
district to another district or requests a change of uses or any requirements
of a zoning district. The application shall be filed by the landowner or by his
or her designated applicant simultaneously with an outline plan or site plan.
Such a REZONING APPLICATION shall contain all pertinent facts relating to the
land as described in this chapter and as deemed necessary by the Planning Board
or Zoning Commission and the various departments within the city.
      SCHOOL, DENOMINATIONAL OR PRIVATE. A school under the sponsorship of a
private agency, corporation or religious agency, having a curriculum generally
equivalent to public elementary or secondary schools, and accredited or
licensed by the state; but excluding private trade or commercial schools, as
herein defined. Day care centers and day nurseries, as herein defined, shall
not be considered SCHOOLS as applicable to this definition.
      SCHOOL, PUBLIC. A school under the sponsorship of a public agency
providing elementary or secondary curriculum, and accredited or licensed by the
state; but excluding private trade or commercial schools.
      SCHOOL, TRADE OR COMMERCIAL. An establishment other than an accredited or
licensed public, private or denominational school, offering training or
instruction in art, occupation or trade.
      SCREENED. Shielded, concealed and effectively hidden from view by a
person standing at ground level on an abutting site, or outside the area or
feature so screened, by a fence, wall, hedge, berm or similar architectural or
landscape feature.
      SETBACK. The required minimum distance between any structure and any
property line of the lot upon which it is located. SETBACKS shall be measured
perpendicular to lot lines. The terms SETBACK and REQUIRED YARD shall mean the
same and can be interchanged.
      SEXUAL ORIENTED BUSINESS. See
Ch. 119 of this code of ordinances.
      SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING. See DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED .
      SITE PLAN. The development plan for one or more lots or tracts upon which
is shown any information required by this chapter such that an informed
decision can be made by the approving authority.
      SIDE LINE. Any lot boundary line not a front or rear line thereof. A SIDE
LINE may be a party lot line, a line bordering on an alley or place or a side
street line.
      SIDE YARD. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building,
situated between the building and the side line of the lot, and extending
through from the street or from the front yard to the rear line of the lot. Any
lot line not a rear line or a front line shall be deemed a side line.
      STORY. That part of a building included between the surface of one floor
and the surface of the floor next above, or if there be no floor above, that
part of the building which is above the surface of the highest floor thereof. A
top story attic is a HALF STORY . The FIRST STORY is the highest story having
its interior floor surface not more than four feet above the curb level,
established or mean street grade or average ground level.
      STREET. A public thoroughfare or place which affords principal means of
access to property abutting thereon.
      STREET LINE. The dividing line between the street and the abutting
property.
      STRUCTURE. A combination of materials to form a construction for use,
occupancy or ornamentation whether installed on, above or below the surface of
land or water.
      STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
      TEMPORARY. Used or lasting for only a limited period of time; not
permanent.
      TEMPORARY BUILDING. Any non-residential premanufactured structure which
is not originally manufactured or constructed at its use site, required on-site
installation of utilities and/or foundation.
      TOWER HEIGHT. Tower height shall be the distance from the bottom
elevation of the tower or tower support structure to the top of the tower not
including antenna wires or rods.
      TOWER SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A structure built primarily for the support of
the tower.
      TOWNHOUSE. A single-family attached dwelling on a separately platted lot
which is joined to another dwelling unit on one or more sides by a party wall
or abutting walls and occupied by not more than one family.
      TRANSPORTATION AND PLANNING DIRECTOR. The Transportation and Planning
Director of the city.
      TRAVEL TRAILER. A mobile vehicle designed and used as a temporary place
of dwelling and of such size and design as to be subject to licensing for
towing on the highway by a passenger motor vehicle or other prime mover and not
requiring a special permit for moving on the highways as contrasted to a mobile
home.
      TRIPLEX. Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed, built,
rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied as three apartments, or which
is occupied as the home or residence of three families living independently of
each other and maintaining separate cooking facilities.
      USABLE OPEN SPACE. An open area or recreational facility which is
designed and intended to be used for outdoor living and/or recreation. An area
of common usable open space shall have a slope not exceeding 10%, shall have no
dimension of less than ten feet, and may include landscaping, walks,
recreational facilities, water features and decorative objects such as art work
or fountains. USABLE OPEN SPACE shall not include: rooftops; accessory
buildings, except those portions of any building designed specifically for
recreational purposes; parking areas; driveways; turn-around areas; or the
right-of-way or easement for streets or alleys.
      USE. The purpose for which land or buildings are or may be occupied in a
zoning district.
      VARIANCE. The relief from or variation of the provisions of these
regulations, other than the use regulations, as applied to a specific piece of
property, as distinct from rezoning, as further set out hereinafter in the
powers and duties of the Board of Adjustment.
      VAULTED ABOVEGROUND TANK. Any U.L. listed steel tank, all portions of
which shall be enclosed in a secondary containment and encased with six inches
of reinforced concrete and the complete structure shall be U.L. listed in
accordance with U.S. Subject 2085, and meet all installation requirements of
the local Fire Code, National Fire Protection Association 30, National Fire
Protection Association 30A and state regulations, used for the storage of
flammable or combustible liquids.
      YARD. An open space at grade between a structure and the adjacent lot
lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the
ground upward except where otherwise specifically provided in this chapter. In
measuring a YARD for the purpose of determining the depth of the side yard,
front yard, rear yard, the least horizontal distance between the lot line and a
building or structure shall be used.
      ZERO LOT LINE HOME. A single-family detached dwelling whereby one
required yard is substantially removed, allowing the primary structure to be
placed within eight inches to one side lot line.
      ZONING COMMISSION. The Zoning Commission of the city.
      ZONING DISTRICT. A classification applied to any certain land area within
the city stipulating the limitations and requirements of land usage and
development.
      ZONING MAP. The Official Zoning Map of the city together with all
amendments thereto.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-6)  (Ord. 94-05, passed 4-20-1994; Ord. 95-26, passed
1-3-1996; Ord. 06-42, passed 12-6-2006)
ZONING DISTRICTS, USES AND AREA REGULATIONS
§ 160.020  ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The city is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
 
Zoning District Designation Zoning District Name
A   Single-Family Residential
A-1 Single-Family Residential
A-2 Zero Lot Line Residential
B   Single-Family Attached, Duplex Residential
B-1 Townhouse Residential
C   Multi-Family Residential
C-1 Multi-Family Residential
D   Neighborhood Service
D-1 Community Service
E   General Business
E-1 Central Business
E-2 Freeway Commercial
E-3 Outdoor Commercial
E-4 Commercial Warehouse
F   Light Industrial
F-1 Outdoor Industrial
G   Waterfront
G-2 Recreational Waterfront
H   Heavy Industrial
I   Planned Unit Development
MH  Mobile Home
O   Open Space
O-P Office-Professional
P-I Planned Industrial
S-P Site Plan
 
   (B)   The existing zoning district names are amended and re-established as
follows:
 
From                      To
“A” First Dwelling Hou“A” Single-Family Residential
“B” Second Dwelling Ho“B” Single-Family Attached, Duplex Residential
“C” Apartment House   “C” Multi-Family Residential
“D” Local Business    “D” Neighborhood Service
 
   (C)   At the time of adoption of this chapter, all property which is zoned
district “E”, General Business, and is located within an area bounded on the
south by the public alley located between Texas Avenue and First Avenue South,
on the east by Bay Street, on the north by 13th Avenue North and on the west by
Tenth Street or a line being an extension of Tenth Street shall be redesignated
as district “E-1", Central Business.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-10)
§ 160.021  ZONING DISTRICT MAP DESCRIPTION; INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   The boundaries of the zoning districts set out herein and delineated
upon the Official Zoning Map of the city, said map being a part of this chapter
as fully as if the same were set forth herein in detail, shall be governed by
the following regulations.
      (1)   If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are
made in district boundaries or other matters portrayed on the Official Zoning
Map, such changes shall be ratified by the City Commission.
      (2)   Regardless of the existence of copies of the Official Zoning Map
which from time to time may be made or published, the Official Zoning Map,
which shall be located in the office of the City Secretary, shall be the final
authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings
and other structures within the city.
      (3)   One updated copy of the Official Zoning Map shall be filed with the
Building Official and shall be used for observation in issuing building
permits, certificates of occupancy and for enforcing this chapter. One updated
copy of the Official Zoning Map may also be filed with the Director of
Transportation and Planning for reference purposes.
      (4)   Reproduction for informational purposes may, from time to time, be
made of the Official Zoning Map.
   (B)   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules apply.
      (1)   The district boundaries are streets, alleys and property lines
unless otherwise shown, and where the districts designated on the Official
Zoning Map are bounded approximately by streets, alleys or property lines; the
streets, alleys or property lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the
district. Where alleys are vacated, the boundary shall be the centerline of
such vacated alley.
      (2)   Where the district boundaries are otherwise indicated, and where
the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the
district boundaries shall be construed to be property lines.
      (3)   In unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines shall be
determined by the use of the scale of the Official Zoning Map.
      (4)   Where the description of the property is contained in an ordinance,
the metes and bounds description of the property in the ordinance shall control
over the zoning map.
      (5)   When on account of any legal vacation proceeding or for any other
cause the streets or alleys on the ground differ from the streets or alleys
shown on the District Map, the Director of Transportation and Planning may
apply the district designations on the map to the streets or alleys on the
ground in such manner as to conform to the intent and purpose of this chapter.
      (6)   Questions of interpretation of the Official Zoning Map shall be
referred to a person designated by the city.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-11)
§ 160.022  NEWLY ANNEXED TERRITORY.
   (A)   All territory annexed to the city after the date of passage of this
chapter shall be automatically classified as “O” (Open Space) District purposes
until permanently zoned by the City Commission and upon recommendation by the
Zoning Commission.
   (B)   (1)   The Zoning Commission shall, as soon as practical, after
annexation of any territory to the city, institute proceedings on its own
motion to give the newly annexed territory a permanent zoning.
      (2)   The procedure to be followed shall be the same as is provided by
law for the adoption of any zoning changes.
   (C)   No person shall erect, construct or proceed or continue with the
erection or construction of any building or structure, or add to any building
or structure, or cause the same to be done in any newly annexed territory to
the city, without first applying for, and obtaining, a building permit or
certificate of occupancy, therefor from the Building Official.
   (D)   No permit for the construction of a building or use of land shall be
issued by the Building Official other than a permit which will allow the
construction of a building permitted in the “O” (Open Space) District, unless
and until such territory has been rezoned to a district other than the “O”
(Open Space) District, by the City Commission in the manner provided by the
law.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-12)
§ 160.023  SUMMARY OF AREA REGULATIONS.
   A summary of zoning district area regulations is provided as follows:
 
                 Minimum Minimum Minimum Minimum         Maximum  Maximum Lot  Minimum
         Minimum Lot     Lot     Front   Rear    Minimum Height   Coverage by  Landscaping
District Lot     Width   Depth   Yard    Yard    Side    of       Buildings    Required
         Area    (in     (in     (in     (in     Yard    Building (percentage) (percentage)
                 feet)   feet)   feet)   feet)
    6,000
    square feet                                    2.5 stories
A   per         50    100 25    20      5 feet     or 35 feet   40      0
    dwelling
    unit
    8,200
    square feet                                    2.5 stories
A-1 per         70    100 30    20      5 feet     or 35 feet   40      0
    dwelling
    unit
    4,000
    square feet                         8 in./10   2.5 stories
A-2 per         40/45 90  15/20 10/15   feet       or 30 feet   50      0
    dwelling
    unit
    3,000
    square feet                         6 feet/15  2 stories or
B   per         30/60 100 30    20      feet       30 feet      40      0
    dwelling
    unit
    2,904
    square feet                         0 feet/
B-1 per         30    90  25    20      6 feet     30 feet      50      0
    dwelling
    unit
    1,742
    square feet                         20 feet/30 3 stories or
C   per         80    100 25/75 20/30   feet       36 feet      50      20
    dwelling
    unit
    2,420
    square feet                                    2 stories or
C-1 per         80    100 25    20      20 feet    25 feet      50      20
    dwelling
    unit
    4,840
    square feet                                                 See §  See §
MH  per         40    95  15/25 10      5 feet     15 feet      160.031 160.031
    dwelling
    unit
O-P 6,000       0     0   25    See §  See §     35 feet      40      10
    square feet                 160.032 160.032
D   6,000       0     0   25    10/15   10 feet/15 35 feet      40      10
    square feet                         feet
D-1 6,000       0     0   25    See §  See §     35 feet      40      10
    square feet                 160.034 160.034
E   0           0     0   25    0/15    See §     75 feet      50      5
                                        160.035
E-1 0           0     0   0     0/10    0 feet/10  75 feet      100     0
                                        feet
E-2 10,000      80    80  40    See §  See §     no req.      65      10
    square feet                 160.037 160.037
E-3 10,000      80    80  25    10/25   10 feet/25 30 feet      70      5
    square feet                         feet
E-4 10,000      50    100 25    15/25   10 feet/25 30 feet      70      5
    square feet                         feet
F   15,000      80    150 30    30      0 feet/30  50 feet      70      5
    square feet                         feet
F-1 20,000      80    150 30    30      0 feet/30  50 feet      70      5
    square feet                         feet
P-1 20,000      80    150 40    See §  See §     55 feet      65      15
    square feet                 160.043 160.043
G   0           0     0   25    0/25    0 feet/25  75 feet      60      5
                                        feet
G-2 10,000      80    80  25    0/25    0 feet/25  30 feet      50      10
    square feet                         feet
H   20,000      100   100 50    0/50    0 feet/50  See §       70      5
    square feet                         feet       160.048
O   2 acres     80    100 50    20      15 feet    2.5 stories  20      0
                                                   or 35 feet
I   See §      –   – –   –     –        –          –     –
    160.050
S-P See §      –   – –   –     –        –          –     –
    160.051
NOTES TO TABLE:
(a)--Denotes whichever is greater
 
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-12)
§ 160.024  DISTRICT A, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   District A is intended to be comprised of single-family detached
residential dwellings located on lots with a minimum area of 6,000 square feet.
      (2)   This district is also intended to accommodate public or parochial
schools, churches, parks or governmental uses other than prisons or halfway
houses.
   (B)   Principal uses.
      (1)   Single-family detached residential dwellings;
      (2)   Public and non-profit institutions of an educational or religious
function, excluding corrective institutions and hospitals;
      (3)   Governmental buildings;
      (4)   Public utility uses required to service the district; and
      (5)   Public and private, non-commercial parks, playgrounds or community
centers.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Private garage;
      (2)   Guest quarters being located at least 60 feet from the front
property line, and meeting all other yard requirements;
      (3)   Private swimming pool;
      (4)   One storage building not exceeding 225 square feet in floor area or
12 feet in height;
      (5)   Registered family home;
      (6)   Licensed group day care home provided such facility provides care
for 12 or less children in the home of the caretaker;
      (7)   Home occupation; and
      (8)   Other uses which are subordinate to and incidental to the principle
use.
   (D)   Area and height requirements.
 
                                      2 stories or 25 feet, unless structure is
                                      constructed with fabricated metal siding
Maximum height of accessory structure or roofing, in which case accessory
                                      structure shall be limited to one story
                                      or 15 feet
Maximum height of principal structure 2.5 stories or 35 feet
Maximum lot coverage by principal     40%
structure
Minimum distance between detached     10 feet
structures
Minimum front yard                    25 feet
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit    6,000 square feet
Minimum lot depth                     100 feet
Minimum lot width                     50 feet
Minimum rear yard                     20 feet
Minimum side yard                     Minimum of 5 feet
Minimum side yard corner lot          15 feet on street side
 
   (E)   Parking requirements. Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided
per dwelling unit.
   (F)   Building regulations. For residential subdivisions platted after 12-6-
2006, a residential structure shall consist of a minimum of 60% brick, stone or
masonry exclusive of doors, windows, window walls and garage doors unless
otherwise approved by the Planning Board (reference §
160.087 of this chapter). These requirements shall also apply to all non-
residential uses permitted in this district.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-14)  (Ord. 94-05, passed 4-20-1994; Ord. 99-50, passed
8-25-1999; Ord. 00-51, passed 9-6-2000; Ord. 03-09, passed 4-16-2003; Ord. 06-
42, passed 12-6-2006)
§ 160.025  DISTRICT A-1, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Purpose. District A-1 is intended to be comprised of low density,
single-family detached residential dwellings, located on lots with a minimum
area of 8,200 square feet. This district is also intended to accommodate public
or parochial schools, churches, parks or governmental uses, other than prisons
or halfway houses.
   (B)   Principal uses.
      (1)   Single-family detached residential dwellings;
      (2)   Public and non-profit institutions of an educational or religious
function, excluding corrective institutions and hospitals;
      (3)   Governmental buildings;
      (4)   Public utility uses required to service the district; and
      (5)   Public and private, non-commercial parks, playgrounds or community
centers.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Private garage;
      (2)   Guest quarters being located at least 60 feet from the front
property line and meeting all other requirements;
      (3)   Private swimming pool;
      (4)   One storage building not exceeding 225 square feet in floor area or
12 feet in height;
      (5)   Registered family home;
      (6)   Licensed group day care home provided such facility provides care
for 12 or less children in the home of the caretaker;
      (7)   Home occupation; and
      (8)   Other uses which are subordinate to and incidental to the principal
use.
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
 
                                      2 stories or 25 feet, unless structure is
                                      constructed with fabricated metal siding
Maximum height of accessory structure or roofing, in which case accessory
                                      structure shall be limited to one story
                                      or 15 feet
Maximum height of principal structure 2.5 stories or 35 feet
Maximum lot coverage by principal     40%
structure
Minimum distance between detached     10 feet
structures
Minimum front yard                    30 feet
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit    8,200 square feet
Minimum lot depth                     100 feet
Minimum lot width                     70 feet
Minimum rear yard                     20 feet
Minimum side yard                     5 feet
Minimum side yard of corner lot       15 feet on street side
 
   (E)   Parking requirements. Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided
per dwelling unit.
   (F)   Building regulations. For residential subdivisions platted after 12-6-
2006, a residential structure shall consist of a minimum of 60% brick, stone or
masonry exclusive of doors, windows, window walls and garage doors unless
otherwise approved by the Planning Board (§
160.087 of this chapter). These requirements shall also apply to all non-
residential uses permitted in this district.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-15)  (Ord. 94-05, passed 4-20-1994; Ord. 99-50, passed
8-25-1999; Ord. 00-51, passed 9-6-2000; Ord. 03-09, passed 4-16-2003; Ord. 06-
42, passed 12-6-2006)
§ 160.026  DISTRICT A-2, PATIO HOMES.
   (A)   Purpose. District A-2 is intended to be comprised of single-family,
zero lot line, detached residential dwellings. The district allows the main
structure to be constructed coincident with one of the side property lines and
requires only one side yard setback in order to maximize lot usage and yet
maintain a neighborhood character consistent with conventional single-family
detached homes.
   (B)   Principal uses.
      (1)   Single-family detached residential dwellings; and
      (2)   Public and private, non-commercial parks, playgrounds or community
centers.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Private garage;
      (2)   Private swimming pool;
      (3)   One storage building not exceeding 225 square feet in floor area or
12 feet in height;
      (4)   Registered family home;
      (5)   Home occupation; and
      (6)   Other uses which are subordinate to and incidental to the principal
uses.
   (D)   Area and height requirements.
 
Maximum area of subdivision           10 acres
                                      2 stories or 15 feet, unless structure is
                                      constructed with fabricated metal siding
Maximum height of accessory structure or roofing, in which case accessory
                                      structure shall be limited to one story
                                      or 15 feet
Maximum height of principal structure 2.5 stories or 30 feet
Maximum lot coverage by principal     50%
structure
Maximum lot coverage by structures,   60%
driveways and parking
Minimum area of subdivision           1 acre
Minimum distance between detached     10 feet, see division (F)(3) below
structures
Minimum front yard                    15 feet; 20 feet where garage faces
                                      street
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit    4,000 square feet
Minimum lot depth                     90 feet
Minimum lot width                     40 feet
Minimum lot width of corner lot       45 feet
Minimum rear yard                     10 feet for 1 story; 15 feet for 2
                                      stories
Minimum side yard                     8 inches on one side; 10 feet on opposite
                                      side
   Or alternate minimum side yard  5 feet on each side
Minimum side yard of corner lot       15 feet on street side
 
   (E)   Parking requirements.
      (1)   All zero lot line homes shall have a two-car garage.
      (2)   Driveways shall be of design as to accommodate two vehicles off-
street.
      (3)   The elimination of a garage space by enclosing the garage with a
stationary building wall shall be prohibited.
   (F)   Special conditions.
      (1)   All subdivision plats filed shall have established front, side and
rear yard setback lines on each lot in accordance with division (D) above.
      (2)   An access easement of five feet shall be provided and so indicated
on the subdivision plat, to allow the adjacent owner access to the eight-inch
side yard on each lot to enable the property owner to maintain his or her
house.
      (3)   No dwelling shall be closer than ten feet eight inches between the
face of exterior walls of neighboring dwelling units in an A-2 District, and no
closer than five feet to the boundary of any other zoning district, or ten feet
to the boundary of District E-1 (Central Business).
      (4)   No openings for access, lights or air shall be permitted on the
wall situated along the property line. Wood construction shall not be permitted
in the exterior or outer covering of zero lot line walls. This covering shall
be built with brick, masonry or other durable, maintenance free materials. No
portion of the wall shall project over the property line.
      (5)   Solid (opaque) walls or fences of wood, masonry or other durable,
suitable material shall extend the full length of the rear lot line as well as
those portions of side lot line behind the front wall of a patio home or zero
lot line home, but not including the zero lot line walls of such homes.
Chainlink fences using opaque slats are expressly prohibited. Fences or walls
shall be a minimum of six feet in height, but shall not exceed eight feet in
height.
      (6)   Water draining from roofs of patio or zero lot line homes shall in
no instance be discharged onto a neighboring property or yard. Where roofs
slope toward a lot line wall and/or neighboring property, an adequate gutter
system shall be provided draining directly to the street.
      (7)   Within the ten-foot side setback area, but not within the front
setback area, may be placed any of the following: spa, swimming pool, deck,
barbecue grill, fountain or patio cover. Patio covers shall be open structures
and can be attached or independent to the residential structure. The patio
cover shall be constructed to meet the required wind loads as prescribed in the
International Residential Code adopted by the city. The patio cover will be
allowed to cover an area not to exceed 25 feet in length of the side yard. The
patio cover shall be designed to allow the adjacent property owner access for
maintenance to their structure.
   (G)   Building regulations.
      (1)   For residential subdivisions platted after 12-6-2006, a residential
structure shall consist of a minimum of 60% brick, stone or masonry exclusive
of doors, windows, window walls and garage doors unless otherwise approved by
the Planning Board (reference §
160.087 of this chapter).
      (2)   These requirements shall also apply to all non-residential uses
permitted in this district.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-16)  (Ord. 00-51, passed 9-6-2000; Ord. 05-46, passed
10-2-2005; Ord. 06-14, passed 4-5-2006; Ord. 06-42, passed 12-6-2006; Ord. 07-
25, passed 8-1-2007)
§ 160.027  DISTRICT B, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED, DUPLEX RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Purpose. District B is intended to be comprised of single-family
attached, two-family dwellings or duplexes. Single-family attached dwellings
refer to the style of structures in which each dwelling unit is situated on a
separately platted lot of record, where the property line runs coincident with
the common firewall separating the units. No more than two units may be
attached. The district also permits the structure on a single lot containing
two dwelling units (duplex) that are separated by a common, unpierced wall.
   (B)   Principal uses.
      (1)   Single-family detached residential dwellings;
      (2)   Single-family attached residential dwellings;
      (3)   Duplexes;
      (4)   Public and private, non-commercial parks, playgrounds or community
centers;
      (5)   Public and non-profit institutions of an educational or religious
function, excluding corrective institutions and hospitals;
      (6)   Governmental buildings; and
      (7)   Public utility uses.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Private garage;
      (2)   Swimming pool;
      (3)   One storage building per residence, not exceeding 225 square feet
in floor area or 12 feet in height;
      (4)   Registered family home;
      (5)   Home occupation; and
      (6)   Other uses which are subordinate to and incidental to the principal
use.
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
 
Maximum height of accessory structure 1 story or 15 feet
Maximum height of principal structure 2 stories or 30 feet
Maximum lot coverage by principal     40%
structure
Maximum lot coverage by structures,   60%
driveway and parking
Minimum distance between detached     10 feet
structures
Minimum front yard                    30 feet
                                      6,000 square feet for single-family
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit    detached dwelling; 3,000 square feet for
                                      each attached dwelling
Minimum lot depth                     100 feet
                                      60 feet for each single-family detached/
Minimum lot width                     duplex; 30 feet for each single-family
                                      attached structure
Minimum rear yard                     20 feet
Minimum side yard                     6 feet
Minimum side yard of corner lot       15 feet on street side
 
   (E)   Parking requirements.
      (1)   Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided per dwelling unit.
      (2)   The elimination of a garage space in a single-family attached
dwelling or a duplex dwelling by enclosing the garage with a stationary
building wall shall be prohibited.
   (F)   Building regulations. For residential subdivisions platted after 12-6-
2006, a residential structure shall consist of a minimum of 60% brick, stone or
masonry exclusive of doors, windows, window walls, and garage doors unless
otherwise approved by the Planning Board (reference §
160.087 of this chapter). These requirements shall also apply to all non-
residential uses permitted in this district.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-18)  (Ord. 06-42, passed 12-6-2006)
§ 160.028  DISTRICT B-1, TOWNHOUSE RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Purpose. District B-1 is intended to be comprised of multiple, single-
family attached (townhouse) dwellings. This is a medium density residential
neighborhood which encourages individual home ownership. Each dwelling unit is
situated on a separately platted lot of record, where the property line runs
coincident with the common firewall separating the units. The maximum permitted
density is 15 units per acre.
   (B)   Principal uses.
      (1)   Townhouse;
      (2)   Public and private, non-commercial parks, playgrounds or community
centers;
      (3)   Public and non-profit institutions of an educational or religious
function, excluding corrective institutions and hospitals;
      (4)   Governmental buildings; and
      (5)   Public utility uses.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Private garage;
      (2)   Swimming pool;
      (3)   One storage building per residence, not exceeding 225 square feet
in floor area or 12 feet in height;
      (4)   Registered family home;
      (5)   Home occupation;
      (6)   Cabana, pavilion or roofed area;
      (7)   Meeting, party and/or social rooms; and
      (8)   Other uses which are subordinate to and incidental to the principal
use.
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
 
Maximum height                         30 feet
Maximum length of the attached single- 200 feet
family complex
Maximum lot coverage by principal      50%
structure
Maximum lot coverage by structures,    70%
driveway and parking
Minimum front yard                     25 feet
Minimum lot area per dwelling unit     2,904 square feet
Minimum lot depth                      90 feet
Minimum lot width                      30 feet
Minimum rear yard                      20 feet
Minimum side yard                      0 feet between units; 6 feet at the end
                                       of each complex
Minimum side yard of corner lot        15 feet on street side
 
   (E)   Parking requirements.
      (1)   Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided per dwelling unit.
      (2)   The elimination of a garage space in a single-family attached
dwelling or a duplex dwelling by enclosing the garage with a stationary
building wall shall be prohibited.
   (F)   Building regulations. For residential subdivisions platted after 12-6-
2006, a residential structure shall consist of a minimum of 60% brick, stone or
masonry exclusive of doors, windows, window walls and garage doors unless
otherwise approved by the Planning Board (reference §
160.087 of this chapter). These requirements shall also apply to all non-
residential uses permitted in this district.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-19)  (Ord. 06-42, passed 12-6-2006)
§ 160.029  DISTRICT C, MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Purpose. District C is intended to be comprised of multi-family
dwelling units for relatively high density residential neighborhood
developments. The uses should not generate traffic through single-family
residential neighborhoods and should be located adjacent to arterial or
collector size streets capable of carrying the additional traffic they will
generate.
   (B)   Principal uses.
      (1)   Duplexes;
      (2)   Triplexes;
      (3)   Fourplexes;
      (4)   Multi-family dwellings;
      (5)   Public and private, non-commercial parks, playgrounds or community
centers;
      (6)   Public and non-profit institutions of an educational or religious
function, excluding corrective institutions and hospitals;
      (7)   Governmental buildings; and
      (8)   Public utility uses.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Private garage, carport and paved automobile parking areas for the
use of tenants or visitors;
      (2)   Cabana, pavilion, manager’s office, meeting, exercise, party and/or
social rooms or buildings incidental to the principal use;
      (3)   Swimming pool, sauna or hot tub, as an accessory to the principal
use;
      (4)   Tennis courts and other recreational facilities, as an accessory to
the principal use;
      (5)   Laundry room for use of tenants; and
      (6)   Other uses which are subordinate to and incidental to the principal
use.
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
 
Maximum height                                36 feet or 3 stories
Maximum lot coverage by driveways and parking 70%
Maximum lot coverage by structures            50%
Maximum residential density                   25 units per acre
Minimum distance between structure            20 feet
Minimum front yard:
   One- and two-story frontage             25 feet
   Three-story frontage                    75 feet
Minimum rear yard:
   One- and two-story frontage             20 feet
   Three-story                             30 feet
Minimum side yard:
   One- and two-story frontage             20 feet
   Three-story                             30 feet
Minimum lot depth                             100 feet
Minimum lot width                             80 feet
 
   (E)   Parking requirements.
      (1)   For duplex, triplex or fourplex structures, two off-street parking
spaces shall be provided per unit.
      (2)   For multi-family dwellings, parking shall be provided at the
following ratios:
 
Efficiency or one bedroom units, spaces per unit 1.75
Two-bedroom units, spaces per unit               2
Three-bedroom units, spaces per unit             2.5
Four-bedroom or greater units, spaces per unit   3
 
   (F)   Screening requirements. Screening in accordance with §
160.084 of this chapter is required along side and rear lot lines unless that
area is adjacent to a C or C-1 District(s).
   (G)   Useable open space and landscaping requirements.
      (1)   Each lot or tract of land used for multi-family development
purposes, shall provide useable open space (as defined in §
160.006 of this chapter) totaling at least 20% of the area of the lot or tract.
      (2)   A landscape border, a minimum of ten feet in width, shall be placed
adjacent to all public streets. This landscape area shall not be in the street
right-of-way. One tree of three-inch caliper per 500 square feet of landscape
border is required.
      (3)   One tree of three-inch caliper per 2,000 square feet of useable
open space is required.
      (4)   The landscape border requirement can be used to meet the
requirements of useable open space landscaping.
      (5)   Required landscaping shall be in conformance with §
160.088 of this chapter.
   (H)   Building regulations. Each exterior facade elevation for all floors
shall consist of a minimum of 80% brick, stone or masonry exclusive of doors,
windows and window walls unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board
(reference §
160.087 of this chapter).
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-22)  (Ord. 06-42, passed 12-6-2006)
§ 160.030  DISTRICT C-1, MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Purpose. District C-1 is intended to be comprised of multi-family
dwelling units for medium density residential neighborhood developments. The
uses should not generate traffic through single-family residential
neighborhoods, and should be located adjacent to arterial or collector size
streets capable of carrying the additional traffic they will generate.
   (B)   Principal uses.
      (1)   Duplexes;
      (2)   Triplexes;
      (3)   Fourplexes;
      (4)   Multi-family dwellings;
      (5)   Public and private, non-commercial parks, playgrounds or community
centers;
      (6)   Public and non-profit institutions of an educational or religious
function, excluding corrective institutions and hospitals;
      (7)   Governmental buildings and uses; and
      (8)   Public utility uses.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Private garage, carport and paved automobile parking areas for the
use of tenants or visitors;
      (2)   Cabana, pavilion, manager’s office, meeting, exercise, party and/or
social rooms or buildings incidental to the principal use;
      (3)   Swimming pool, sauna or hot tub, as an accessory to the principal
use;
      (4)   Tennis courts and other recreational facilities, as an accessory to
the principal use;
      (5)   Laundry room for use of tenants; and
      (6)   Other uses which are subordinate to and incidental to the principal
use.
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
 
Maximum height                                            25 feet or 2 stories
Maximum lot coverage by structures                        50%
Maximum lot coverage by structures, driveways and parking 70%
Maximum residential density                               18 units per acre
Minimum distance between structures                       20 feet
Minimum front yard                                        25 feet
Minimum lot depth                                         100 feet
Minimum lot width                                         80 feet
Minimum rear yard                                         20 feet
Minimum side yard                                         20 feet
 
   (E)   Parking requirements.
      (1)   For duplex, triplex or fourplex structures, two off-street parking
spaces shall be provided per unit.
      (2)   For multi-family dwellings, parking shall be provided at the
following ratios:
 
Efficiency or one bedroom units, spaces per unit 1.75
Two-bedroom units, spaces per unit               2
Three-bedroom units, spaces per unit             2.5
Four-bedroom or greater units, spaces per unit   3
 
   (F)   Screening requirements. Screening in accordance with §
160.084 of this chapter is required along side and rear lot lines unless that
area is adjacent to a C or C-1 District(s).
   (G)   Useable open space and landscaping requirements.
      (1)   Each lot or tract of land used for multi-family development
purposes, shall provide useable open space (as defined in § 160.006 of this
chapter) totaling at least 20% of the area of the lot or tract.
      (2)   A landscape border, a minimum of ten feet in width, shall be placed
adjacent to all public streets. This landscape area shall not be in the street
right-of-way. One tree of three-inch caliper per 500 square feet of landscape
border is required.
      (3)   One tree of three-inch caliper per 2,000 square feet of useable
open space is required.
      (4)   The landscape border requirement can be used to meet the
requirements of useable open space landscaping.
      (5)   Required landscaping shall be in conformance with §
160.088 of this chapter.
   (H)   Building regulations. Each exterior facade elevation for all floors
shall consist of a minimum of 80% brick, stone or masonry exclusive of doors,
windows and window walls unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board
(reference §
160.087 of this chapter).
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-23)  (Ord. 06-42, passed 12-6-2006)
§ 160.031  DISTRICT MH, MOBILE HOME.
   (A)   Purpose. District MH is intended to provide for the development of
mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions where the type of housing can be
placed in a coordinated development with appropriate standards for density and
spacing.
   (B)   Principal uses.
      (1)   Single-family mobile homes situated in a mobile home park; and
      (2)   Public and private, non-commercial parks, playgrounds or community
centers.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Mobile home rental office;
      (2)   Swimming pool;
      (3)   Laundry room for use by tenants;
      (4)   Cabana, pavilion or roofed area;
      (5)   Meeting, party and/or social rooms;
      (6)   Common and centrally located enclosed storage area serving all
units; and
      (7)   Other uses which are subordinate to and incidental to the principal
use.
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
 
Maximum area of mobile home park or subdivision 25 acres
Maximum height                                  15 feet
Minimum area of mobile home park or subdivision 5 acres
Minimum distance between mobile homes           20 feet
Minimum front yard:
   Of private drive                          15 feet
   Of public street                          25 feet
Minimum lot area per unit                       4,840 square feet
Minimum lot depth                               95 feet
Minimum lot width                               40 feet
Minimum rear yard                               10 feet
Minimum side yard                               5 feet
 
   (E)   Parking requirements. Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided
per mobile home.
   (F)   Open space requirements.
      (1)   There shall be provided within the park, outside of unit plots or
lots, a separate useable open space area for recreational purposes.
      (2)   The minimum area of the useable open space area shall be at a ratio
of 500 square feet for each of the first 20 units and 250 square feet per unit
for all additional units.
      (3)   Outdoor swimming pool or pools may be included in satisfying these
requirements.
      (4)   The area in front, side or rear yards may not be utilized in
satisfying this requirement.
   (G)   Special conditions.
      (1)   Any land zoned District M-H (Mobile Home) and used as a mobile home
park shall also meet all requirements of
Ch. 156 of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   Should there be any conflict between the regulations of this
chapter and the regulations of
Ch. 156 of this code of ordinances, the more restrictive regulation shall
apply.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-24)
§ 160.032  DISTRICT O-P, OFFICE-PROFESSIONAL.
   (A)   Purpose. District O-P is intended to provide for low to moderate
intensity office and professional uses which provide a service rather than sell
products. The uses in this district should not have an adverse effect on
adjacent residential areas nor create excessive amounts of traffic. All uses
are to be conducted within an enclosed building.
   (B)   Principal uses.
      (1)   Administrative offices;
      (2)   Business and commercial schools;
      (3)   Financial institutions;
      (4)   Governmental buildings and uses;
      (5)   Medical and dental clinics and offices;
      (6)   Radio, TV stations, excluding towers;
      (7)   Schools and studios for art, dancing, drama, music, photography and
for any business and commercial service; and
      (8)   Veterinary clinics where all activities are conducted within a
totally enclosed building.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Paved automobile parking lots incidental to the principal use;
      (2)   Any accessory use customarily related to a principal use authorized
in this district such a pharmacy, optical company or eating establishment which
is established for the convenience of the occupants and clients of the primary
use and is also located within the same building;
      (3)   Other uses which are subordinate to and incidental to the principal
use; and
      (4)   Signs, advertising services provided on the same premises.
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
 
Maximum height                                          35 feet
Maximum lot coverage by structures                      40%
Maximum lot coverage by structures, driveways and       90%
parking
Minimum distance between detached structures            12 feet
Minimum front yard                                      25 feet
Minimum lot area                                        6,000 square feet
Minimum lot depth                                       None
Minimum lot width                                       None
Minimum rear yard                                       15 feet
   If adjacent to any district zoned for residential 15 feet or 10% of depth
uses                                                    of lot, whichever is
                                                        greater
Minimum side yard                                       10 feet
   If adjacent to any district zoned for residential 15 feet
uses
 
   (E)   Parking requirements. Off-street parking in this district shall be
provided in accordance with §
160.081 of this chapter.
   (F)   Screening requirements. Screening in accordance with §
160.084 of this chapter is required along side and rear lot lines when these
lot lines are adjacent to any district zoned for residential uses.
   (G)   Landscape requirements. See §
160.088 of this chapter.
   (H)   Building regulations. Each exterior facade elevation for all floors
shall consist of a minimum of 80% brick, stone or masonry exclusive of doors,
windows and window walls unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board
(reference §
160.087 of this chapter).
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-28)  (Ord. 06-42, passed 12-6-2006)
§ 160.033  DISTRICT D, NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICE.
   (A)   Purpose. District D is intended to provide for office and retail
services in proximity to residential areas in which all principal uses are
conducted indoors. While the uses allowed in this district are intended to be
located adjacent to residential areas, the character of the residential areas
should not be adversely impacted.
   (B)   Principal uses.
      (1)   Any use permitted in the O-P (Office-Professional) District subject
to the regulations of District D;
      (2)   Retail stores and food markets completely within an enclosed
building;
      (3)   Personal and professional services including barber and beauty
shops and dry cleaning;
      (4)   Minor repair shops such as bicycles, shoe and watch repair;
automotive repair excluded;
      (5)   Cafés, restaurant or cafeterias, where there are not provisions or
facilities for the serving or consumption of liquor, and where there is not
floor show or other form of entertainment;
      (6)   Automobile service stations; and
      (7)   Washaterias.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Paved automobile parking lots incidental to the principal use;
      (2)   Other uses which are subordinate to and incidental to the principal
use; and
      (3)   Signs advertising services provided on the same premises.
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
 
Maximum height                                            35 feet
Maximum lot coverage by structures, driveways and parking 90%
Maximum lot coverage by structures                        40%
Maximum size of retail, retail strip centers or shopping  25,000 square feet
centers per lot or tract
Minimum distance between detached structures              12 feet
Minimum front yard                                        25 feet
Minimum lot area                                          6,000 square feet
Minimum lot depth                                         None
Minimum lot width                                         None
Minimum rear yard                                         10 feet
   If adjacent to any district zoned for residential us15 feet
Minimum side yard                                         10 feet
   If adjacent to any district zoned for residential us15 feet
   If adjacent to street                               25 feet
 
   (E)   Parking requirements. Off-street parking in this district shall be
provided in accordance with §
160.081 of this chapter.
   (F)   Screening requirements. Screening in accordance with §
160.084 of this chapter is required along side and rear lot lines when these
lot lines are adjacent to any district zoned for residential uses.
   (G)   Landscape requirements. See §
160.088 of this chapter.
   (H)   Building regulations. Each exterior facade elevation for all floors
shall consist of a minimum of 80% brick, stone or masonry exclusive of doors,
windows and window walls unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board
(reference §
160.087 of this chapter).
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-29)  (Ord. 94-05, passed 4-20-1994; Ord. 06-42, passed
12-6-2006)
§ 160.034  DISTRICT D-1, LIMITED SERVICE.
   (A)   Purpose. District D-1 is intended to provide for uses in the O-P
(Office-Professional) District in addition to a limited number of other
services which are compatible to adjacent residential area, provided that
adequate screening and other protective measures are taken.
   (B)   Principal uses.
      (1)   Any use permitted in the O-P (Office-Professional) District subject
to the regulations of district D-1;
      (2)   Day care centers or day nurseries which do not operate between the
hours of midnight to 6:00 a.m.;
      (3)   Licensed group day care home which provides care between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.;
      (4)   Nursing homes; and
      (5)   Kindergartens.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Paved automobile parking lots incidental to the principal use;
      (2)   Other uses which are subordinate to and incidental to the principal
uses; and
      (3)   Signs advertising services provided on the same premises.
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
 
Maximum height                                          35 feet
Maximum lot coverage by structures, driveways and       90%
parking
Maximum lot coverage by structures                      40%
Minimum distance between detached structures            12 feet
Minimum front yard                                      25 feet
Minimum lot area                                        6,000 square feet
Minimum lot depth                                       None
Minimum lot width                                       None
Minimum rear yard                                       15 feet
   If adjacent to any district zoned for residential 15 feet or 10% of depth
uses                                                    of lot, whichever is
                                                        greater
Minimum side yard                                       10 feet
   If adjacent to any district zoned for residential 15 feet
uses
   If adjacent to street                             25 feet
 
   (E)   Parking requirements. Off-street parking in this district shall be
provided in accordance with §
160.081 of this chapter.
   (F)   Screening requirements. Screening in accordance with §
160.084 of this chapter is required along side and rear lot lines when these
lot lines are adjacent to any district zoned for residential uses.
   (G)   Landscape requirements. See §
160.088 of this chapter.
   (H)   Special conditions. Signs advertising the services contained within a
lot or tract must be located on one common ground, pole or monument sign. The
sign shall not exceed 13 feet in height.
   (I)   Building regulations. Each exterior facade elevation for all floors
shall consist of a minimum of 80% brick, stone or masonry exclusive of doors,
windows and window walls unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board
(reference §
160.087 of this chapter).
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-30)  (Ord. 94-05, passed 4-20-1994; Ord. 06-42, passed
12-6-2006)
§ 160.035  DISTRICT E, GENERAL BUSINESS.
   (A)   Purpose. District E is intended to provide for an extensive variety of
enclosed retail and commercial services to serve the overall needs of the
community. Due to the variety and potential intensity of these uses, they
should be located along major transportation corridors and be appropriately
buffered from residential areas.
   (B)   Principal uses.
      (1)   Any use permitted in the O-P (Office-Professional), D (Neighborhood
Service) or D-1 (Limited Service) Districts subject to the regulations of
District E;
      (2)   Automobile repair garages; provided that, the storage of inoperable
or wrecked vehicles shall not be permitted outside of the business building
unless the vehicles are completely encompassed by a solid screening fence or
wall at least six feet high;
      (3)   Automobile, motorcycle and light load truck sales and leasing, new
or used;
      (4)   Hospitals;
      (5)   Ambulance services;
      (6)   Motion picture theatres within an enclosed building;
      (7)   Spa, health studio or fitness centers;
      (8)   Coin-operated amusement machine arcades;
      (9)   Bowling alley and skating rinks;
      (10)   Establishments where alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed on
premises (see restrictions below), except sexually oriented businesses:
taverns, night clubs, dance halls and ice houses or any similar uses where
alcoholic beverages are consumed on the premises and where at least 50% of the
business use is attributable to the sale of alcoholic beverages shall not be
less than 300 feet from any property zoned District A, A-1, A-2 or B-1.
Distance shall be measured from the nearest public door of the facility to the
property line of the property zoned District A, A-1, A-2 or B-1;
      (11)   Car washes, self-service, full-service or automated; and
      (12)   Any retail sales, commercial business or service not included in
the O-P, D or D-1 Zoning Districts; provided that, all such uses shall be
completely within an enclosed building and are not noxious or offensive by
reason of the emission of odor, dust, gas fumes, noise or vibration, and
provided that no warehousing or manufacturing, or treatment of products or
equipment, shall be permitted, except such as is clearly incidental to the
conduct of a permitted use and provided that the use is not prohibited by any
other section of this chapter or by any other ordinances of the city.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Paved automobile parking lots incidental to the principal use;
      (2)   Other uses which are subordinate to and incidental to the principal
uses; and
      (3)   Signs advertising services provided on the same premises.
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
 
Maximum height                                            75 feet
Maximum lot coverage by structures, driveways and parking 95%
Maximum lot coverage by structures                        50%
Minimum distance between detached structures              12 feet
Minimum front yard                                        25 feet
Minimum lot area                                          None
Minimum lot depth                                         None
Minimum lot width                                         None
Minimum rear yard                                         None
   If adjacent to any district zoned for residential us15 feet
Minimum side yard                                         None
   If adjacent to any district zoned for residential us10 feet
   If adjacent to street                               25 feet
 
   (E)   Parking requirements. Off-street parking in this district shall be
provided in accordance with §
160.081 of this chapter.
   (F)   Screening requirements. Screening in accordance with §
160.084 of this chapter is required along side and rear lot lines when these
lot lines are adjacent to any district zoned for residential uses.
   (G)   Landscape requirements. See §
160.088 of this chapter.
   (H)   Building regulations. Each exterior facade elevation for all floors
shall consist of a minimum of 80% brick, stone or masonry exclusive of doors,
windows and window walls unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board
(reference §
160.087 of this chapter).
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-31)  (Ord. 94-05, passed 4-20-1994; Ord. 06-42, passed
12-6-2006; Ord. 16-18, passed 6-1-2016)
§ 160.036  DISTRICT E-1, CENTRAL BUSINESS.
   (A)   Purpose. District E-1 is intended to accommodate the existing downtown
business uses and the flexible area regulations of this area. This district is
established for a limited area of the city and expansion of the district should
be contiguous of the downtown area.
   (B)   Principal uses. Any use permitted in the O-P (Office-Professional), D
(Neighborhood Service), D-1 (Limited Service) or E (General Business) Districts
subject to regulations of District E-1.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Paved automobile parking lots incidental to the principal use;
      (2)   Other uses which are subordinate to and incidental to the principal
uses; and
      (3)   Signs advertising services provided on the same premises.
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
 
Maximum height                                            75 feet
Maximum lot coverage by structures, driveways and parking 100%
Maximum lot coverage by structures                        100%
Minimum distance between detached structures              None
Minimum front yard                                        None
Minimum lot area                                          None
Minimum lot depth                                         None
Minimum lot width                                         None
Minimum rear yard                                         None
   If adjacent to any district zoned for residential us10 feet
Minimum side yard                                         None
   If adjacent to any district zoned for residential us10 feet
   If adjacent to street                               None
 
   (E)   Building regulations. Each exterior facade elevation for all floors
shall consist of a minimum of 80% brick, stone or masonry exclusive of doors,
windows and window walls unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board
(reference §
160.087 of this chapter).
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-32)  (Ord. 06-42, passed 12-6-2006)
§ 160.037  DISTRICT E-2, FREEWAY COMMERCIAL.
   (A)   Purpose. The E-2 District is intended to create an appropriately
landscaped, higher intensity use corridor, composed primarily of office,
retail, hotels, motels, restaurants and similar commercial services, along
existing and proposed freeways and expressways. The aforementioned provisions
for E-2 also requires the allowed commercial uses to demonstrate adherence to
higher development performance standards. The requirement is in order to comply
with the aesthetic criteria established for the gateway entrances of the city.
   (B)   Principal uses.
      (1)   Any use permitted in the O-P (Office-Professional), D (Neighborhood
Service) or D-1 (Limited Service) Districts subject to the regulations of
District E-2;
      (2)   Automobile, motorcycle, light load truck and motor home sales and
leasing, new or used;
      (3)   Hospitals; and
      (4)   Shopping malls.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Paved automobile parking lots incidental to the principal use;
      (2)   Other uses which are subordinate to and incidental to the principal
uses; and
      (3)   Signs advertising services provided on the same premises.
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
 
Maximum height                      No requirement
Maximum lot coverage by structures  65%
Maximum lot coverage by structures, 90%
driveways and parking
Minimum distance between detached   15 feet
structures
Minimum front yard                  40 feet
Minimum lot area                    10,000 square feet
Minimum lot depth                   80 feet
Minimum lot width                   80 feet
                                    25 feet or equal to the height of the
Minimum rear yard                   building facing the rear yard, whichever is
                                    greater
                                    25 feet or equal to the height of the
Minimum side yard                   building facing the side yard, whichever is
                                    greater
 
   (E)   Parking requirements. Off-street parking in this district shall be
provided in accordance with §
160.081 of this chapter.
   (F)   Screening requirements. Screening in accordance with §
160.084 of this chapter is required along side and rear lot lines when these
lot lines are adjacent to any district zoned for residential uses.
   (G)   Landscape requirements. See §
160.088 of this chapter.
   (H)   Building regulations. Each exterior facade elevation for all floors
shall consist of a minimum of 80% brick, stone or masonry exclusive of doors,
windows and window walls unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board
(reference §
160.087 of this chapter).
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-33)  (Ord. 95-26, passed 1-3-1996; Ord. 06-42, passed
12-6-2006; Ord. 16-18, passed 6-1-2016)
§ 160.038  DISTRICT E-3, OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL.
   (A)   Purpose. District E-3 is intended to provide for a variety of
commercial uses which are typically displayed for sale outdoors, excluding new
and used car sales. These uses typically require an extensive amount of land
and, because of the heavy commercial nature, are not compatible with
residential uses.
   (B)   Principal uses.
      (1)   Business services and merchandise displayed or sold in an
unenclosed or incompletely enclosed area;
      (2)   Travel trailer, camper, motor home and boat sales and service,
lease or rental;
      (3)   Plant nursery and greenhouses;
      (4)   Lumber yards;
      (5)   Mobile home sales, storage or repair, lease and rental; and
      (6)   Equipment and vehicle rental.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Paved automobile parking lots incidental to the principal use;
      (2)   Other uses which are subordinate to and incidental to the principal
uses; and
      (3)   Signs advertising services provided on the same premises.
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
 
Maximum height                                            30 feet
Maximum lot coverage by structures, driveways and parking 95%
Maximum lot coverage by structures                        70%
Minimum distance between detached structures              12 feet
Minimum front yard                                        25 feet
Minimum lot area                                          10,000 square feet
Minimum lot depth                                         80 feet
Minimum lot width                                         80 feet
Minimum rear yard                                         10 feet
   If adjacent to any district zoned for residential us25 feet
Minimum side yard                                         10 feet
   If adjacent to any district zoned for residential us25 feet
   If adjacent to street                               25 feet
 
   (E)   Parking requirements. Off-street parking in this district shall be
provided in accordance with §
160.081 of this chapter.
   (F)   Screening requirements. Screening in accordance with §
160.084 of this chapter is required along side and rear lot lines when these
lot lines are adjacent to any district zoned for residential uses.
   (G)   Landscape requirements. See §
160.088 of this chapter.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-34)
§ 160.039  DISTRICT E-4, COMMERCIAL WAREHOUSE.
   (A)   Purpose. District E-4 is intended to provide for the limited
warehousing and storage of goods and materials. This is not an industrial
district; therefore, the land area and buildings are to be limited in size.
   (B)   Principal uses.
      (1)   Miniwarehouses; and
      (2)   Warehousing completely within an enclosed building.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Paved automobile parking lots incidental to the principal use;
      (2)   Other uses which are subordinate to and incidental to the principal
uses;
      (3)   Signs advertising services provided on the same premises;
      (4)   Office space used in conjunction with a principal use; and
      (5)   Retail sales, if incidental to the principal use.
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
 
Maximum height                                            30 feet
Maximum lot area                                          3 acres
Maximum lot coverage by structures                        70%
Maximum lot coverage by structures, driveways and parking 95%
Minimum distance between detached structures              12 feet
Minimum front yard                                        25 feet
Minimum lot area                                          10,000 square feet
Minimum lot depth feet                                    100 feet
Minimum lot width                                         50 feet
Minimum rear yard                                         15 feet
   If adjacent to any district zoned for residential us25 feet
Minimum side yard                                         10 feet
   If adjacent to any district zoned for residential us25 feet
   If adjacent to street                               25 feet
 
   (E)   Parking requirements. Off-street parking in this district shall be
provided in accordance with §
160.081 of this chapter.
   (F)   Screening requirements. Screening in accordance with §
160.084 of this chapter is required along side and rear lot lines when these
lot lines are adjacent to any district zoned for residential uses.
   (G)   Landscape requirements. See §
160.088 of this chapter.
   (H)   Building regulations. Each exterior facade elevation for all floors
shall consist of a minimum of 80% brick, stone or masonry exclusive of doors,
windows and window walls unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board
(reference §
160.087 of this chapter).
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-35)  (Ord. 06-42, passed 12-6-2006)
§ 160.040  DISTRICT LGBD, LIMITED GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. Limited general business district is intended to provide
limited retail and commercial services to serve the overall need of the area.
This is transitional land use district which excludes high volume uses such as
hotels, large grocery stores, restaurants, taverns, night clubs and other uses
that typically will have large numbers of customers that will congregate on the
premises.
   (B)   Principal uses. Convenience stores/gas stations, small retail, any
uses under D (Neighborhood Services), IBD (Industrial Business District) and E-
4 (Commercial Warehouse).
   (C)   Building regulations. Each exterior facade elevation for all floors
shall consist of a minimum of 80% brick, stone or masonry exclusive of doors,
windows and window walls unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board
(reference §
160.087 of this chapter).
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-36)  (Ord. 06-23, passed 6-7-2006; Ord. 06-42, passed
12-6-2006)
§ 160.041  DISTRICT F, LIGHT INDUSTRIAL.
   (A)   Purpose. District F is intended to provide for light manufacturing,
wholesale and warehousing operations in an enclosed area. These uses are not of
the variety to emit excessive noise, vibration, smoke or odor.
   (B)   Principal uses.
      (1)   Any use permitted in the E-4 (Commercial Warehouse) District
subject to the regulations of District F;
      (2)   Any manufacturing, research, wholesale or warehouse operations
which do not involve the primary production or storage of wood, metal or
chemical products from raw materials; provided that, such uses shall be
contained within an enclosed building;
      (3)   Testing laboratories; and
      (4)   Railroad facilities required to serve the district.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Paved automobile parking lots incidental to the principal use;
      (2)   Other uses which are subordinate to and incidental to the principal
uses;
      (3)   Signs advertising services provided on the same premises;
      (4)   Office space used in conjunction with a principal use; and
      (5)   Outdoor storage incidental to the primary use; provided that, such
storage shall be completely encompassed by a solid screening wall or fence of
at least six feet in height; and, provided that, materials shall be stacked no
higher than one foot below the wall or fence.
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
 
Maximum height                                            50 feet
Maximum lot coverage by structures, driveways and parking 95%
Maximum lot coverage by structures                        70%
Minimum distance between detached structures              30 feet
Minimum front yard                                        30 feet
Minimum lot area                                          15,000 square feet
Minimum lot depth                                         150 feet
Minimum lot width                                         80 feet
Minimum rear yard                                         30 feet
Minimum side yard                                         None
   If adjacent to any district zoned for residential us30 feet
   If adjacent to street                               30 feet
 
   (E)   Parking requirements. Off-street parking in this district shall be
provided in accordance with §
160.081 of this chapter.
   (F)   Screening requirements. Screening in accordance with §
160.084 of this chapter is required along side and rear lot lines when these
lot lines are adjacent to any district zoned for residential uses.
   (G)   Landscape requirements. See §
160.088 of this chapter.
   (H)   Building regulations. Each exterior facade elevation for all floors
shall consist of a minimum of 80% brick, stone or masonry, exclusive of doors,
windows and window walls, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board
(reference §
160.087 of this chapter).
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-38)  (Ord. 08-43, passed 12-3-2008)
§ 160.042  DISTRICT F-1, OUTDOOR INDUSTRIAL.
   (A)   Purpose. District F-1 is intended to provide for light industrial uses
which are predominately operated outdoors. Because of the potential visual and
noise impacts of the uses permitted in this district, additional buffering may
be required for protection of adjacent areas.
   (B)   Principal uses.
      (1)   Any use permitted in the F (Light Industrial) District subject to
the regulations of District F-1;
      (2)   Motor freight terminals;
      (3)   Trucking terminals;
      (4)   Railway freight terminals;
      (5)   Outdoor storage of sand, gravel, rock or earth;
      (6)   Outdoor storage of industrial equipment or supplies; and
      (7)   Sales, rental and storage of heavy load vehicles, tractor trailers,
cranes, bulldozers or similar equipment.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Paved automobile parking lots incidental to the principal use;
      (2)   Other uses which are subordinate to and incidental to the principal
uses;
      (3)   Signs advertising services provided on the same premises; and
      (4)   Office space used in conjunction with a principal use.
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
 
Maximum height                                            50 feet
Maximum lot coverage by structures, driveways and parking 95%
Maximum lot coverage by structures                        95%
Minimum distance between detached structures              30 feet
Minimum front yard                                        30 feet
Minimum lot area                                          20,000 square feet
Minimum lot depth                                         150 feet
Minimum lot width                                         80 feet
Minimum rear yard                                         30 feet
Minimum side yard                                         None
   If adjacent to any district zoned for residential us30 feet
   If adjacent to street                               30 feet
 
   (E)   Parking requirements. Off-street parking in this district shall be
provided in accordance with §
160.081 of this chapter.
   (F)   Screening requirements. Screening in accordance with §
160.084 of this chapter is required along side and rear lot lines when these
lot lines are adjacent to any district zoned for residential uses.
   (G)   Landscape requirements. See §
160.088 of this chapter.
   (H)   Building regulations. Each exterior facade elevation for all floors
shall consist of a minimum of 80% brick, stone or masonry, exclusive of doors,
windows and window walls, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board
(reference §
160.087 of this chapter).
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-40)  (Ord. 08-43, passed 12-3-2008)
§ 160.043  DISTRICT P-I, PLANNED INDUSTRIAL.
   (A)   Purpose. District P-I is intended to provide for high performance,
non-hazardous industries with properly proportioned and landscaped open spaces,
controlled design of plant exteriors and screening of loading and storage
facilities. A minimum of 15% of the area shall be landscaped.
   (B)   Principal uses.
      (1)   Research and development facilities and laboratories;
      (2)   Instrument and component manufacturing facilities;
      (3)   Apparel manufacturing facilities;
      (4)   Transportation component manufacturing facilities;
      (5)   Printing and allied products facilities;
      (6)   Electrical machine manufacturing facilities;
      (7)   Offices equipment and supplies manufacturing facilities;
      (8)   Medical and pharmaceutical supplies manufacturing;
      (9)   Offices; and
      (10)   Warehousing within a totally enclosed facility.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Paved automobile parking lots incidental to the principal use;
      (2)   Other uses which are subordinate to and incidental to the principal
uses; and
      (3)   Signs advertising services provided on the same premises.
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
 
Maximum height                      55 feet
Maximum lot coverage by structures  65%
Maximum lot coverage by structures, 85%
driveways and parking
Minimum distance between detached   30 feet
structures
Minimum front yard                  40 feet
Minimum lot area                    20,000 square feet
Minimum lot depth                   150 feet
Minimum lot width                   80 feet
                                    25 feet or equal to the height of the
Minimum rear yard                   building facing the rear yard, whichever is
                                    greater
                                    25 feet or equal to the height of the
Minimum side yard                   building facing the side yard, whichever is
                                    greater
 
   (E)   Parking requirements. Off-street parking in this district shall be
provided in accordance with §
160.081 of this chapter.
   (F)   Screening requirements. Screening in accordance with §
160.084 of this chapter is required along side and rear lot lines when these
lot lines are adjacent to any district zoned for residential uses.
   (G)   Landscape requirements. See §
160.088 of this chapter.
   (H)   Building regulations. Each exterior facade elevation for all floors
shall consist of a minimum of 80% brick, stone or masonry exclusive of doors,
windows and window walls unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board
(reference §
160.087 of this chapter).
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-41)  (Ord. 06-42, passed 12-6-2006)
§ 160.044  DISTRICT G, WATERFRONT.
   (A)   Purpose. District G is intended to accommodate limited heavy
commercial and industrial uses which utilize port and shore areas.
Consideration should be given to the potential impact of these uses on adjacent
areas.
   (B)   Principal uses.
      (1)   Docks;
      (2)   Loading and unloading facilities (rail and water);
      (3)   Marine ways;
      (4)   Piers;
      (5)   Slips;
      (6)   Warehouses; and
      (7)   Wharves.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Paved automobile parking lots incidental to the principal uses;
      (2)   Other uses which are subordinate to and incidental to the principal
use;
      (3)   Signs advertising services provided on the same premises; and
      (4)   Office space used in conjunction with a principal use.
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
 
Maximum height                                            75 feet
Maximum lot coverage by structures, driveways and parking 95%
Maximum lot coverage by structures                        60%
Minimum distance between detached structures              15 feet
Minimum front yard                                        25 feet
Minimum lot area                                          None
Minimum lot depth                                         None
Minimum lot width                                         None
Minimum rear yard                                         None
   If adjacent to any district zoned for residential us25 feet
Minimum side yard                                         None
   If adjacent to any district zoned for residential us25 feet
   If adjacent to street                               25 feet
 
   (E)   Parking requirements. Off-street parking in this district shall be
provided in accordance with §
160.081 of this chapter.
   (F)   Screening requirements. Screening in accordance with §
160.084 of this chapter is required along side and rear lot lines when these
lot lines are adjacent to any district zoned for residential uses.
   (G)   Landscape requirements. See §
160.088 of this chapter.
   (H)   Special conditions. All development shall also be subject to any other
city, state or federal coastal regulations.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-42)
§ 160.045  DISTRICT G-2, RECREATIONAL WATERFRONT.
   (A)   Purpose. District G-2 is intended to provide for recreational and
tourism type uses which utilize the city’s waterfront and the dike. This
district is not designed to accommodate industrial uses.
   (B)   Principal uses.
      (1)   Piers;
      (2)   Slips;
      (3)   Recreational boat rental and storage;
      (4)   Restaurants;
      (5)   Marinas;
      (6)   Retail sales, totally within an enclosed building; and
      (7)   Yachts.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Paved automobile parking lots incidental to the principal use;
      (2)   Other uses which are subordinate to and incidental to the principal
uses;
      (3)   Signs advertising services provided on the same premises;
      (4)   Office space used in conjunction with a principal use; and
      (5)   Gasoline sales as an accessory to a principal use.
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
 
Maximum height                                            30 feet
Maximum lot coverage by structures, driveways and parking 90%
Maximum lot coverage by structures                        50%
Minimum distance between detached structures              15 feet
Minimum front yard                                        25 feet
Minimum lot area                                          10,000 square feet
Minimum lot depth                                         80 feet
Minimum lot width                                         80 feet
Minimum rear yard                                         None
   If adjacent to any district zoned for residential us25 feet
Minimum side yard                                         None
   If adjacent to any district zoned for residential us25 feet
   If adjacent to street                               25 feet
 
   (E)   Parking requirements. Off-street parking in this district shall be
provided in accordance with §
160.081 of this chapter.
   (F)   Screening requirements. Screening in accordance with §
160.084 of this chapter is required along side and rear lot lines when these
lot lines are adjacent to any district zoned for residential uses.
   (G)   Landscape requirements. See §
160.088 of this chapter.
   (H)   Special conditions. All development shall also be subject to any other
city, state or federal coastal regulations.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-43)  (Ord. 16-18, passed 6-1-2016)
§ 160.046  DISTRICT IBD, INDUSTRIAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. IBD is located adjacent and north of the heavy industrial
complex south of FM 1765. It is intended to promote high quality light
industrial development that provides services dependent and complimentary to
the adjacent heavy industrial complex. It is recognized that certain special
standards relative to land use, setbacks, signage and the like are appropriate
for the area.
   (B)   Principal uses. Equipment storage and rental, outdoor storage and lay
down yards, fabrication shops, warehousing, material and supply sales, office
and parking.
   (C)   Accessory uses. Impervious cover not to exceed 50% which will be
landscaped in accordance with §
160.088 of this chapter.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-44)  (Ord. 06-24, passed 6-7-2006)
§ 160.047  DISTRICT CIMU, COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL/MIXED USE FOR THE DICKINSON
BAYOU TRANSITION AREA.
   (A)   Principal uses allowed are: D, O-P, E, E-4, F, F-1, PI, G, G-2.
(Residential housing when and where appropriate may be allowed. Must be
reviewed on a case-by-case basis and obtain Planning Board, zoning and City
Commission approval.)
   (B)   Impervious cover not to exceed 85% with the remaining area to be
landscaped in accordance with §
160.088 of this chapter.
   (C)   Area and height regulations:
 
Maximum height                                                                75 feet
   If proposed use is adjacent to property with a residential dwelling the 35 feet
maximum height of structure
Maximum lot coverage by structures                                            60%
Maximum lot covers by structures, driveways and parking                       85%
Minimum distance between detached structures                                  30 feet
Minimum front yard                                                            40 feet
Minimum lot area                                                              10,000
                                                                              square feet
Minimum lot depth                                                             150 feet
Minimum lot width                                                             80 feet
                                                                              40 feet if
Minimum rear yard                                                             adjacent to
                                                                              residential
                                                                              property
Minimum side yard                                                             10 feet
   If adjacent to any district zoned for residential use                   70 feet
   If adjacent to street                                                   50 feet
 
   (E)   Fences, walls, berms and/or heavy landscape and foliage may be used
for screening if property adjacent or in near proximity to existing residents.
The design and amount of screening will be determined based on proposed
activity, distance to residents and density of residents.
   (F)   Landscape requirements at 15% of area to be developed.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-45)  (Ord. 08-05, passed 1-16-2008)
§ 160.048  DISTRICT H, HEAVY INDUSTRIAL.
   (A)   Purpose. District H is intended to provide for the development of
intensive industrial and manufacturing activities. The noise, smoke, odor,
vibration and/or traffic typically generated by these uses require adequate
buffering from adjacent areas with particular emphasis on nearby residential
areas. The permitted uses are considered to be the least compatible with other
uses within the community.
   (B)   Principal uses.
      (1)   Any use permitted in the F (Light Industrial), F-1 (Outdoor
Industrial) and G (Waterfront) Districts, subject to the regulations of
District H;
      (2)   The manufacturing, processing, distributing and/or storage of any
material or product from processed or raw materials including, but not limited
to, chemicals, petrochemicals or mineral extracts;
      (3)   Shipyards;
      (4)   Railroad and railway facilities; and
      (5)   Any other manufacturing, industrial or storage use not now or
hereafter prohibited by this chapter or any other ordinance of the city.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Paved automobile parking lots incidental to the principal use;
      (2)   Other uses which are subordinate to and incidental to the principal
use;
      (3)   Signs advertising services provided on the same premises;
      (4)   Office space used in conjunction with a principal use; and
      (5)   Laboratories and shops incidental to the principal use.
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
 
Maximum height                                            None
   If adjacent to any district zoned for residential us75 feet
Maximum lot coverage by structures, driveways and parking 95%
Maximum lot coverage by structures                        70%
Minimum distance between detached structures              20 feet
Minimum front yard                                        50 feet
Minimum lot area                                          20,000 square feet
Minimum lot depth                                         100 feet
Minimum lot width                                         100 feet
Minimum rear yard                                         None
   If adjacent to any district zoned for residential us50 feet
Minimum side yard                                         None
   If adjacent to any district zoned for residential us50 feet
   If adjacent to street                               50 feet
 
   (E)   Parking requirements. Off-street parking in this district shall be
provided in accordance with §
160.081 of this chapter.
   (F)   Screening requirements. Screening in accordance with §
160.084 of this chapter is required along side and rear lot lines when these
lot lines are adjacent to any district zoned for residential uses.
   (G)   Landscape requirements. See §
160.088 of this chapter.
   (H)   Special conditions. All development shall also be subject to any other
city, state or federal regulations.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-46)
§ 160.049  DISTRICT O, OPEN SPACE.
   (A)   Purpose. District O is intended to provide for land within the
corporate limits of the city which are not subdivided and/or are relatively
undeveloped. This district is designed to promote orderly, timely, economical
growth and to recognize current conditions. It is anticipated that all O
districts will be rezoned to other zoning classifications as the city proceeds
toward full development.
   (B)   Principal uses.
      (1)   Single-family dwellings;
      (2)   Barns, stables, for keeping private stock;
      (3)   Golf courses and country clubs (publicly or privately owned);
      (4)   Farms and crop production;
      (5)   Truck gardens;
      (6)   Greenhouses, excluding sales;
      (7)   Pasturage;
      (8)   Private riding academy;
      (9)   Governmental buildings and uses;
      (10)   Public utility uses; and
      (11)   Public parks and recreation areas.
   (C)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Private garages;
      (2)   Private swimming pools;
      (3)   Home occupation; and
      (4)   Other uses which are subordinate to and incidental to the principal
use.
   (D)   Area and height regulations.
 
Maximum height                                    2.5 stories or 35 feet
Maximum height of accessory structure             2 stories or 25 feet
Maximum lot coverage by structures, driveways and 40%
parking
Maximum lot coverage by structures                20%
Minimum distance between detached structures      10 feet
Minimum front yard                                50 feet
Minimum lot area                                  2 acres
Minimum lot depth                                 100 feet
Minimum lot width                                 80 feet
Minimum rear yard                                 20 feet
Minimum side yard                                 15 feet
   If adjacent to street                       25 feet
 
   (E)   Parking requirements. Off-street parking in this district shall be
provided in accordance with §
160.081 of this chapter.
   (F)   Screening requirements. Screening in accordance with §
160.084 of this chapter is required along side and rear lot lines when these
lot lines are adjacent to any district zoned for residential uses.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-47)
§ 160.050  DISTRICT I (PUD), PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The (PD) Planned Development District is intended to provide for
combining and mixing uses into integral land use units such as industrial
parks; industrial, office and commercial centers; residential developments with
multiple or mixed housing types; or any appropriate combination of uses which
may be planned, developed or operated as integral land use units, whether by a
single owner or a combination of owners.
      (2)   After a public hearing has been convened and proper notice to all
affected property owners has been made in accordance with provisions of this
chapter, and after a recommendation by the Planning Board and Zoning Commission
has been submitted, the City Commission may authorize the creation of a (PD)
Planned Development District on:
         (a)   Residential developments on tracts of 20 acres or more;
         (b)   Mixed use developments on tracts of 20 acres or more; or
         (c)   Developments on tracts of less than 20 acres when the Planning
Board, Zoning Commission and City Commission have determined that the area to
be rezoned cannot be rezoned to any other zoning district without creating the
potential of adversely affecting adjacent properties.
   (B)   General provisions.
      (1)   Permitted uses. The uses to be permitted in any specific (PD)
Planned Development District shall be enumerated in the ordinance that creates
such district. Any proposed amendment to the uses permitted within a specific
(PD) Planned Development District shall be submitted and processed in
accordance with division (E) below.
      (2)   Procedure.
         (a)   The steps necessary to request creation of a (PD) Planned
Development District shall be as follows:
            1.   Preapplication conference between the applicant and the
Director of Transportation and Planning or his or her designee for presentation
and discussion of a preliminary drawing (reference division (C) below); and
            2.   Submission of the formal application form for a change of
zoning with all required material.
         (b)   Every (PD) Planned Development District approved under the
provisions of this chapter shall be considered an amendment to this chapter and
applicable only to the property involved.
         (c)   In carrying out the development of a (PD) Planned Development
District, the development conditions and the development schedule shall be
complied with. Such conditions as are specified for the development of a (PD)
Planned Development District shall not be construed as conditions precedent to
the approval of the zoning amendment, but shall be construed as conditions
precedent to the granting of a certificate of occupancy by the city.
   (C)   Preapplication requirements.
      (1)   Preapplication conference.
         (a)   An applicant for a Planned Development District (PD) shall
schedule a preapplication conference with the Director of Transportation and
Planning or his or her designated representative prior to the formal submission
of the application materials. At the preapplication conference, the applicant
shall provide a preliminary drawing that includes, but is not limited to, the
following:
            1.   Delineation of site boundaries;
            2.   General site layout indicating relationship of proposed land
uses, parking and street layout(s);
            3.   Proposed residential development densities;
            4.   Approximate gross square footage of non-residential uses where
applicable;
            5.   Projected building heights;
            6.   General topographic conditions;
            7.   Significant environmental features, including floodplains and
watercourses; and
            8.   Delineation of approximate acreage for each land use
specified.
         (b)   Based on the information provided by the applicant, the Director
of Transportation and Planning or his or her designee shall provide initial
comments concerning the merits of the proposed development and provide any
other information necessary to aid the applicant in the preparation of the
formal application.
      (2)   Application submission. Any person, group of persons or corporation
having a proprietary interest in any property may file an application for a
(PD) Planned Development District. Such application shall be submitted and
processed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Formal public hearing.
         (a)   The Planning Board and Zoning Commission shall make their
recommendations to the City Commission in accordance with the standard
procedures for a change of zoning in the city. The Planning Board and Zoning
Commission may recommend, and the City Commission may approve the request for a
Planned Development District (PD) as submitted or make any modifications
thereto as may be appropriate.
         (b)   In approving the ordinance establishing the Planned Development
District (PD), the City Commission shall, after recommendation of the Planning
Board and Zoning Commission, specify such height, floor area, density, site
coverage, setback, landscaping, off-street parking and all other standards as
are appropriate for the development which are considered necessary to protect
the health, safety and general welfare, and to create a reasonable transition,
to and protection from, property adjacent to the Planned Development District
(PD).
   (D)   Development schedule.
      (1)   If the applicant desires, or if the Planning Board, Zoning
Commission or City Commission requires, a development schedule shall be
submitted indicating the approximate date on which construction is expected to
begin and the rate of anticipated development to completion. The development
schedule shall, if adopted and approved by the City Commission, become part of
the ordinance creating such Planned Development District (PD), and shall be
adhered to by the owner, developer and successors in the interest.
      (2)   The Planning Board and Zoning Commission or the City Commission
may, if in their opinion the owner or owners of the property are failing or
have failed to meet the approved schedule, initiate proceedings to amend the
ordinance of the Planned Development (PD) District, or remove all or part of
the Planned Development (PD) District from the Official Zoning Map and place
the area involved in another appropriate zoning district. Such action shall
occur in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Upon the
recommendation of the Planning Board and Zoning Commission, and for good cause
shown by the owner or developer, the City Commission may extend the development
schedule or adopt such new development schedule as may be indicated by the
facts and conditions of the case.
   (E)   Amendment to Planned Development (PD) District.
      (1)   Any major amendment, supplement, deletion or modification to the
Planned Development (PD) District may be granted by the City Commission upon
application by any person, group or persons or corporation having a proprietary
interest therein. Any application for such amendment, supplement, deletion or
modification shall contain the information specified in this chapter and shall
be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in division (C) above.
The Director Transportation and Planning, Mayor or their designated
representatives may authorize minor modifications that:
         (a)   Do not alter the basic relationship of the proposed development
to adjacent property;
         (b)   Do not alter the uses permitted;
         (c)   Do not increase the maximum density, floor area, height or site
coverage;
         (d)   Do not decrease the amount of off-street parking; and
         (e)   Do not reduce the minimum yards or setbacks.
      (2)   An applicant may appeal the decision of the Director of
Transportation and Planning, Mayor or their designated representative to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment for review and decision as to whether a formal
amendment to the Planned Development (PD) District shall be required.
   (F)   Coordination with subdivision ordinance.
      (1)   It is the intent of this section that subdivision review under the
subdivision regulations of the city be carried out simultaneously with the
review of a Planned Development (PD) District under the provisions of this
chapter.
      (2)   Both this chapter and
Ch. 159 of this chapter contain regulations that apply to such matters in the
design of a Planned Development (PD) District such as streets, utilities and
open spaces. In any Planned Development (PD) District for which the provisions
of the two ordinances are in conflict, the Director of Transportation and
Planning shall submit a recommendation to the Planning Board and Zoning
Commission, which shall determine which standard shall prevail.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-48)  (Ord. 01-07, passed 3-21-2001)
§ 160.051  DISTRICT S-P, SITE PLAN.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   District S-P is intended to be utilized for the following purposes:
         (a)   Encourage a procedure which can relate the type, design and
layout of a proposed development to a particular site;
         (b)   Develop uses on difficult size and shape lots;
         (c)   Promote new and innovative development concepts;
         (d)   Provide compatibility by limiting uses when necessary to protect
adjacent areas;
         (e)   Provide for the mixing of various land uses where appropriate;
         (f)   Provide for the development of specific uses which are not
normally found in zoning districts;
         (g)   Provide limited flexibility from standard ordinance requirements
as long as those deviations continue to meet the intent of the chapter; and
         (h)   Provide additional information and regulatory controls
concerning the proposed use or uses for the protection of the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the community.
      (2)   Even though the district permits deviations from standard zoning
district requirements, it is not the intent, nor the purpose, of the S-
P District to be utilized to obtain these deviations for the sole benefit of
the development or applicant.
   (B)   Principal uses. Any use not prohibited by this chapter or any other
ordinances may be authorized in the S-P District.
   (C)   Uses.
      (1)   Uses; reasons for classification. The following uses are included
under District S-P due to the following reasons:
         (a)   General. This type of use is allowed in all districts zoned for
residential uses such as A, A-1, A-2, B, B-1, C, C-1; 2) The rational and nexus
is to allow the city a means in which to continue to fulfill its obligation in
promoting and protecting the health, safety and general welfare of all citizens
in the city including those that will reside in this type of facility. This is
a departure from the conventional application of this chapter for this
district. This departure is made in order to facilitate a notification process
which will still allow the legally required flexibility for this type of
development and at the same time have a mechanism in place in order to monitor
and inventory all personal care facilities within the city.
            1.   Personal care facilities.PERSONAL CARE FACILITIES shall mean a
shared residential living arrangement which provides a family-type environment
for up to and including four handicapped persons, supervised by one or more
primary care givers, subject to compliance with the permit conditions listed in
this division (C)(1)(a):
               a.   As used in this section, with respect to a person, HANDICAP
means:
                  i.   A physical or mental impairment which substantially
limits one or more of such person’s major life activities, as defined in
division (C)(1)(a)1.b. below;
                  ii.   A record of having such an impairment; or
                  iii.   Being regarded as having such an impairment, but such
term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled
substance as defined by Tex. Health and Safety Code Ch. 481.
               b.   As used in this section, PHYSICAL OR MENTAL IMPAIRMENT
includes:
                  i.   Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic
disfigurement or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body
systems: neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory,
including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genito-
urinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or
                  ii.   Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental
retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific
learning disabilities. The term PHYSICAL OR MENTAL IMPAIRMENT includes, but is
not limited to, such diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech and
hearing impairments, pre-senile dementia, cerebral palsy, autism, epilepsy,
muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, mental
retardation, emotional illness, drug addiction (other than addiction caused by
current illegal use of a controlled substance) and alcoholism.
               c.   For purposes of this exception, MAJOR LIFE ACTIVITIES
includes functions such as caring for one’s self, performing manual tasks,
walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working.
            2.   Permits.
               a.   No personal care facility as defined in division (C)(1)
(a)1. above shall hereafter operate until a permit has been issued by the
Director of Planning of the city, or his or her designee, stating that the
facility complies with the provisions of this chapter.
               b.   The applicant shall provide a site plan which clearly shows
compliance with the following criteria:
                  i.   Any single-family dwelling unit which is proposed to be
utilized for shared group housing for the handicapped shall provide, as a
minimum, the following square footage in each bedroom.
                     A.   To house one handicapped person per bedroom, the
dwelling unit must provide 100 square feet of space per bedroom utilized for
this purpose.
                     B.   To house two handicapped persons per bedroom, the
dwelling unit must provide 120 square feet of space per bedroom utilized for
this purpose.
                  ii.   Any single-family dwelling unit which is proposed to be
utilized for a personal-care facility for handicapped persons shall provide for
a separate bedroom for the care provider or providers.
                  iii.   Parking for the residents of a personal care facility
shall not exceed the number of bedrooms in the facility. At least one paved
parking space shall be provided on the premises of the facility for each
bedroom in the facility.
               c.   An inspection shall be conducted by the City Inspection
Department, using as its criteria the appropriate portions of the requirements
of the Minimum Licensing Standards for Facilities Serving Persons with Mental
Retardation and Related Conditions, or its most current amendment as
established by the State Department of Health Bureau of Long-Term Care, or the
Minimum Licensing Standards for Personal Care Facilities as established and
amended under Tex. Health and Safety Code §§ 247.001 et seq. The Inspection
Department shall prepare a report describing the property and any remedial
improvements which must be completed in order for the property to meet the
minimum standards. The report shall be forwarded to the applicant and to the
Director of Planning or his or her designee, and no permit shall be issued
until the proposed home has met the minimum standards.
               d.   A $50 permit fee shall be assessed to defray administrative
and inspection costs for each permit issued. This fee may be adjusted by the
City Commission.
               e.   The facility shall comply with all applicable Fire and
Building Codes of the city and shall comply with the provisions of the Federal
Americans with Disabilities Act.
               f.   No other group living arrangements shall be located within
a radius of 600 feet of the home for which the permit is requested. Such
measurements shall be measured from property line to property line. Other group
living arrangements shall include, but not be limited to, homes for the
mentally retarded, personal care facilities, adult foster care homes and group
housing for handicapped persons. In making the determination that no home
exists within 600 feet, the Director of Planning shall consider information
provided by the applicant, information contained in the records of the city,
and information obtained by physical inspection of the premises, if any.
               g.   The holder of the permit shall be in charge of and
responsible for the operation of the dwelling unit for shared group housing.
               h.   Permit shall be renewed annually, so long as the facility
continues to comply with the standards described in this division (C)(1)(a)2..
Permits are non-transferred.
               i.   City inspection personnel shall have the right to conduct
inspections to ensure continued compliance with standards at any time; and, in
the event a home is found to be in violation of the standards, the Inspector
shall forward to the Director of Planning a report describing the violations
and that the Director of Planning or his or her designee may withdraw the
permit. Following withdrawal of the permit and issuance of a vacate order, the
permit holder shall have the right to appeal the decision of the Director of
Planning or his or her designee to the zoning Board of Adjustment within ten
days.
               j.   The permit shall be prominently displayed in the facility
at all times. Permit shall include the following statement:
“The city does not license facilities as to quality of care. This structure has
been inspected and has met the minimum requirements for personal care
facilities specified in §
160.052 of the code of ordinances for the city.”
               k.   Any permit issued under this section shall become void and
of no further effect in the event the use of the premises is discontinued for a
period of one year, or if the property is restored to use as a single-family
residence.
               l.   Nothing in this section shall be construed as attempting to
regulate or affect the right of handicapped individuals to purchase their own
housing for single-family residences or to affect the right of individuals to
care for handicapped family members. Nothing in this section shall be construed
as attempting to regulate homes established pursuant to Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat.
Art. 1011(n).
            3.   Five or more persons. Personal-care-facilities persons in a
shared residential living arrangement which provides a family-type environment
for five or more handicapped persons, supervised by one or more primary care
givers, as further defined in division (A)(1)(a)1. above, are subject to
compliance with the permit conditions listed in divisions (A)(1)(a)1. and (A)
(1)(a)2. above. The maximum number of handicapped individuals per dwelling
shall be six.
         (b)   Uses restricted to district S-P. The following uses, because of
the character or potential impact on the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the city, are hereafter required to be located in District
S-P:
            1.   Aviation fields and airports;
            2.   Bed and breakfast establishments. The site plan for bed and
breakfast shall comply with the following provisions of this division (C)(1)
(b).
                  a.   Purpose and intent. The establishment of bed and
breakfast facilities has been found to not only provide an alternative type of
lodging for visitors to the city, but the income from such a facility provides
incentives for maintaining older homes. This chapter is formulated and adopted
on the basis of the public policy that supports the city as a tourist
destination of persons interested in the architectural and historical
significance of the city’s older residential structures. This chapter focuses
on the need to provide an incentive for owners of the city’s older/historical
homes to continue occupancy and maintenance of historical homes. Therefore, the
chapter is intended to enable residential dwellings built more than 50 years
old and/or of historical significance to conduct bed and breakfast operations
providing they meet certain restrictions. The chapter emphasizes protection to
neighborhoods with the provisions that prohibit nuisance and detrimental change
in the residential character of any site proposed for a bed and breakfast
operation. Owners of bed and breakfast facilities will be allowed to serve
meals to paying overnight guests, attenders to social functions and tours and
the like. All state and County Health District requirements shall be met. An
applicant for bed and breakfast must own and reside at the site.
               b.   Criteria for evaluation. The location, size, design and
operating characteristics of the proposed bed and breakfast facility will be
compatible with and will not adversely affect or be materially detrimental to
adjacent uses, residents, buildings, structures or natural resources, with
consideration given to:
                  i.   Harmony in scale, bulk, coverage and density;
                  ii.   The availability of public facilities, services and
utilities;
                  iii.   The harmful effect, if any, upon desirable
neighborhood character;
                  iv.   The generation of traffic and the capacity and physical
character of surrounding streets;
                  v.   Provide adequate landscaping and screening if determined
applicable by the staff and Planning Board;
                  vi.   The suitability of the site for the type and intensity
of use or development which is proposed;
                  vii.   Each facility must comply with Ch. 11, § 11-5,
“Lodging or Rooming Houses” NFPA 101 Life Safety Code;
                  viii.   The Fire Marshal or designee shall inspect all bed
and breakfast facilities. The facility must successfully pass the inspection
and inspections will be made on an annual basis;
                  ix.   The Building Inspector shall inspect the site for
compliance to applicable Building Codes;
                  x.   The Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation shall
review the plans for conformance to Elimination of Architectural Barriers Act,
Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Art. 9102; and
                  xi.   All site plan bed and breakfast requests shall be
reviewed by the Planning Board for appropriateness and specific development
requirements.
            3.   Cemeteries, mausoleums and crematories;
            4.   Child care institutions;
            5.   Gun clubs, skeet shoots and target ranges;
            6.   Halfway houses;
            7.   Prisons;
            8.   Radio, television and microwave towers.
               a.   Intent. It is the intent that the zoning ordinance
provisions for site plan (radio, television, and microwave towers) provide
flexibility and fairness for the development of such a facility and maintain
adequate regulatory controls needed for site appropriateness, harmony and
compatibility with regards to land use; and to ensure that the development is
built with adherence to all development provisions, standards and codes
established by the city.
               b.   Exemptions from site zoning. The following tower uses are
exempt from site plan zoning:
                  i.   Any tower less than 60 feet in height in non-residential
zoned property;
                  ii.   Any tower less than 75 feet in height and an accessory
to a commercial or industrial facility;
                  iii.   Any tower less than 300 feet in height and an
accessory to a heavy industrial facility;
                  iv.   Any tower attached to and extending less than 35 feet
above an existing structure (e.g., electrical distribution tower, elevated
water tanks, building);
                  v.   Any tower less than 50 feet in height in residential
zoned property if used only for amateur purposes and not for business or
profit; and
                  vi.   A government owned tower/antenna or communication
structure used primarily for public safety purposes will be exempt from the
zoning and other general requirements.
               c.   Permit requirements. All towers whether site plan zoned or
exempted must receive permit approval meeting all applicable codes and
requirements and meeting the following guidelines:
                  i.   Setback requirements.
                     A.   The distance from the base of the tower to the
nearest entrance corridor (being defined as I-45, FM 1764, Highway 146, Highway
3, FM 1765 and 25th Avenue North) shall be two times the height of the tower
for towers less than 100 feet high and three times the height for towers 100
feet high up to 200 feet high and four times the height for towers over 200
feet high.
                     B.   The distance from the base of the tower to the
nearest residential structure, platted residential subdivision lot or paved
public road shall be:
                        (1)   Guyed towers: minimum 2.0 times the height of the
tower; and
                        (2)   Non-guyed towers minimum: 1.20 times the height
of the tower.
                     C.   The distance from the base of the tower to the
closest adjacent* property line shall be: (*Exception: If a tower owner leases
a parcel from a larger tract of land, the property line of the larger tract
shall prevail. A recorded plat of the tract shall indicate the required
building setback from the tower.)
                        (1)   Guyed towers: minimum 1.50 times the height of
the tower; and
                        (2)   Non-guyed towers: minimum 1.0 times the height of
the tower.
                  ii.   Height of structures. If a tower is attached on an
existing structure or building, primary purpose of which is not for tower
support, said tower shall not extend more than 35 feet above the attachment
point or one times the height of structure whichever is less.
                  iii.   Security fence.
                     A.   The base of a tower and guy wire anchor locations
must be completely enclosed by a fence, wall or barrier which limits climbing
access through or over to such towers and any supporting systems, lines, wires,
buildings or other structures. If the security fence is within 300 feet of
existing developed residential properties or public road then with a minimum
height of eight feet. (Existing tower site having security fences at least six
feet in height will not be required to meet the eight-foot requirement.)
                     B.   Gates and doors opening directly into any such land
or premises enclosed by a fence, wall or barrier, as required by this section,
shall be equipped with a lock to keep and capable of keeping such doors or
gates securely closed and locked at all times.
                     C.   The requirements of this section do not apply to any
tower located on a building that is not designed or built primarily to support
the tower; provided that, the general public has no physical access to the
tower.
                  iv.   Screening fence. The security fence shall be designed
to provide screening from view of the public on the side(s) that is within 300
feet of existing residential or commercial development or entrance corridor
utilizing vinyl inserts and creating a substantially opaque type fence designed
and built to provide privacy.
                  v.   Landscaping. A tower site located within 300 feet of
existing developed residential or commercial properties shall have maintained
landscaping in a healthy, growing condition at all times and in compliance with
all applicable ordinances, deed restrictions and regulations. At a minimum, a
tower site shall have one large shrub capable of reaching a minimum height of
four feet for each eight linear feet of required screening fence and one street
tree for each 50 linear feet of required screening fence; provided that, not
less than one street tree and three large shrubs are provided for each tower
site.
               d.   Existing towers. All existing towers shall be addressed as
non-conforming uses in accordance with §
160.089 of this chapter, non-conforming uses, of this chapter. Furthermore, all
existing towers shall comply with the security fence, screening fence and
landscaping requirements within 12 months of the final passage of this chapter.
            9.   Refuse dumps;
            10.   Sexually oriented business as defined and as regulated under
separate ordinance;
            11.   RV parks. The use of any parcel for an RV park and any
modifications to an existing RV park shall comply with the following standards
and requirements.
               a.   RV parks shall only be allowed after obtaining site plan
zoning approval.
               b.   i.   Type I RV park (destination parks) are designed and
located for RVers who are planning to stay awhile and recreate. These parks
will be located in the area of the city denoted on the land use plan as
“Waterfront Conservation and Recreation”. These parks will be located generally
along or closely adjacent to the bay or waterways remote to major highways.
These destination parks will be designed with high-end criteria and upscale
amenities.
                  ii.   Type II RV park (accommodation/overnight parks) are
designed and located for RVers who are “en route” travelers and require only
one or two night stay overs, or traveling workers and contractors moving from
one city to another for work assignments. These parks will be located in a
limited area of the city denoted on the land use plan as “light industrial
growth areas” - generally south of E.F. Lowry Expressway between Highway 3 and
Highway 146. These parks will be designed with high end criteria but only
moderate amenities.
               c.   No RV park shall be allowed within the zoning area “gateway
corridor”.
               d.   Criteria:
                  i.   Size:
                     A.   Type I park: ten to 45 acres; and
                     B.   Type II park: five to 15 acres.
                  ii.   Maximum density:
                     A.   Type I park: eight spaces per acre 35-foot minimum
width pad sites; and
                     B.   Type II park: ten spaces per acre 35-foot minimum
width pad sites.
                  iii.   Sanitary sewer and water services:
                     A.   All RV parks are required to have city water and
sewer services.
                     B.   City water will be provided at a water meter and
vault which are complete and ready for automated water meter reading in
accordance with city specifications. The water meter, vault, backflow preventer
and all other necessary appurtenances will be provided at the expense of the RV
park owner/operator. Upon inspection and acceptance by the city, water meter,
vault and related appurtenances become the property of the city. The city will
service and maintain said water meter, vault and appurtenances after acceptance
by city. The RV park owner/operator remains the owner of the backflow preventer
and is responsible for maintaining the backflow preventer including an annual
test of the backflow preventer by a licensed backflow preventer tester. The
results of each annual backflow preventer test must be provided to the City
Utilities Department within 30 days of the test. RV park owns and is
responsible for the water distribution system from the water meter.
                     C.   The RV park potable water distribution system must be
in accordance with applicable city, state and federal engineering, plumbing and
regulatory requirements; including those in effect at the time of construction/
installation and as they may change over the life of the RV park. The RV park
is responsible for construction and maintenance of the potable water
distribution system from the water meter.
                     D.   The RV park fire water system must be separate from
the potable water distribution system. RV park owner/operator is responsible
for construction, maintenance, repair and replacement of the RV park fire water
system. If potable water pressure from the water meter is not adequate to meet
fire water system requirements, the RV park will acquire additional fire water
booster pumps and fire water storage, if necessary. Any such additional
requirements related to the fire water system will be at the expense of the RV
park. The RV park will be responsible for maintaining all such additional
equipment and assets.
                     E.   Only sanitary sewage and gray water are allowed to be
transmitted to the city sewer system from the RV park. No area drain flows,
storm water flows or washdown water will be allowed into the city’s sewer
system from RV parks.
                     F.   If public water and sewer is not available, the city
may consider connection to a city approved water and wastewater system.
                  iv.   Fire protection system: each park shall have an
adequate fire protection system as approved by the City Fire Department.
                  v.   Dry utilities: each space shall have connection to
electricity, phone and cable. All electrical, phone and cable lines shall be
installed underground. Electrical service to each space shall be a minimum of
50 amps.
                  vi.   Minimum setbacks: RVs shall be located at least five
feet from any buffer area, at least ten feet from any private road, at least 20
feet from any service building, service area, recreation area or from another
RV space and at least 25 feet from any boundary of the RV park. Service
buildings, service areas and recreation areas shall be located at least ten
feet from any private road, RV space or grouped bay parking area.
                  vii.   Minimum landscape buffers: a buffer area shall be
provided immediately within all boundaries, all of which shall be loamed,
seeded and planted with grass and at least one row of tall deciduous trees
planted no more than 20 feet apart, and one or more rows of bushy shrubs or
hedge capable of attaining a height of at least five feet within three years.
Plants shall be hardy, appropriate for the use and location, and planted so as
to thrive with normal maintenance. The required buffer area shall be minimum of
25 feet in depth within all other boundaries. No RV may be located within a
buffer area. No building or structure may be erected or placed within a buffer
area, except a sign, fence or wall. No refuse-disposal area shall be located
within a buffer area. No plant materials or land may be deposited or removed
within a buffer area, except as a part of recognized landscaping scheme or
except for emergency access.
                  viii.   Roads:
                     A.   All interior roads, drives and pad sites shall be
privately constructed of concrete pavement.
                     B.   For angled parking.
                        (1)   All two-way roads shall be a minimum of 25 feet
in width.
                        (2)   All one-way roads shall be a minimum of 20 feet
in width.
                        (3)   For straight-in parking add five feet to width of
roads.
                     C.   Concrete roads shall be constructed in accordance
with city subdivision standards (curbs are not required).
                  ix.   Drives and parking pads: drives and parking pads shall
be constructed with a minimum five inches thick, 3,000 psi concrete pavement
reinforced with #4 bars on 18 inches cc. Sub-grade shall be compacted to 95%
SPD. Shape and dimensions shall be in accordance with Exhibit A and B attached.
Each park shall accommodate drive-through and back-in spaces.
                  x.   Drainage: open ditch/swale drainage is allowed within
the park site. Ditches/swales shall be constructed with gentle side slopes and
at least 3% profile grades. Must provide sufficient RCP culverts for all drive
and walkway crossings and outfalls. Interior drainage system shall be designed
to 2CFS per acre run off.
                  xi.   Offsite drainage/utilities: developer shall be
responsible to provide sufficient off-site drainage and utility facilities if
sufficient utilities do not exist.
                  xii.   Off-site road: park shall be accessed via a publicly
maintained paved street at least 28 feet in pavement width of sufficient design
strength to support RV traffic. The developer shall be responsible for
upgrading and/or rebuilding the public road to its point of intersection with
an adequately wide and strong publicly maintained paved road.
                  xiii.   Walkways: a hard surface walkway system shall be
installed from each RV site to each building and amenity site.
               e.   General requirements and rules:
                  i.   Projects may be single-use or developed as part of a
larger resort or residential development.
                  ii.   No RV shall be located anywhere but in an RV space and
only one RV shall be located within any RV space.
                  iii.   The only structures or vehicles which may be placed in
an RV space, other than storage structures provided by the management of the
park, are one RV and two motor vehicles.
                  iv.   No part of any RV park shall be used for the parking or
storage of any heavy equipment or trucks exceeding one-ton capacity.
                  v.   No home occupation or business shall be operated from an
RV park.
                  vi.   No structural addition to any RV, no park model or
manufactured home shall be permitted. (Mobile homes are prohibited from RV
sites).
                  vii.   Each RV space shall have sufficient unobstructed
access to, or frontage on, an RV park road, so as to permit the movement of
RVs.
                  viii.   All refuse containers shall have an animal proof lid
and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Garbage and refuse
shall be disposed of in such a manner to control flies, rodents and odors.
                  ix.   All roads, walkways, grouped bay parking and service
areas shall be provided with lighting adequate to ensure the safety of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic but shall be arranged as far as possible to
reflect away from RV spaces.
                  x.   All entrances and exits from the RV park shall be
forward motion only.
                  xi.   No entrance or exit shall be located closer than 60
feet to the intersection of two streets.
                  xii.   Lot spaces shall be labeled with numbers to augment
identification by 911 operations.
                  xiii.   Signage and outside lighting shall be in accordance
with the city’s sign nuisance ordinance. All signage must be reviewed and
approved by the Building Official.
                  xiv.   All unpaved portions of the property shall be
maintained with established lawn/turf for landscaping approved by the Planning
Board. Existing established trees shall be maintained where possible.
Additional trees will be required in accordance with the RV landscape RV
requirements.
               f.   Required amenities:
                  i.   Type I and II parks:
                     A.   Business office with management staff on duty in the
park 24 hours per day.
                     B.   Laundry room with the capacity of one washer and one
dryer for each 15 spaces. These buildings must be constructed of brick, stone
or split face block on concrete foundations.
                     C.   Restroom/shower facilities. Men and women restroom
facilities must each have one toilet, one sink and one shower for each 15
spaces. All buildings in Type I and Type II parks shall be constructed of
brick, stone or split face block on concrete slab. The interior shall be
finished and provided with air conditioning and heating.
                     D.   Each park shall contain an open space/recreation area
equivalent to 5% of the gross park area.
                  ii.   Type I parks only:
                     A.   Club house/meeting room equivalent to ten square feet
per park space with a minimum of 1,500 square feet; and
                     B.   Activity area in addition to open space recreation
area which provides activities such as swimming, fishing, boating, tennis or
related items.
            12.   Quarries, mines, sand, clay or gravel pits or excavations for
the purpose of removing, screening, crushing, washing or storage of sand, clay,
topsoil, stone, gravel or similar materials; the site plan shall comply with
the provisions of this division (C)(1)(b)12.
               a.   The site plan shall include provisions designed to restore
the usefulness of the excavated area after the excavation is terminated. Such
provisions shall require, insofar as is reasonably possible, that when the
excavation is terminated, the excavated area shall be placed in such condition
that use of adjacent land areas allowed by the zoning ordinance shall not be
destroyed or substantially impaired. A post construction development plan shall
be submitted and filed with the city as part of the site plan zoning
application.
               b.   The total acreage and depth of the excavation pit shall be
approved by the city based on soil conditions, land use factors and other
technical factors. The analysis will focus on the technical appropriateness,
consistent with existing police powers granted by the zoning and planning
enabling acts.
               c.   The excavation shall be enclosed with a fence at least six
feet in height from ground level, of chain link construction or built of other
strong and durable materials with interspaces too small for a human being to
crawl through. The top of said six-foot fence shall be crowned with two strips
of barbed wire. Said fence shall be equipped with no more than two gates of
like materials and height as the fence. When the excavation is unattended, said
gates shall be closed and locked.
               d.   The top bank of the excavated pit, when completed, shall be
a minimum of 60 feet from adjacent property lines.
               e.   The side slope at the finished perimeter of the pit shall
be excavated and shaped to a maximum slope steepness of two and one-half feet
horizontal to one foot vertical. The steepness may be increased if approved
bulkheading is installed.
               f.   To alleviate erosion of the side slopes, the following
elements shall be constructed: adjacent to the top bank shall be constructed an
earthen berm or training levee a minimum of one and one-half feet in height and
six feet in width completely encircling the pit. Behind the levees drainage
swales shall be constructed to divert sheet flow drainage to collection points
where drainage into the pit shall be controlled by culvert pipe and/or concrete
plumes.
               g.   No such operations shall be permitted where the perimeter
of the excavation or the perimeter of the area to be excavated is within 325
feet of any existing dwelling house or residential lot which is a part of a
residential subdivision duly approved by the city.
               h.   The permittee shall take all steps necessary to comply with
the site plan and the provision hereof while the process of excavation is in
progress. Where this is impossible, all provisions of the plan and of this
division (C)(1)(b)12.h. shall be complied with. The restoration of the
excavated area according to said plan and the provisions hereof shall be
adhered to in every case; and if the same is substantially deviated from or
violated, said development shall be considered as a zoning violation.
               i.   A performance bond, letter of credit or escrow account in
an amount determined by the city may be required to guarantee such restoration.
      (13)   Hotels. The use of any parcel for a hotel shall comply with the
following standards and requirements.
         a.   A hotel shall contain restaurant accommodations.
         b.   A hotel shall contain a guest lounge or cocktail area.
         c.   A hotel shall contain a swimming pool with a hot tub area.
         d.   A hotel shall contain a fitness center.
         e.   Guest room may be accessible only from an internal hallway that
is primarily accessible from a central lobby area contained within the hotel.
         f.   A hotel shall contain a minimum of 80 rooms.
   (D)   Elements of the site plan. An application for a S-P District shall be
filed with the City Department of Transportation and Planning for technical
evaluation and processing for recommendation to the Zoning Commission and shall
be accompanied by a site plan showing the following information:
      (1)   The requested specific use or uses;
      (2)   The designation of a basic zoning district which is most closely
comparable to the requested principal use. The district’s permitted accessory
uses, area, and height regulations, screening requirements, landscape
requirements and any other special conditions or requirements shall apply
except as specifically varied and identified on the site plan. Should the site
plan request mixed land uses, these uses and comparable zoning district
designation shall be identified by tracts;
      (3)   Date, scale, north point, property owner and name of person
preparing the site plan;
      (4)   Location of existing boundary lines and dimensions of the tract;
      (5)   Dimensions and size of all proposed buildings, structures and land
improvements;
      (6)   The designation of proposed specific land uses for all building
areas;
      (7)   Clear designation of areas reserved for off-street parking and for
off-street loading; type of surface material to meet minimum standards of
Director of Public Works; the ratio of parking spaces to square feet of floor
space or number of spaces provided for each dwelling unit;
      (8)   Location and size of points of ingress and egress to public streets
may be shown on-site plan, or the Zoning Commission may recommend such points
be shown and the City Commission may require location and size of points of
ingress and egress to public streets be shown on-site plan however, if specific
location and size of points of ingress and egress to public streets are not
required to be shown on the site plan, the location and size of points of
ingress and egress to public streets shall not violate any ordinances or
regulation adopted by the City Commission to regulate the location and size of
points of ingress and egress to public streets;
      (9)   Centerline of existing watercourses, drainage features and floodway
easement;
      (10)   Location and size of existing and proposed streets and alleys with
location of all street intersections adjacent to the area of request;
      (11)   Location, type and height of existing and proposed fences or
screening walls;
      (12)   Screening and landscaping shall be required where such treatment
is essential to proper arrangement of development or when required in a
comparable district. Such plan is required when necessary to indicate the
character of proposed development. The plan should include screening walls,
ornamental planting, lawns and gardens, playgrounds and wooded areas that are
to be retained. The Zoning Commission or City Commission may require the
landscaping plan;
      (13)   Location and type of signs, lighting, luminaries, exterior
auditory speakers;
      (14)   Area map indicating the neighborhood in which the property is
located; and
      (15)   Each applicant for a S-P District use shall file eight copies of
the site plan with the Departments of Transportation and Planning and/or
Building Inspection.
   (E)   Procedure.
      (1)   Prior to the review by the Zoning Commission, the applicant may be
required by a person designated by the city to present the site plan before the
Planning Board for review and comment.
      (2)   The Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing as required by
this chapter and state law; make its report and recommendation to the City
Commission and may recommend such additional conditions and restrictions as
necessary to secure and protect the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare.
      (3)   In recommending a Site Plan District, the Zoning Commission may
also recommend additional standards deemed necessary to create a reasonable
transition to, and protection of, adjacent property and public areas,
including, but not limited to, light and air orientation, type and manner of
construction, fire protection systems and appliances, setbacks, lighting,
landscaping, open space and screening.
      (4)   In granting or denying an application for a S-P Zoning District,
the City Commission may consider some of the following issues:
         (a)   Safety of the motoring public and of pedestrians using the
facility and the area immediately surrounding the site;
         (b)   Safety from fire hazards and measures of fire control;
         (c)   Protection of adjacent property from flood or water damage;
         (d)   Noise producing elements; and glare of vehicular and stationary
lights and effect of such light on established character of the neighborhood;
         (e)   Location, lighting and type of signs; and relation of signs to
traffic control and adverse effect on adjacent properties;
         (f)   Street size and adequacy of pavement width for traffic
reasonably expected to be generated by the proposed use around the site and in
the immediate neighborhood; and
         (g)   Adequacy of parking, as determined by requirements of this
chapter for off-street parking facilities; location of ingress/egress points
for parking and off-street loading spaces; and protection of public health by
requiring surfacing on all parking areas to control dust.
      (5)   In approving a Site Plan District, the City Commission may require
additional standards deemed necessary to create a reasonable transition to, and
protection of, adjacent property and public areas, including but not limited
to, light and air orientation, type and manner of construction, fire protection
systems and appliances, setbacks, lighting, landscaping, open space and
screening.
      (6)   Prior to conditional approval, the City Commission may require the
applicant to submit a revised site plan to the Zoning Commission for that
body’s recommendation.
      (7)   Prior to approval by ordinance the applicant must submit 16 copies
of the site plan in an approved final form, containing all the required
revisions, to the person designated by the city.
      (8)   The application for a change in zoning shall be deemed to be denied
as a matter of law upon the applicants failure to file a site plan in an
approved final form within the time limit established by the City Commission.
      (9)   On the Official Zoning Map and on any reproductions, a S-P Site
Plan Zoning District shall bear the designation “S-P” followed by the ordinance
number or zoning case number.
      (10)   The Building Official shall not issue a building permit for
development of property zoned S-P unless the proposed development is in
accordance with the site plan as approved by the City Commission. However,
applicants for a building permit may request and the Building Official may
approve, a building permit in which the proposed number of buildings is reduced
or the buildings are reduced in square footage and/or height. All other
requirements of the approved site plan must be met.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-49)  (Ord. 94-05, passed 4-20-1994; Ord. 95-26, passed
1-3-1996; Ord. 99-43, passed 8-18-1999; Ord. 07-45, passed 11-7-2007; Ord. 16-
18, passed 6-1-2016)
§ 160.052  ENVIRONMENTAL OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The development standards for these zoning districts are
modified to reduce development density to enhance the environment, provide more
setback area, and to serve as a buffer for compatibility between the commercial
zoning districts allowed and environmental sensitive areas. This will require a
rezoning public hearing with the Planning Board’s review of the proposed
development to determine compliance of the performance standards for adherence
to environmental sensitivity and land use appropriateness.
   (B)   Principal uses. The zoning districts that are allowed in this area
are: D, D-1, E-3, E-4, G-2, O, OP, P-I and SP Site Plan. The more stringent of
the Environmental Overlay Gateway District provisions or actual shall apply.
   (C)   Accessory uses. Reference existing text for all districts allowed in
the Environmental Overlay District.
   (D)   Area and height requirements.
 
Maximum coverage by structure, driveways 60%
and parking
Maximum coverage by structure on the lot 40%
Minimum distance between detached        15 feet
structure
Minimum front yard setback               40 feet
Minimum lot area                         None
                                         25 feet or equal to height of building
Minimum rear yard setback                facing the rear yard or whichever is
                                         greater
                                         25 feet or equal to height of building
Minimum side yard setback                facing the side yard or whichever is
                                         greater
 
   (E)   Parking. Parking shall be in accordance with established provisions of
§
160.081 of this chapter.
   (F)   Screening. Screening shall be in accordance with §
160.084 of this chapter.
   (G)   Landscaping. Landscaping shall be at 20% of developed site and in
accordance with landscaping provisions established in §
160.088 of this chapter.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-51)  (Ord. 01-38, passed 9-19-2001)
§ 160.053  DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (A)   Development plan approval by the Planning Board shall be required
prior to the issuance of a building permit for the following types of
development:
      (1)   Development in non-residential zoning classifications;
      (2)   Development in planned unit developments (PUD), excluding areas of
planned developments devoted exclusively to single-family, single-family
attached or duplex dwellings;
      (3)   Development in the S-P Site Plan District, excluding uses devoted
exclusively to single-family, single-family attached or duplex dwellings;
      (4)   Townhouse or multi-family dwellings;
      (5)   Schools, elementary or secondary;
      (6)   Mobile home or recreational vehicle park; and
      (7)   Recreational and entertainment uses.
   (B)   Approval of a development plan by the Planning Board shall be required
when the development plan is in conjunction with a request for a zoning change
excluding uses devoted exclusively to single-family, single-family attached or
duplex dwellings.
   (C)   Formal application and the required information for a development plan
shall be made to the City Planner by the applicant on forms prescribed by the
city.
   (D)   (1)   When a development plan application has been reviewed and
determined to be in conformance with all applicable provisions of the zoning
ordinance and subdivision ordinance by the City Planner, it shall be placed on
the agenda for the next available regular Planning Board meeting.
      (2)   If an application is submitted in conjunction with zoning change
request, the development plan will be submitted to the Zoning Commission for a
recommendation from that body.
      (3)   The Planning Board consideration shall include the following:
         (a)   Conformance with planning guidelines set forth in the
Comprehensive Plan, if applicable;
         (b)   Paving and layout of streets, alleys and sidewalks;
         (c)   Means of ingress and egress;
         (d)   Provisions for drainage;
         (e)   Provisions for off-street parking;
         (f)   Provisions for protective screening and open spaces;
         (g)   The impact of noise;
         (h)   The impact of glare from stationary and vehicular lights;
         (i)   Provisions for areas designated for landscaping; and
         (j)   Other aspects deemed by the Planning Board necessary to consider
in the interest of promoting the public health, safety, order, convenience,
prosperity and general welfare.
      (4)   In the approval or disapproval of the development plan, the
Planning Board shall not be authorized to waive or vary conditions and
requirements contained in the zoning ordinance or subdivision ordinance.
      (5)   Any development plan application denied by the Planning Board may
be appealed to the City Commission.
   (E)   Building permits to be in conformance with development plan. It shall
be unlawful to issue a building permit for any development for which a
development plan is required pursuant to this chapter prior to the approval of
a development plan. No building permit shall be issued except in conformity
with the approved development plan or in accordance with authorized minor
changes.
   (F)   Subsequent to approval of a development plan, minor changes may be
authorized by the City Planner when such minor changes will not cause any of
the following circumstances to occur:
      (1)   A change in the character of the development;
      (2)   A change in the primary use of the development;
      (3)   An increase in the intensity, floor area ratio, height or site
coverage of the development;
      (4)   An increase in the traffic generated by the use;
      (5)   A reduction in the originally approved setbacks from property
lines;
      (6)   An increase in the problems of off-street parking, circulation,
safety and utilities;
      (7)   A change in the subject size, lighting or orientation of originally
approved signs; or
      (8)   A decrease in the percentage of landscaping required.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-52)  (Ord. 08-40, passed 10-15-2008)
§ 160.054  SIXTH STREET REVITALIZATION DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. This district is intended to actively promote the
redevelopment of a portion of 6th Street as the city realizes the economic
impact and importance of this area.  The concept is to redevelop the street
into an entertainment/retail district with proposed developments adhering to
the following general guidelines:
      (1)   Generate pedestrian traffic.
      (2)   Promote, create, and assist in the development of activities and
businesses that generate patrons and customers through stop-in activities, not
so much drive-thru or drive-by activities/businesses.
      (3)   Promote, create, assist, and develop activities and businesses that
are open after 6:00 p.m.
      (4)   Promote activities and businesses that are family-friendly, serve
local residents, promote tourism, and/or serve out-of-town visitors.
      (5)   Encourage growth of current businesses.
      (6)   Revitalize activities and businesses and redevelop vacant buildings
or land.
      (7)   Eradicate eyesores, dilapidated structures, crime.
      (8)   Promote, attract, and assist in the creation and develop of cottage
industries.
   (B)   Principal uses.
      (1)   The types of activities and businesses that would be considered
appropriate for the district are as follows:
         (a)   Bakery.
         (b)   Bar and grill, wine bar.
         (c)   Restaurant, café (full service).
         (d)   Florist.
         (e)   Antique or resale shops.
         (f)   Art galleries.
         (g)   Automotive services ( inside only).
         (h)   Sporting goods store.
         (i)   Texas City Dike recreation related activities.
         (j)   Drug store, pharmacy.
         (k)   Tourist destination activities.
         (l)   Toy store.
         (m)   Cottage industries.
         (n)   Upstairs offices and residential uses are encouraged as an
accessory use.
      (2)   This is not an exhaustive list of allowed uses.  It is the intent
of this district to not overpopulate with any single activity or business. 
Concentrations of the same activities/businesses need to be carefully
considered to insure district becomes a diverse, mixed-use, multi-purpose
district.
   (C)   Procedure.  The steps necessary to request approval of a certificate
of occupancy or a building permit within this district shall be as follows:
      (1)   Pre-application conference between the applicant and the Director
of Transportation and Planning.  At this conference, applicant will be required
to describe, in detail, the intended occupancy and use of the facility and
describe any needed building or site improvements.
      (2)   Submission of a formal application for use and occupancy of an
existing building, and detailed plans for building or site improvements.  This
formal application will be presented to the Planning Board for a final decision
to:
         (a)   Approve the application;
         (b)   Approve the application with conditions; or
         (c)   Deny the application.
   (Ord. 13-44, passed 9-18-2013)
“GWY” GATEWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT
§ 160.065  INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The “GWY” Gateway Overlay District shall function as an overlay zoning
district. The “GWY” requirements shall supersede the regulations of the
underlying zoning district where such district’s regulations are in conflict
with the provisions of this chapter. All regulations of the underlying zoning
district shall be in effect except as identified in the “GWY” Gateway Overlay
District regulations.
   (B)   The purpose of the “GWY” Gateway Overlay District is to enhance the
aesthetic and visual character of gateways into the city that are adjacent to
regional highways. It is intended to ensure that land development adjacent to
gateways occurs in a manner that is compatible with the use of the
transportation corridor, while minimizing traffic hazards and congestion at key
focal points of the community.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-90)  (Ord. 99-42, passed 8-18-1999)
§ 160.066  PRINCIPAL AND ACCESSORY USES.
   No land shall be used and no structure shall be erected for, converted to or
used for any principal or accessory use other than such uses as are allowed in
the underlying zoning district(s).
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-91)  (Ord. 99-42, passed 8-18-1999)
§ 160.067  SCREENING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Screening wall. Screening walls applicable to the separation of land
uses, screening of satellite television reception dishes, trash receptacles and
other items shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the
underlying zoning district, except as otherwise provided herein.
      (1)   Outside storage shall be screened on all sides by a solid, opaque
brick or stone wall of not less than six feet in height measured at the highest
finished grade, constructed in accordance with the general design standards of
the city.
      (2)   Trash receptacles shall be visually screened on three sides by a
solid, brick or stone wall not less than six feet in height, measured at the
highest finished grade. The height of the trash receptacle shall not be
permitted to exceed the height of the visual screening device. Screening shall
not be required on the side used for access by garbage pickup services. Such
side shall not face less than 45 degrees from any adjacent street. Trash
receptacles already enclosed by a solid, brick or stone wall of at least six
feet in height measured at the highest finished grade shall not be required to
provide additional screening.
      (3)   Any fencing in the Gateway Corridor, required or otherwise, shall
be a solid, brick or stone wall of not less than six feet in height, measured
at the highest finished grade.
   (B)   Rooftop screening. Roof-mounted equipment, including, but not limited
to, storage tanks, compressor units, vent stacks greater than four inches in
diameter, and elevator machinery, shall be integrated into the building design
and screened from the view from adjacent streets and public facilities. Rooftop
screening shall use building materials similar to the facade of the building on
which such items are located, to create a smooth, clean, integrated appearance.
For purposes of this section, a highway frontage road shall be designated as an
adjacent street.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-92)  (Ord. 99-42, passed 8-18-1999; Ord. 08-48, passed
12-3-2008)
§ 160.068  MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Outside display or storage. All areas utilized for outside display or
storage in conjunction with sales or rental of motor vehicles, mobile homes,
trailers or boats, regardless of whether such areas are screened from public
view, shall have a concrete or city-approved surface, constructed in accordance
with the standards prescribed by the city.
   (B)   Utilities.
      (1)   All utilities located within 200 feet of the front property line,
which will serve any lot or parcel, shall be installed underground, except for
any transmission lines or feeder lines, either existing or proposed; provided
that, such transmission or feeder lines shall be located within a designated
paved easement or alleyway provided by the property owner.
      (2)   Nothing set forth herein shall prohibit or restrict any utility
company from recovering the difference between the cost of overhead facilities
and underground facilities. Each utility whose facilities are subject to the
provisions of this chapter shall develop policies and cost reimbursement
procedures with respect to the installation and extension of underground
service.
   (C)   Landscaping. Landscaping shall be a minimum of 15% provided of the
total land area of any property, in accordance with §
160.088 of this chapter.
   (D)   Masonry content. One- or two-story structures, regardless of structure
height, shall meet the following minimum masonry requirements. Buildings shall
have the following minimum masonry requirement: 100% of the total exterior
walls, front and side walls, which may be seen from any public thoroughfare,
excluding doors, windows and window walls, shall be constructed of brick,
stone, masonry or pre-cast concrete panels.
   (E)   Setback. To provide adequate protection of the aesthetic and visual
character of the gateways, a minimum setback of 40 feet of all buildings,
accessory buildings and structures from the property boundary which is adjacent
to a public thoroughfare shall be required. The minimum setback requirement
shall be reduced to a setback of 25 feet if parking is prohibited within said
setback area.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-93)  (Ord. 99-42, passed 8-18-1999)
§ 160.069  LOCATION OF THE GATEWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (A)   The location of the Gateway Overlay District, also known as the
Gateway Corridor, shall consist of all portions of properties adjacent and
within 300 feet of the following thoroughfares:
      (1)   I-45 - Dickinson Bayou to FM 1765;
      (2)   FM 1765 - I-45 to Bay Street;
      (3)   6th Street - Texas Avenue to 19th Ave. N;
      (4)   Loop 197 North - Highway 146 to 19th Avenue N;
      (5)   Highway 146 - FM 1764 to Moses Bayou;
      (6)   FM 646 (From West City Limits to Highway 146);
      (7)   Highway 146 (From Dickinson Bayou to north city limit line);
      (8)   Century Boulevard from I-45 to Highway 3;
      (9)   FM 517 from Highway 146 to Gum Bayou;
      (10)   25th Avenue North from Amburn Road to Highway 146;
      (11)   FM 2004 from I-45 to Highway 3;
      (12)   Highway 3 from FM 1765 to north city limit line;
      (13)   FM 1764 from I-15 to 6th Street; and
      (14)   FM 3436 from SH 646 south to FM 517.
   (B)   These are as shown on the Official Zoning Map on file in City
Planner’s office.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-94)  (Ord. 06-21, passed 6-7-2006; Ord. 06-36, passed
10-4-2006; Ord. 08-17, passed 5-7-2008)
SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
§ 160.080  TEMPORARY USES.
   (A)   The following uses, which are classified as temporary uses, may be
permitted by the Building Official in any district:
      (1)   Carnivals not to exceed 30 days;
      (2)   Circus not to exceed 30 days;
      (3)   Fairgrounds not to exceed 30 days;
      (4)   Religious assemblies not to exceed 30 days;
      (5)   Sports events not to exceed 30 days;
      (6)   Concrete mixing or batching plant uses temporarily required by
contractors during the construction of public improvements or buildings, and in
such cases, the period of time for which the use is granted may be for a period
of time provided in the contract for completion of such public improvement or
building, provided that such use shall not be permitted nearer than 250 feet to
a developed lot in a district zoned for residential uses;
      (7)   Armed forces displays not to exceed 30 days;
      (8)   Educational displays not to exceed 30 days;
      (9)   Temporary sales of merchandise not to exceed 30 days; and
      (10)   Temporary buildings and/or construction trailers (not to exceed
six months) excluding mobile homes used for residential purposes.
   (B)   A temporary use shall not be permitted nearer than 100 feet to a
developed area in a district zoned for residential uses.
   (C)   A permit for the temporary use of any property for the above-listed
uses shall be secured from the Building Inspection Department to such use.
   (D)   Use of a parcel of property for any of the above-listed uses at any
time on any day shall constitute a day’s use. Use of a parcel of property for
any of the above-listed uses for more than 30 days except for concrete mixing
or batching plants, during any one year shall constitute a permanent use and
such parcel of property shall automatically again be subject to the district
regulation of the zoning district in which such parcel of property is located.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-54)  (Ord. 94-05, passed 4-20-1994)
§ 160.081  OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose. Off-street parking requirements are intended to properly
regulate the number and design of off-street vehicular parking spaces to meet
the needs of occupants, customers, visitors or others involved in the use of
any building, structural improvement or place of assembly; and to eliminate the
undue use of the surface street system for parking purposes.
   (B)   Requirements.
      (1)   In all districts, except E-1 (Central Business), there shall be
provided off-street parking spaces.
      (2)   Each parking space shall have adequate drives and room for ingress
and egress to each parking space with a minimum size of eight feet by 22 feet
for each parallel parking space and nine feet by 18 feet for each angular head-
in parking space, and shall be designed in accordance with minimum standards as
defined.
      (3)   The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required shall be
as follows:
 
Commercial uses:
   Assembly and exhibition halls without fixed seats  1 per each 150 square
                                                         feet
   Automotive sales and service                       1 per each 500 square
                                                         feet of floor area
   Banks                                              1 per 300 square feet
                                                         of floor area
   Bingo parlor                                       1 per each 3 seats
                                                         (occupant load)
   Bowling alley                                      5 per each lane
   Broadcast and communication services               1 per each 300 square
                                                         feet of floor area
   Commercial trade school                            1 per each 2 students
                                                         and staff
   Day care and kindergarten                          1 per each 8 pupils
                                                         (design capacity)
                                                         15 spaces per each 200
   Flea market (indoor and outdoor)                   square feet of floor
                                                         area or market area
   Funeral homes, mortuaries                          1 per each 200 square
                                                         feet of floor area
   Furniture and appliance store                      1 per each 500 square
                                                         feet of floor area
   Health clubs                                       1 per each 200 square
                                                         feet of floor area
                                                         1 per room for the
                                                         first 250 rooms and
                                                         0.75 space per room
                                                         for each room over
   Hotels, motels                                     250, plus 1 space per
                                                         5 restaurant/lounge
                                                         area seats, plus 1
                                                         space per 125 square
                                                         feet of meeting/
                                                         conference areas
1.1 spaces per room which contains kitchenette facilities, plus parking for
restaurant and meeting areas per ratio stated herein
2 spaces per guest room provided with kitchen facilities, plus parking for
restaurant and meeting areas per the ratio stated herein
                                                         1 per each 200 square
                                                         feet of retail floor
   Lumber yard, building materials and hardware sales area, plus 1 per each
                                                         1,000 square feet of
                                                         wholesale or storage
                                                         area
   Office and business services                       1 per 300 square feet
                                                         of floor area
   Live theaters and auditoriums                      1 per each 3.5 seats
   Motion picture theaters (which do not include live 1 space per 3.5 seats
performances)                                            for single-screen
                                                         theaters
1 space per 5 seats for motion picture theaters with 2 or more screens
   Nursing/convalescent home                          1 per each six beds
                                                         (design capacity)
   Private clubs and dancehalls                       1 per each 100 square
                                                         feet of floor area
   Repair service                                     1 per each 500 square
                                                         feet of floor area
   Restaurants and cafeterias                         1 per each 150 square
                                                         feet of seating area
   Retail                                             1 per each 200 square
                                                         feet of floor area
                                                         1 per each 200 square
   Shopping centers                                   feet of retail space,
                                                         plus required parking
                                                         for non-retail uses
Governmental/institutional uses:
   Church, synagogue, temple                          1 per each 4 seats in
                                                         the main sanctuary
                                                         1 per each 2 students,
   Colleges, universities                             plus 1 for each
                                                         classroom, laboratory
                                                         or instruction area
   Governmental office buildings, libraries, museums  1 per each 300 square
                                                         feet of floor area
   Hospital                                           1 per each 15 beds
                                                         (design capacity)
   Schools:
      Elementary                                   1 per each 15 students
                                                         (design capacity)
      Middle/junior high                           1 per each 15 students
                                                         (design capacity)
      High                                         1 per each 3 students
                                                         and 1 per each staff
Industrial:
                                                         1 per each 1,000
   Distribution, warehouse or storage                 square feet of floor
                                                         area
                                                         1 per each 1,000
   Manufacturing facility                             square feet of floor
                                                         area
Multi-family/apartments:
                                                         1.75 per each
                                                         efficiency or 1
                                                         bedroom unit
2 per each 2 bedroom unit
2.5 per each 3 or more bedroom unit
3 per each 4 or more bedroom unit
   Mobile home                                        2 per dwelling unit
   Retirement center (excluding nursing home)         1.5 per unit
Residential uses:
   Duplex/single-family attached                      2 per dwelling unit
   Single-family dwellings                            2 per dwelling unit
   Townhouses                                         2 per dwelling unit
   Triplex or fourplex                                2 per dwelling unit
Transient accommodations:
                                                         1 per guest room plus
   Bed and breakfast                                  parking for other uses
                                                         as required by this
                                                         chapter
                                                         1 per guest room plus
   Clubs, boardinghouses, dormitories                 parking for other uses
                                                         as required by this
                                                         chapter
 
   (C)   Off-street stacking requirements for drive-through facilities.
      (1)   A stacking space shall be an area on a site measuring eight feet by
20 feet with direct forward access to a service window or station of a drive-
through facility which does not constitute space for any other circulation
driveway, parking space or maneuvering area.
      (2)   For financial institutions with drive-through facilities, each
teller window or station, human or mechanical, shall be provided with a minimum
of five stacking spaces.
      (3)   For each service window of a drive-through restaurant, a minimum of
six spaces shall be provided.
      (4)   For kiosks, a minimum of two stacking spaces for each service
window in addition to the service window shall be provided.
      (5)   For each full service car wash, vacuum or gas pump lane, a minimum
of seven stacking spaces shall be provided.
      (6)   For each self-service (drive-through/automated) wash bay, a minimum
of three stacking spaces in addition to the wash bay shall be provided.
      (7)   For each self-service (open bay), a minimum of two stacking spaces
in addition to the wash bay shall be provided.
      (8)   For automobile quick lube facilities, a minimum of three stacking
spaces in addition to the service bay shall be provided.
   (D)   Joint parking. Uses may join in establishing joint parking areas.
Where it can be demonstrated before the Zoning Commission that parking for two
or more specific uses occurs at alternating periods, and where the combined
floor area of such uses occupies not less than 50,000 square feet or where the
aggregate required off-street parking for such uses would be at least 200
spaces, then the parking space requirements of the use requiring the greater
number of spaces may be applied to the other uses in a combined parking area.
However, it shall be demonstrated as a condition precedent to consideration of
a joint parking area that such area will result in a reduction of at least 10%
of the aggregate required off-street parking for such uses.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-56)  (Ord. 95-26, passed 1-3-1996)
§ 160.082  OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All retail, commercial and industrial structures shall provide and
maintain off-street facilities for the loading and unloading of merchandise and
goods within the building or on a suitably screened lot adjacent to a private
service drive.
   (B)   At least one-half of such loading spaces shall have a minimum
dimension of ten feet by 40 feet and the remaining spaces shall have a minimum
dimension of ten feet by 20 feet.
   (C)   Loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following
schedule.
      (1)   For all retail, commercial and industrial uses.
 
Square Feet of Gross Floor Area in Structure Minimum Required Spaces or Berths
0 to 10,000                                  None
10,000 to 50,000                             1
50,000 to 100,000                            2
100,000 to 200,000                           3
Each additional 100,000                      1 additional
 
      (2)   For all hotels, office buildings, restaurants and similar
establishments.
 
Square Feet of Gross Floor Area in Structure Minimum Required Spaces or Berths
0 to 50,000                                  None
50,000 to 150,000                            1
150,000 to 300,000                           2
300,000 to 500,000                           3
500,000 to 1,000,000                         4
Each additional 500,000                      1 additional
 
   (D)   Loading docks for any establishment which customarily receives goods
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. and is adjacent to a residential
use or district shall be designed and constructed so as to fully enclose the
loading operation, in order to reduce the effects of the noise of the operation
on adjacent residences.
   (E)   Where adjacent to residential uses or districts, off-street loading
areas shall be screened from view of the residential use or district.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-57)
§ 160.083  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   (A)   In any district zoned for residential uses, an accessory building may
not be used for commercial purposes and may not be rented.
   (B)   An accessory building not exceeding one story in height may occupy not
more than 60% of a minimum required rear yard.
   (C)   An accessory building exceeding one story or more in height may occupy
not more than 40% of a minimum required rear yard.
   (D)   An accessory building in a district zoned for residential uses shall
be located on the rear one-half of the lot and at least ten feet from any
dwelling building existing or under construction on the same lot or any
adjacent lot, except swimming pools, which may be located nearer than ten feet
from any dwelling building existing as long as the excavation of the swimming
pool does not in any way harm or endanger the existing building or dwelling. No
accessory building shall be located nearer than five feet to any rear lot line
and shall be subject to the same side yard requirements as the principal
structure. In the case of a corner lot, no accessory building shall be located
within any side yard required on the street side. A garage, attached to or
detached from the main building, may be located not nearer than five feet to
any rear lot line and shall be subject to the same side yard requirements as
the principal structure. Metal shipping containers shall not be allowed in any
district zoned for residential use. Districts zoned for residential use are A,
A-1, A-2, B, C, C-1 and MH.
   (E)   Metal shipping container boxes are only allowed in zoning districts
zoned F (Light Industry); F-1 (Outdoor Industrial); G (Water Front); H (Heavy
Industry) and within construction site areas not to exceed 24 months. Container
boxes allowed within the approved zoning districts shall be located within the
rear one-half of the lot and/or must adhere to the established performance
standards already prescribed for the above-referenced zoning districts (F, F-1,
G and H).
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-58)  (Ord. 94-05, passed 4-20-1994; Ord. 07-26, passed
8-1-2007; Ord. 09-30, passed 10-21-2009)
§ 160.084  REQUIRED SCREENING.
   (A)   All multi-family development shall provide buffering on the subject
property, from adjacent property which is zoned or used for lower density
residential or non-residential uses if the adjacent property is zoned or used
for such uses at the time of the multi-family development.
   (B)   All non-residential development, including planned developments, shall
provide buffering on the subject property, from all adjacent land zoned or used
for any residential purpose, if that land is zoned or used as such at the time
of the non-residential development.
   (C)   The screening shall be continuously maintained and shall be either a
solid masonry wall in accordance with adopted fence standards, which is a
minimum six feet high, or the standard screening fence. Such screening shall be
located on the subject property, adjacent to the common property line. If an
alley is separating the uses, the required screening shall be located on the
subject property side of the alley adjacent to the property line which is
adjacent to the alley.
   (D)   The standard screening fence which is required for screening purposes,
shall be constructed with the following standards.
      (1)   Said fence shall be a minimum of six feet in height.
      (2)   All wood materials shall be naturally decay resistant or pressure
treated exterior grade, such as redwood or cedar, or other materials acceptable
to the City Commission.
      (3)   All nails or fasteners shall be of non-rusting, non-corrosive
metal, such as hot-dipped galvanized steel. All nails or fasteners shall be of
the type (screw-shank, ring-shank or divergent-point staples) that, when
properly driven, will not work free due to wind, vibration or shrinkage of
members. The maximum spacing allowed between pickets shall be one-quarter inch.
      (4)   All materials shall be securely fastened, vertical boards to
horizontal stringers, stringers to vertical posts, top rail, to ensure an
ongoing attractive appearance and safe condition, free form rust, rot,
vandalism and other sources of decay.
   (E)   Outside storage of wrecked, inoperable vehicles and equipment shall be
screened by a minimum six-foot masonry wall or standard screening fence.
Materials stored, excluding trucks and machinery, shall be stacked no higher
than one foot below the top of the fence or wall.
   (F)   An exception to the screening fence requirement may be granted by the
City Commission. Any property owner who appeared at a zoning public hearing
wherein a specific screening fence requirement was imposed on a subject
property under consideration will be notified of the proposed exception and
date of the administrative report of said property if request for an exception
of the screening fence is submitted. One or more of the following conditions
must be present or apply for consideration of an exception:
      (1)   Topographical variations that would preclude a normal installation,
or act as a screening mechanism. A topographical variation may serve as a
screening device if the zoning district requiring the screening fence is
separated from the adjoining use by a 30% slope or greater, as long as the
elevation between the two uses is at least six feet, (property requiring the
screening fence is at the higher elevation);
      (2)   Dense vegetation that presently exists onsite, which serves the
same purpose as a screening fence. Vegetation will serve as a screening device
if it is a minimum of six feet in height and the density obstructs the view;
and
      (3)   The fence will impede proper drainage.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-59)  (Ord. 97-26, passed 1-21-1998; Ord. 08-48, passed
12-3-2008)
§ 160.085  CORNER LOTS.
   Unless a greater side yard is required by zoning district regulations, on
corner lots, the side yard on the street shall be the same as the requirement
for the front, except on corner lots adjacent to a segment of side street upon
which no property fronts, said segment being defined as that portion of a
street between one street intersection and the next, the minimum side yard
shall be 20 feet or the same as the depth of front building setback, whichever
is less. This regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable
width of a corner lot of record at the time of passage of this chapter to less
than 20 feet.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-60)
§ 160.086  PROJECTIONS INTO REQUIRED YARDS.
   Certain architectural features, fences, walls and hedges may project into,
or be located in, required yards as follows:
   (A)   Cornices, eaves and sills not more than two feet into any required
yard;
   (B)   Balconies, bay windows and chimneys not more than three feet into
front yards, or two feet into side and rear yards;
   (C)   Patios and open decks may be located in side yards and rear yards;
provided that, they are not closer than three feet to any adjacent property
line. In the case of a corner lot, patios or decks shall be subject to the
regular street side yard requirements of the district;
   (D)   Upon approval of the Building Official, open sided carports may be
located in front yards (or, in the case of a corner lot, in the side yard);
provided that, they are not closer than five feet to any front property line,
and do not exceed the eave height of the existing dwelling;
   (E)   An open fire escape not more than four feet into rear yards; provided
that, such structure does not obstruct ventilation or light;
   (F)   Any fence, wall, hedge, shrubbery and the like, no higher than a
baseline extending from a point two and one-half feet above front walk grade to
a point six feet above walk grade at the depth of the front yard, single trees
having single trunks which are pruned to a height of seven feet above walk
grade. Corner lots where the side yard on the street side is required to be the
same as the front yard, shall also observe front yard regulations with regard
to fences, walls, hedges, shrubbery and the like on the side street except that
the City Commission may, by special ordinance, permit the construction of a
fence not to exceed eight feet in height, which does not project more than five
feet into the required side yard setback area;
   (G)   No object, or combination of objects, including, but not limited to,
any structure, fence, wall, screen hedge, tree, bush, shrub, billboard or mound
of earth, terrace, bank or barrier shall be erected, placed, planted or
maintained on any corner lot in such a manner as to create a traffic hazard by
obstructing the view of the drivers of motor vehicles using the streets
adjacent thereto. The natural existing terrain shall be excluded from the
objects otherwise prohibited by this division (G). And said object, or
combination of objects, erected, placed, planted or maintained on a corner lot
or parkway adjacent thereto so as to interfere with the visual line of sight at
an elevation between two and one-half feet above the top of the adjacent
roadway curb and eight feet above the top of the adjacent street curb, or if
there is not a curb, then from the average street grade, within a triangular
area formed by the intersection of the adjacent street right-of-way lines, the
right-of-way lines and a point on each such right-of-way line 35 feet from the
intersection, shall be prima facie evidence that said object, or combination of
objects, so erected, placed, planted or maintained is an obstruction
constituting a traffic hazard. The triangular area of visibility as provided
herein is further described and depicted by the drawing at the end of this
section; and/or
   (H)   Any object or combination of objects, placed, planted or maintained in
violation of this division (H), shall be removed upon written notice by
certified mail from the Building Official of the city, or his or her
representative, to the owner, agent or occupant of the premises where such
obstruction has been erected, placed, planted or maintained. Failure of the
owner, agent or occupant to remove such an obstruction within ten days after
receipt of such notice shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-61)  (Ord. 00-54, passed 9-6-2000; Ord. 02-01, passed
2-6-2002)
§ 160.087  ALTERNATIVE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Where this chapter authorizes approval by the Planning Board of
alternatives to the required exterior brick, stone or masonry material; such
consideration shall be conducted in a public hearing; however, legal
notification shall not be required.
   (B)   In consideration of a request for alternative materials, it shall be
the responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate the following:
      (1)   The application represents a superior result than that which could
be achieved by strictly following the requirements of this section;
      (2)   The application identifies a unique architectural theme for a
master planned subdivision; or
      (3)   The application is based upon building constraints related to
elevated structures and flood protection.
   (C)   An application based upon economic relief or economic hardship shall
not be considered as a basis for approval of alternative standards.
   (D)   A denial of the application by the Building Official may be appealed
to the Board of Adjustments if the appeal is filed consistent with §
160.110 of this chapter.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-62)  (Ord. 06-42, passed 12-6-2006)
§ 160.088  LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose. Landscaping requirements are intended to reduce the negative
effects of glare, noise, erosion and sedimentation caused by expanses of
impervious or unvegetated surfaces. These requirements are also intended to
preserve and improve the natural and urban environment and enhance the
aesthetic qualities of the city.
   (B)   Requirements. In multi-family and mobile home districts and all non-
residential districts, excluding District E-1 (Central Business), future
developments must provide a minimum amount of landscaping according to the
following chart:
 
District Minimum Percent Lot Area to be Landscaped
C   20
C-1 20
D   10
D-1 10
E   5
E-2 10
E-3 5
E-4 5
F   5
F-1 5
G   5
G-2 10
H   5
I   (a)
MH  See § 160.031
O-P 10
P-I 15
S-P (b)
NOTES TO TABLE:
(a) Established per Final Development Plan.
(b) Established per Site Plan.
 
      (1)   Except in districts C, C-1 and MH, a minimum of 50% of the required
landscaping area shall be located in the front one-half of the lot. Required
landscaping shall not include driveways, paved walks or right-of-way or
easements for streets or alleys.
      (2)   On any corner lot, all landscaping, whether or not required by this
chapter, shall be designed and maintained to conform with the visibility
standards in §
160.085 of this chapter.
      (3)   When a driveway intersects a public right-of-way, all landscaping
within the triangular areas described below shall provide unobstructed cross-
visibility at a level between 30 inches and eight feet above street grade.
      (4)   The triangular areas referred to are: the areas of property on both
sides of an accessway where it intersects a public right-of-way, with the two
sides of each triangle being ten feet long from the point of intersection and
the third side being a line connecting the ends of the other two.
   (C)   Plant material. Tree species shall be a minimum of seven feet overall
height immediately after planting. Trees of species whose roots are known to
cause damage to public roadways or other public works shall be prohibited.
   (D)   Required trees. One tree per 500 square feet of designated landscaped
area is required. The number of required trees in Districts C and C-1 shall be
according to the requirements of §§ 160.029 and 160.030 of this chapter. A
minimum of one tree per lot or tract is required. All trees shall be planted in
the areas which are visible from the street. Trees shall not be planted in the
right-of-way. Trees shall be a minimum of three-inch caliper, staked and
wrapped, and shall be live oak, red oak, cedar elm, bald cypress, silver maple,
Japanese black pine, palm or other trees of similar quality as approved by the
Director of Parks and Recreation. Yaupon, crepe myrtle and other similar trees
shall not be required to be a minimum of three-inch caliper.
   (E)   Existing plant materials. In instances where healthy plant material
exists on a site prior to its development, the application of the above
landscaping requirements may be adjusted if such an adjustment is consistent
with and will preserve the intent of this chapter.
   (F)   Maintenance. All plant material shall be maintained at all times in a
living and growing condition.
   (G)   Landscape plan. A landscaping plan, demonstrating compliance with the
provisions of this section, shall be submitted to the Building Official at the
time of application of building permit.
   (H)   Synthetic or artificial materials. Synthetic or artificial lawn or
plant material shall not be used to satisfy the requirements of the landscape
requirements.
   (I)   Additional requirements. Requirements, in addition to those noted
above, may be stipulated in the individual zoning districts regulations.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-63)
§ 160.089  NON-CONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Any use of land or structures which do not conform to the use
regulations prescribed in this chapter or amendments hereto shall be deemed a
non-conforming use.
   (B)   Any building or structure on a lot which does not conform the lot
area, lot dimensions, front yard, side yard, rear yard or coverage, or any
building or structure which does not conform to the height, parking, loading,
building spacing or any other regulations or any requirements of this chapter
shall be deemed a non-conforming building or structure.
   (C)   Any use or failure to meet requirements that existed lawfully at the
time of enactment of this chapter may be continued subject to reasonable
regulations by the Board of Adjustments, except as described in the following.
      (1)   A non-conforming use or failure to meet requirements shall not be
continued when there is a change of use.
      (2)   A non-conforming use or failure to meet requirements shall not be
continued when 50% of the floor area of the use or structure is remodeled or
rebuilt.
      (3)   A non-conforming use or failure to meet requirements shall not be
continued when the non-conforming use is abandoned.
      (4)   Any non-conforming use or failure to meet requirements shall be
brought into compliance when the property is rezoned to another district.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-65)  (Ord. 94-05, passed 4-20-1994)
§ 160.090  HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this chapter shall be modified as
follows.
   (A)   Chimneys, water towers, penthouses, scenery lofts, monuments, cupolas,
domes, spires, standpipes, false mansards, parapet walls, drive-in theater
screens, similar structures and necessary mechanical appurtenances may be
erected as to their height in accordance with existing or hereafter adopted
ordinances of the city.
   (B)   On through lots with double frontage 150 feet or less in depth, the
height of a building may be measured from the curb level on either street. On
through lots, more than 150 feet in depth, the height regulation and basis of
height measurement for the street permitting the greater height shall apply to
a depth of not more than 150 feet from that street. The remainder of the lot
shall comply with height regulation based on the street with the lower
elevation.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-66)
§ 160.091  FRONT, SIDE AND REAR YARD REGULATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   In all districts, except E-1 (Central Business), where the frontage
upon the same side of a street between two intersecting streets is occupied or
partially occupied by a building with front yards which do not conform to the
provisions of this chapter, or where the configuration of the ground is such
that conformity with the front yard provisions of this chapter would work a
hardship, the Board of Adjustment may permit modifications of the front yard
requirements applicable to the remaining frontage upon the same side of such
street between such intersecting streets.
   (B)   In all districts, except E-1 (Central Business), where the frontage
upon the same side of a street between intersecting streets is occupied or
partially occupied by a building having front yards of greater depth than are
required by this chapter, no other lot upon the same side of such street
between such intersecting streets shall be occupied by a building with a front
yard of less than the least depth of any such existing front yards, unless by
permission of the Board of Adjustment.
   (C)   No cornice shall project over the street line more than 5% of the
width of such street and in no case more than four feet.
   (D)   Buildings on through lots in all districts, except E-1 (Central
Business), where such lot is 200 feet or more in depth, shall provide an
equivalent open space in lieu of the required rear yard; provided that, in any
case where the rear lot lines are continuous through the block, if a through
lot is secured by combining any two or more non-through lots and their common
rear line is eliminated or built over, any building on such through lot shall
provide a court above the level of the first story open and unobstructed the
full width of the lot and for the full distance between the projected minimum
rear yard lines. It is the purpose of this regulation to secure adequate
ventilation for the interior of the block.
   (E)   A minimum of ten feet shall be allowed between buildings. This
distance may not be reduced by more than 40% by overhanging eaves, roofs or
other projections.
   (F)   The area required in a yard at any given level shall be open from such
level to the sky, unobstructed, except for the customary projections of
skylights and parapets above the bottom of such yard, and except for the
ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices or other
ornamental features not exceeding four inches and chimneys not more than two
feet; provided that, if the building is not more than 35 feet in height, such
cornice may project not more than two and one-half feet into such yard; and,
provided further that, upon balconies and one-story porches with three
unenclosed sides may project into a front or rear yard not to exceed ten feet;
provided further that, within five feet of the street wall a cornice may
project not more than three feet into the side yard.
   (G)   An open fire escape may project not more than four feet into a side or
rear yard. Solid floored balconies and enclosed fireproof outside stairways may
project not more than four feet into a rear yard.
   (H)   To provide adequate protection in all districts zoned for residential
uses, a minimum setback of 25 feet of all buildings and accessory buildings
from any underground, high-pressure, gas pipeline easement or any other
hazardous pipeline is required. When deemed necessary, the City Commission may
request additional setbacks. The only exception will be one storage building
not exceeding 225 square feet in floor area or 12 feet in height will be
allowed in the 25-foot setback area. Foundations for storage buildings will be
constructed on a treated wood foundation and not on concrete. Storage buildings
are not classified as permanent accessory buildings.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-67)  (Ord. 94-05, passed 4-20-1994; Ord. 07-39, passed
11-7-2007; Ord. 08-31, passed 7-16-2008)
§ 160.092  COMPLETION AND RESTORATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS.
   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans, construction or
designated use of a building legally under construction or restoration or for
which a permit for construction or restoration has been issued at the time of
passage of this chapter. The entire construction or restoration of the building
shall be complete within two years from the passage of this chapter.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-68)
§ 160.093  GASOLINE OR DIESEL STORAGE TANKS.
   (A)   Gasoline or diesel storage tanks shall conform to the provisions of
Ch. 96 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Portable fuel containers of less than 55 gallons capacity shall not be
considered storage tanks for purposes of this section.
   (C)   No gasoline or diesel storage tank shall be located in Districts A, A-
1, A-2, B, B-1, C, C-1, MH and O-P or any residential district that may be
created in the future.
   (D)   Aboveground storage tanks other than vaulted aboveground tanks are
prohibited, except in District H and G.
   (E)   Vaulted aboveground tanks for private use may be allowed in all
districts, except A, A-1, A-2, C, C-1, D, D-1, MH and O-P; provided, they meet
all local requirements.
   (F)   Storage tanks for all retail and marine service stations open for
public use shall be underground.
   (G)   No opening for the filling or dispensing of any gasoline or diesel
tanks shall be permitted within 50 feet of any boundary of a district zoned for
residential uses or within 50 feet of any residential use.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-69)  (Ord. 94-05, passed 4-20-1994)  Penalty, see §
160.999
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 160.105  ZONING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Creation. There is hereby constituted a commission to be known as the
Zoning Commission of the city.
   (B)   Composition. The Zoning Commission shall consist of five members and
two alternate members who shall each be appointed by the City Commission, upon
recommendation of the Mayor.
   (C)   Terms of office. Initially, two members shall be appointed for a term
of one year, three for a term of two years and the two alternates for a term of
two years. Thereafter, all appointments on such Zoning Commission shall be for
a term of two years. Any vacancy on the Zoning Commission in and during the
unexpired term of a member thereof shall be filled by the City Commission, upon
recommendation by the Mayor.
   (D)   Quorum. Any three members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business. The affirmative vote of a majority of these attending
any meeting at which there is quorum present shall be necessary to pass any
motion or recommendation of the Zoning Commission. Alternates shall sit and
vote as a member of the Zoning Commission when required to establish a quorum.
When more than one alternate is available to fill a vacancy, the Zoning
Commission Chairperson shall designate which alternate shall serve.
   (E)   General duties. The Zoning Commission shall have the following powers:
      (1)   To recommend the boundaries of the various districts and
appropriate regulations to be enforced therein under this chapter, the Charter
of the city or the laws of the state to the City Commission and to recommend
approval or denial of zoning changes and regulations under this chapter, the
Charter of the city or the laws of the state;
      (2)   To hear, recommend or determine any matter relating to zoning
control as may be specified or required under this chapter, the Charter of the
city or the laws of the state; and
      (3)   To exercise such duties and powers as may be now or hereafter
conferred by this chapter, the Charter of the city or applicable laws of the
state.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-76)
§ 160.106  PROCEDURE FOR ZONING CHANGE AND AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   General. The City Commission may, from time to time, on its own motion
or on petition, after public notice and hearings thereon, as provided herein,
amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the regulations and restrictions as
established herein and may change, restrict or extend the boundaries of the
various districts established herein. Before taking action upon any proposed
amendment, modification, change, restriction or extension, the same shall be
referred by the City Commission to the Zoning Commission of the city, for
recommendation and final report of such Zoning Commission; and no action shall
be taken by the City Commission until it has received the final report of said
Zoning Commission.
   (B)   Application requirements.
      (1)   Any person, firm or corporation requesting a change in zoning of
any property from one district classification to another district
classification under this chapter shall make an application in writing to the
city requesting a change in zoning, which application shall contain the
following information:
         (a)   Legal description of the land on which a zoning change is
requested together with the local street address;
         (b)   Name and address of the owner of the property;
         (c)   Name and address of the person making the application, if made
by anyone other than the owner, together with a statement that the person
making the application is authorized to act for the owner in making the
application;
         (d)   District use under which the property is regulated at the time
of making the application and the district use requested by the applicant; and
         (e)   Any other information concerning the property as may be
requested by the Department of Transportation and Planning of the city or the
Zoning Commission.
      (2)   Prior to processing the request, the applicant shall pay a fee as
established in §
160.107 of this chapter to offset the costs of processing, publishing and
mailing of notices.
   (C)   Zoning Commission public hearing.
      (1)   Notification. Before acting upon any changes in the classification
of property, the Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing. Written notice
of all such public hearings before said Zoning Commission on proposed changes
in classification shall be sent to owners of real property lying within 200
feet of the property on which the change in classification is proposed, such
notice to be given, not less than ten days before the date set for the hearing,
to all such who have rendered their said property for city taxes as the
ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll. Such notice may be served
by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the city post
office. Where property lying within 200 feet of the property proposed to be
changed is located in territory which was annexed to the city after the final
date for making the renditions which are included on the last approved city tax
roll, proper advertising of the public hearing shall be provided by at least 15
days’ notice of the time and place of such hearing as published in an official
newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
      (2)   Continuance. Any hearing may be continued for good cause at the
request of the applicant, or at the discretion of the Zoning Commission duly
noted in writing in its minutes. In the event that any hearing is continued or
recessed or, a matter tabled for any reason other than lack of proper notice,
further notice to surrounding property owners shall not be required provided
that such continuation date and time shall be set at that meeting.
      (3)   Recommendation.
         (a)   Upon the final hearing of such application, the Zoning
Commission shall recommend approval or denial of the same and a report of such
action shall be made by the Zoning Commission to the City Commission.
         (b)   In the event that the Zoning Commission recommends that a zoning
change request not be granted, the case will not be processed further and shall
not be forwarded to the City Commission for public hearing, unless the
applicant shall, within ten days after the date the Zoning Commission votes to
recommend that the zoning change not be granted, file with the Department of
Transportation and Planning a request that the application be forwarded to the
City Commission for a public hearing and determination of the zoning change
request.
         (c)   In the event a zoning change request is denied by the Zoning
Commission or the City Commission, the property owner/applicant shall not
reapply for the same land use rezoning change for a period of 180 days from the
date of denial.
   (D)   City Commission public hearing.
      (1)   Notification. Before acting upon an amendment change, modification
or repeal of this chapter by the City Commission, at least 15 days’ notice of
the time and place of such hearing shall be published in an official newspaper
or a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
      (2)   Continuance. Any hearing may be continued for good cause at the
request of the applicant, or at the discretion of the City Commission duly
noted in writing in its minutes. In the event that any hearing is continued or
recessed or a matter tabled for any reason other than lack of proper notice,
further notice to surrounding property owners shall not be required provided
that such continuation date and time shall be set at that meeting.
      (3)   Approval. If the zoning request for change in classification of
property is approved by the City Commission, an appropriate ordinance shall be
voted upon by the City Commission when the City Commission has received notice
from the Building Official that the applicant has requested a building permit
for the requested uses.
      (4)   Expiration. If no ordinance granting the requested zoning has been
adopted within one year of the date on which the City Commission voted approval
of the zoning change, such zoning shall be considered to be expired unless
placed on the City Commission agenda for further consideration.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-77)  (Ord. 95-26, passed 1-3-1996; Ord. 98-37, passed
12-2-1998)
§ 160.107  FEES.
   Should any person, firm or corporation petition the city to amend this
chapter so as to change the classification of any property from its present
zoning classification, contemporaneously with the filing thereof, a filing fee
according to the schedule below, shall be paid by him, her or it, to the City
Secretary for the benefit of the city to in part compensate the city for its
expense in bringing the matter on to a public hearing.
 
District Requested                                       Fee
Any district, except S-P or I (Planned Unit Development) $250
I (Planned Unit Development)                             $400
S-P for area less than 5 acres                           $300
S-P for area of 5 acres or more                          $350
 
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-78)  (Ord. 01-32, passed 7-21-2001)
§ 160.108  PROTEST.
   In case of a written protest against such change, signed by the owners of
20% or more either of the area of the lots or land included in such proposed
change, or of the lots or land immediately adjoining the same and extending 200
feet therefrom, such amendment shall not become effective, except by the
favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the City Commission.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-79)
§ 160.109  ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Building Official, Fire Marshal or designee,
Assistant Fire Marshal or any deputy or inspector working under their
direction, to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to refuse to issue any
permit for any building or structure or the use of any premises which would
violate any of the provisions hereof, and cause any building, structure, place
or premises to be inspected and examined, and to order in writing the remedying
of any condition found to exist therein or thereat in violation of any
provision of this chapter. In case any building or structure is erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any
building, structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, the Building
Official is hereby authorized and directed to institute any appropriate action
or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, maintenance, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion or use, to restrain, correct or
abate such violation and to prevent any illegal act, conduct or use on or about
such premises.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-80)  (Ord. 94-05, passed 4-20-1994)
§ 160.110  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   Creation and organization of Board of Adjustment.
      (1)   A Board of Adjustment is hereby established in accordance with the
provisions of the state law regarding the zoning of cities. The word “Board”,
when used in this chapter, shall be construed to mean the Board of Adjustment.
      (2)   The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members, each to be
appointed by the City Commission for a term of two years. Board members may be
removed for cause by the City Commission upon written charges and after public
hearing. One member may be a member of the City Planning Board or Zoning
Commission; provided that, the appointment of any member of the City Planning
Board or Zoning Commission shall be for his or her term of office as such only.
      (3)   Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member
whose position becomes vacant. The Board shall elect its own Chairperson who
shall serve for a period of one year or until his or her successor is elected.
      (4)   The City Commission shall appoint four alternate members of the
Board of Adjustment who shall serve in the absence of one or more regular
members when requested to do so by the Chairperson of the Board of Adjustment.
All cases to be heard by the Board of Adjustment will always be heard by a
minimum of four members. Alternate members shall serve for the same period as
the regular members and any vacancies shall be filled in the same manner and
may be subject to removal as the regular members.
   (B)   Procedures.
      (1)   The Board of Adjustment may adopt rules to govern its proceedings
provided that such rules are consistent with this chapter or state law.
Meetings of the Board may be held at the call of the Chairperson or at such
other times as the Board may determine and will be held in accordance with the
open meeting law. The Chairperson, or in his or her absence, the acting
Chairperson may administer oaths and/or compel public attendance.
      (2)   The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to
vote indicating such fact, and shall keep a record of its examination and other
official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the
Board of Adjustment and shall be a public record.
      (3)   Appeals to the Board of Adjustment can be taken by any person
aggrieved, or by an officer, department, or board of the municipality affected
by any decision of the Building Official relative to the enforcement of this
chapter. Such appeal must be filed within 15 days after the decision has been
rendered by the Building Official, by filing with the Building Official and
with the Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof,
upon payment of a fee in an amount determined by the City Commission. The
Building Official shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the
papers constituting the records upon which the action appealed from was taken.
      (4)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings of the action being appealed
from unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies the Board of
Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or her,
that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings
shall not be stayed, otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted
by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on application, upon notice
to officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown.
      (5)   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a specific time for the hearing
of an appeal, give the public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the
parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time.
      (6)   At a public hearing relative to an appeal, any interested party may
appear before the Board in person, by agent or by attorney. The burden of proof
shall be on the applicant to establish the necessary facts to warrant favorable
action of the Board on a matter. Any action granting a variance authorizing the
issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be valid only
for a period of 90 days from such action, unless said building permit or
certificate of occupancy is secured in the 90-day period, in which event the
action shall be permanent. The Board shall have the authority to grant a longer
period. If said building permit or certificate of occupancy is not secured
within the 90-day period, or within any extended period granted by the Board,
the action of the Board shall become void without prejudice to a subsequent
appeal and such appeal shall be subject to the same regulations and
requirements for hearing as herein specified for the original appeal.
      (7)   An appeal to the Board of Adjustment for the same or a related
action on the same piece of property shall not be allowed prior to the
expiration of one year from a previous ruling by the Board on any appeal to
such body unless other property in the immediate vicinity has, within the said
one-year period, been changed or acted on by the Board or City Commission so as
to alter the facts and conditions upon which the previous Board action was
based, as determined by the Board. Such change of circumstances shall permit
the rehearing of an appeal by the Board prior to the expiration of a one-year
period, but such conditions shall not have any force in law to compel the
Board, after a hearing, to grant a subsequent appeal; such subsequent appeal
shall be considered entirely on its merits and the peculiar and specific
conditions related to the property on which the appeal is brought.
      (8)   No final action shall be taken by the Board of Adjustment on an
appeal on the absence of a written recommendation from a person designated by
the city.
   (C)   Jurisdiction of the Board of Adjustment. When in its judgment, the
public convenience and welfare will be substantially served and the appropriate
use of the neighboring property will not be substantially or permanently
injured, the Board of Adjustment may, in specific cases, after written notice
and public hearings, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards,
authorize or order the following:
      (1)   Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error on any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Building Official in
the enforcement of this chapter;
      (2)   To hear and decide special exception to the terms of this chapter
upon which such Board is required to pass under this chapter. The Board will
set appropriate terms for exceptions when necessary;
      (3)   To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the
terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where,
owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this
chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done;
      (4)   Permit the reconstruction, extension or enlargement of a building
occupied by non-conforming uses, on the lot or tract occupied by such building;
provided, such reconstruction does not prevent the return of such property to a
conforming use;
      (5)   Permit such variances of height, yard, area, lot coverage, off-
street parking and loading regulations that will not be contrary to the public
interest and where, because of special conditions, the enforcement of this
chapter or its amendments would result in an unnecessary hardship. A variance
shall not be granted to relieve a self-created or personal hardship, nor shall
it be based solely on economic gain or loss, nor shall it permit any person a
privilege in developing a parcel of land not permitted by this chapter to other
parcels of land in the district. No variance may be granted if it results in an
unnecessary hardship, as herein defined on another parcel of land;
      (6)   In order to make a finding of hardship and grant a variance, the
Board of Adjustment must determine that:
         (a)   The requested variance does not violate the intent of the
chapter or its amendments;
         (b)   Special conditions of restricted area, shape, topography or
physical features exist that are peculiar to subject parcel of land and are not
applicable to other parcels of land in the same zoning district;
         (c)   The hardship is in no way the result of the applicant’s own
actions; and
         (d)   The interpretation of the provisions in this chapter or its
amendments would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other
properties, in the same zoning district, that comply with the same provisions.
      (7)   No variance may authorize a use other than those permitted in the
district, for which the variance is sought.
   (D)   Action of the Board.
      (1)   In exercising its powers, the Board may, in conformity with the
provisions of Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Art. 1011-a through 1011-j, as amended,
(Tex. Local Gov’t Code §§ 211.001 through 211.013) reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decisions or determination
appealed from and make such order, requirement, decisions or determination as
ought to be made and shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the
appeal is taken, including the power to impose reasonable conditions to be
complied with by the applicant.
      (2)   The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be necessary
to revise any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such
administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter
upon which it is required to pass under this chapter or to approve any variance
in said ordinance.
      (3)   Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any
officer, department or board of the municipality, may present to a court of
record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal,
in whole or part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall
be presented to the Court within ten days after the filing of the decision in
the office of the Board, and not thereafter. The date of filing of the decision
in the office of the Board shall be the date the Board announces its decision
either orally or in writing to the applicant.
   (E)   Filing fee. A filing fee of $100 to help pay a part of the cost of
legal publications, accumulating data and other administrative costs shall
accompany each notice or appeal filed with the Board of Adjustments.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-81)  (Ord. 01-64, passed 1-16-2002)
§ 160.111  PERMITS.
   No permits for the erection, alteration, construction, reconstruction, use
or maintenance of any building or use of any premises shall be issued by the
Building Official unless there shall first be filed in his or her office by the
applicant therefore, a plan in duplicate, drawn to scale, correctly showing the
location and actual dimensions of the lot to be occupied, the dimensions and
location on the lot of the building to be erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, used or maintained with measurements in feet and inches from all lot
lines to all foundation lines or the building, together with a true statement,
in writing, signed by the applicant, showing the use for which such building or
premises is arranged, intended or designed and the location and dimensions of
all accessory buildings or structures. No permit shall be issued by the
Building Official unless such plan shall show in all details that such premises
are to be used in conformity with all the provisions of this chapter. A record
of such applications and plans shall be kept in the office of the Building
Official. Failure of any applicant or of his or her agents, servants or
employees to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, use or maintain any
buildings, structures or premises in conformance with such plans on which such
permit is issued, when such failure constitutes a violation of any provisions
of this chapter, shall render such permit void and the Building Official is
hereby authorized and directed to revoke any such permit by giving written
notice to the applicant, or his or her agent, servants or employees and all
work upon such buildings, structures or premises shall be changed so as to
comply with such plans and permit.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-82)
§ 160.112  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   General. No vacant land shall be occupied or used, except for
agricultural uses, and no building hereafter erected or structurally altered
shall be occupied or used until a certificate of occupancy shall have been
issued by the Building Official. The certificate of occupancy shall state that
the building or proposed use of a building or land complies with all the
building and health laws and ordinance, and with the provisions of these
regulations. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office
of the Building Official, and copies shall be furnished on request to any
person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected. No
fee shall be charged for a certificate of occupancy. No permit for excavation
for any building shall be issued before application has been made for a
certificate of occupancy.
   (B)   Certificate of occupancy for a building. A certificate of occupancy
and compliance shall be applied for coincident with the application for a
building permit, and shall be issued within ten days after the erection or
structural alteration of such building shall have been completed in conformity
with the provisions of these regulations. Pending the issuance of a regular
certificate, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Building
Official for the period not exceeding six months during the completion of
alterations or during partial occupancy of a building pending its completion.
Such temporary certificate shall not be construed as in any way altering the
respective rights, duties or obligations of the owners or of the city relating
to the use or occupancy of the premises, or any other matter covered by this
chapter, and such temporary certificate shall not be issued except under such
restrictions and provisions as will adequately ensure the safety of the
occupants.
   (C)   Certificate of occupancy for land. A certificate of occupancy for the
use of vacant land or the change in the character of the use of land as herein
provided, shall be applied for before any such land shall be occupied or used
and a certificate of occupancy shall be issued within ten days after the
application has been made; provided that, such use is in conformity with the
provisions of these regulations.
   (D)   Certificate of occupancy for a non-conforming use. A certificate of
occupancy for a non-conforming use existing at the time of the adoption of this
chapter shall be issued by the Building Official and the certificate shall
state that the use is a non-conforming use, and does not conform to the
provisions of this chapter. The Building Official shall notify all occupants of
property being used as non-conforming uses, and the occupants shall, within 30
days after receipt of such notice, apply at the office of the Building Official
for a certificate of occupancy.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-83)
§ 160.113  INTERPRETATION AND INTENT.
   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health, safety,
morals or general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal,
abrogate, annul or in any way to impair or interfere with any existing
provisions of law or ordinances or any rules or regulations previously adopted
pursuant to law relating to the use of building or premises; nor is it intended
by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement or
covenants between parties; provided, however, that, where this chapter imposes
a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises than are imposed by
such existing provisions of law or ordinance or by such rules or regulations or
by such easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-84)
§ 160.114  SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Commission that if the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this chapter shall be
declared unconstitutional, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not
affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentence, paragraphs or section
of this chapter, since the same would have been enacted by the City Commission
without the incorporation in this chapter of any such unconstitutional or
invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-86)
§ 160.115  REPEALING CLAUSE.
   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with any of the provisions
of this chapter are hereby repealed insofar as the same are in conflict with
the provisions hereof.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-87)
§ 160.116  EMERGENCY.
   The fact that the present zoning ordinance and regulations of the city are
inadequate to properly safeguard the health, safety, morals, peace and general
welfare of the inhabitants of the city, the city creates an emergency for the
immediate preservation of the public which requires that this chapter shall
become effective from and after the date of its passage, as provided by the
Charter of the city, and it is accordingly so ordained.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-88)
§ 160.999  PENALTY.
   Any person or corporation violating or failing to comply with any provisions
of this chapter shall be fined, upon conviction, not less than $10, nor more
than $2,000, and each day any violation or non-compliance continues, shall
constitute a separate offense.
(1998 Code, App. A, § 40-85)
APPENDIX A: ILLUSTRATIONS
Figure 1: Lot Dimensions
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7306ab21d381f71b691cecb749da3bd91fbd7fa7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2883.jpg]
 
Figure 2: Lot Lines
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7306ab21d381f71b691cecb749da3bd91fbd7fa7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2885.jpg]
 
Figure 3: Lot Lines - Front
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7306ab21d381f71b691cecb749da3bd91fbd7fa7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2887.jpg]
 
Figure 4: Lot Lines - Side
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7306ab21d381f71b691cecb749da3bd91fbd7fa7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2889.jpg]
 
Figure 5: Lot Width
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7306ab21d381f71b691cecb749da3bd91fbd7fa7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2891.jpg]
 
Figure 6: Lot Depth
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7306ab21d381f71b691cecb749da3bd91fbd7fa7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2893.jpg]
 
Figure 7: Setback - Yard
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7306ab21d381f71b691cecb749da3bd91fbd7fa7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2895.jpg]
 
Figure 8: Front Yard - Measurement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7306ab21d381f71b691cecb749da3bd91fbd7fa7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2897.jpg]
 
Figure 9: Front Yard - Corner Lot
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/7306ab21d381f71b691cecb749da3bd91fbd7fa7/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2899.jpg]
 
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
[Reserved]
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Texas Codes
References to 1998 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO TEXAS CODES
 
Texas Code Cites Code Section
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
Administrative Code Title 16, § 23.97(a)       52.06
Administrative Code Title 16, § 23.97(d)       52.06
Administrative Code Title 16, § 23.97(e)       52.06
Administrative Code Title 30, Ch. 290, Subch. D 50.061
Administrative Code Title 30, § 920.38 et seq. 50.17
Administrative Code Title 31, Ch. 307           158.04
Administration Code Title 30, Ch. 312.142       51.60
 
 
Texas Code Cites          Code Section
AGRICULTURE CODE
Agriculture Code Ch. 75   158.21
Agriculture Code Ch. 76   158.21
Agriculture Code § 76.001158.04
 
 
Texas Code Cites Code Section
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CODE
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.04          Ch. 119
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.04(13)      119.05
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 11.38         119.30
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 22.08         119.05
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 33.01         119.07
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 61.36         119.30
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 101.63(a)     119.09
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 102.01        119.02
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 104.01        119.15
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 105.01        119.04
Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 105.01—105119.05
Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 105.02—105119.04
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 105.05        119.03
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 105.06(c)     119.06
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 106.02        119.12
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 106.03        119.10
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 106.04        119.12
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 106.05        119.12
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 106.09        119.11
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33        Ch. 119
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.53        119.02
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 201.09        119.05
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 201.13        119.05
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 201.45        119.05
Alcoholic Beverage Code § 201.47        119.05
 
 
Texas Code Cites                            Code Section
BUSINESS AND COMMERCE CODE
Business and Commerce Code §§ 36.01 et seq117.03
Business and Commerce Code Ch. 43(B)        118.026
Business and Commerce Code Ch. 153          117.03
 
 
Texas Code Cites Code Section
CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE
Code of Criminal Procedure Art. 1.07          32.080
Code of Criminal Procedure Ch. 2, Art. 2.12   112.02,
                                              112.17
Code of Criminal Procedure Art. 14.01 et seq. 32.045
Code of Criminal Procedure Art. 17.04         33.13
Code of Criminal Procedure § 38.11           33.13
Code of Criminal Procedure Art. 23.14         32.080
Code of Criminal Procedure Art. 43.02         32.080
Code of Criminal Procedure Art. 44.01         33.12
Code of Criminal Procedure Art. 44.42         32.080
Code of Criminal Procedure Art. 44.43         32.080
Code of Criminal Procedure Art. 45.02         33.08
 
 
Texas Code Cites        Code Section
EDUCATION CODE
Education Code § 38.007119.02
 
 
Texas Code Cites             Code Section
FAMILY CODE
Family Code §§ 31.01 et seq130.27
Family Code § 51.08         130.99
 
 
Texas Code Cites Code Section
GOVERNMENT CODE
Gov’t Code Ch. 30, Subch. A   33.01;
                                33.08
Gov’t Code § 30.00014        33.11
Gov’t Code § 30.00019        33.11
Gov’t Code §§ 418.01 et seq.35.30,
                                35.32
Gov’t Code § 418.173         35.99
Gov’t Code §§ 552.001 et seq113.003
Gov’t Code § 552.003(6)      37.15
Gov’t Code § 552.275         37.15
Gov’t Code § 552.275(a) and (37.15
Gov’t Code § 552.275(d)      37.15
Gov’t Code § 552.275(e)      37.15
Gov’t Code §§ 845.401—845.34.05
                                34.01,
Gov’t Code §§ 851.001 et seq34.10,
                                34.11
Gov’t Code § 851.001         34.11
Gov’t Code § 851.001(8)      34.02
Gov’t Code § 852.006(a)      34.03
Gov’t Code § 853.502         34.12
Gov’t Code § 853.502(b)      34.12
Gov’t Code § 853.505         34.12
Gov’t Code § 854.102(b)      34.08
Gov’t Code § 854.202(f)      34.11
Gov’t Code §§ 854.301—854.34.11
Gov’t Code § 854.405         34.11
Gov’t Code § 854.406         34.11
Gov’t Code § 854.408         34.11
Gov’t Code § 854.409         34.11
Gov’t Code § 854.410         34.11
Gov’t Code §§ 855.402 et seq34.05
Gov’t Code § 855.501(b)      34.04
Gov’t Code §§ 2253.001 et se36.01
 
 
Texas Code Cites Code Section
HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE
Health and Safety Code § 161.081         111.02
Health and Safety Code §§ 247.001 et seq160.051
Health and Safety Code § 341.001         94.001
Health and Safety Code § 341.002         Ch. 94
Health and Safety Code § 341.081         Ch. 94
Health and Safety Code § 342.001         94.026
Health and Safety Code § 342.003         94.027
Health and Safety Code § 342.004         94.028
Health and Safety Code § 342.006         94.029,
                                          94.032
Health and Safety Code § 342.006(a)      94.030
Health and Safety Code § 342.006(a)(1)   94.029
Health and Safety Code § 342.006(a)(2)   94.029
Health and Safety Code § 342.007         94.029
Health and Safety Code § 342.007(b)      94.031
Health and Safety Code § 361.003(12)     94.006
Health and Safety Code Ch. 481            160.051
Health and Safety Code § 481.002(5)      130.07
Health and Safety Code § 481.002(6)      130.07,
                                          130.99
Health and Safety Code Art. 481.134       130.10
Health and Safety Code § 483.001(2)      130.07,
                                          130.99
Health and Safety Code §§ 501.001 et seq130.99
Health and Safety Code §§ 756.011—756.130.01
Health and Safety Code §§ 756.012       130.99
Health and Safety Code Ch. 771            52.06
Health and Safety Code Ch. 772            52.06
Health and Safety Code §§ 822.021 et seq95.017
Health and Safety Code § 826.033         95.023
Health and Safety Code §§ 826.041—826.95.040
 
 
Texas Code Cites                       Code Section
HUMAN RESOURCES CODE
Human Resources Code §§ 42.001 et seq160.006
Human Resources Code § 121.007(a)(b)  73.03
 
 
Texas Code Cites Code Section
LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE
Local Gov’t Code Ch. 53           10.01
Local Gov’t Code Ch. 54, Subch. C 150.020
Local Gov’t Code § 54.001        10.99;
                                    50.999
Local Gov’t Code § 54.012        50.999
Local Gov’t Code § 54.016        158.99
Local Gov’t Code § 54.017        150.025
Local Gov’t Code § 54.039        150.027,
                                    150.028
Local Gov’t Code § 105.001       36.15
Local Gov’t Code § 117.001 et seq30.06
                                    32.002,
                                    32.025,
Local Gov’t Code §§ 143.001 et s32.026,
                                    32.063;
                                    32.999
Local Gov’t Code § 143.005       32.027
Local Gov’t Code § 143.006(e)    31.20
Local Gov’t Code § 143.006(f)    31.26
Local Gov’t Code § 143.012       31.20
Local Gov’t Code § 143.071       32.028
Local Gov’t Code § 143.086       32.028
Local Gov’t Code § 143.087       32.029
Local Gov’t Code §§ 201.001 et s37.01,
                                    37.07
Local Gov’t Code § 201.005       37.04
Local Gov’t Code §§ 211.001—21160.110
                                    159.001,
Local Gov’t Code Ch. 212          159.008,
                                    159.025,
                                    159.026
Local Gov’t Code § 212.0065      159.026,
                                    159.027
Local Gov’t Code § 212.0115      159.003
Local Gov’t Code § 212.013       159.028
Local Gov’t Code § 212.016       159.025,
                                    159.026
Local Gov’t Code § 215.042       33.02
Local Gov’t Code § 215.072       33.02
                                    150.025,
Local Gov’t Code Ch. 214          150.032,
                                    150.033
Local Gov’t Code Ch. 214, Subch. A33.02
Local Gov’t Code §§ 243.001 et s117.99
Local Gov’t Code § 251.001       Ch. 90,
                                    Ch. 92
Local Gov’t Code §§ 252.001 et s36.01
Local Gov’t Code § 252.021       36.01
Local Gov’t Code Ch. 284          52.111
Local Gov’t Code § 284.053(a)    52.111
Local Gov’t Code § 341.012       32.060;
                                    32.144
Local Gov’t Code § 341.903       33.02
Local Gov’t Code § 342.012       32.144
Local Gov’t Code §§ 331.001 et sCh. 92
Local Gov’t Code § 551.002       33.02
 
 
Texas Code Cites                         Code Section
NATURAL RESOURCES CODE
Natural Resources Code §§ 81.001 et seqCh. 120
Natural Resources Code § 113.001        Ch. 96
 
 
Texas Code Cites Code Section
OCCUPATIONS CODE
Occupations Code Ch. 53              30.02
Occupations Code § 151.001          35.02
Occupations Code Ch. 1101            93.23
Occupations Code §§ 1301.001 et seq152.01;
                                     154.01
Occupations Code Ch. 2153            Ch. 118
Occupations Code § 2153.044         118.023
Occupations Code § 2153.401         118.021
Occupations Code § 2303.159(a)      112.22
 
 
Texas Code Cites Code Section
PENAL CODE
Penal Code Titles 1—3     10.05
Penal Code §§ 21.01 et seq117.07
Penal Code § 22.011        117.07
Penal Code § 22.021        117.07
Penal Code § 38.15         112.12
Penal Code § 42.01(a)(5)   94.008
Penal Code §§ 43.01 et seq117.07
Penal Code Ch. 47           118.024;
                            118.026
Penal Code § 47.01         118.026
 
 
Texas Code Cites Code Section
PROPERTY CODE
Property Code § 301.021         93.16
Property Code § 301.022         93.17
Property Code § 301.023         93.18
Property Code § 301.024         93.19
Property Code § 301.025         93.20
Property Code § 301.026         93.21
Property Code § 301.027         93.22
Property Code §§ 301.041—301.93.23
Property Code § 301.171         93.27
 
 
Texas Code Cites                           Code Section
REVISED CIVIL STATUTES
Rev. Civ. Stat. Art. 1011-a through 1011-j 160.110
Rev. Civ. Stat. Art. 1011(n)               160.051
Rev. Civ. Stat. Art. 4590b                 35.12
Rev. Civ. Stat. Art. 6243e                 34.09
Rev. Civ. Stat. Art. 9102                  160.051
 
 
Texas Code Cites Code Section
TAX CODE
Tax Code Ch. 11             36.46
Tax Code § 11.13           36.46
Tax Code § 11.13(m)        36.46
Tax Code § 182.025(b)      90.072
Tax Code § 321.101         36.47
Tax Code §§ 351.001 et seq36.48
Tax Code § 351.001         36.48
 
 
Texas Code Cites             Code Section
TAX UTILITIES CODE
Tax Utilities Code Ch. 54    52.04;
                             90.107
Tax Utilities Code § 54.206 52.11
Tax Utilities Code § 121.252Ch. 96
 
 
Texas Code Cites Code Section
TRANSPORTATION CODE
Transportation Code §§ 311.001 et seq.         Ch. 90
Transportation Code §§ 313.001 et seq.         90.001
Transportation Code § 471.007                   75.01;
                                                 75.99
Transportation Code §§ 501.001 et seq.         70.01
Transportation Code § 502.151                   71.18
Transportation Code § 502.281                   112.04
Transportation Code § 541.001 et seq.           Ch. 70
Transportation Code Ch. 541, Subch. C, § 541.20172.13
Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(2)             Ch. 70,
                                                 Ch. 72
Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(3)             70.10
Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(8)             70.29
Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(10)            70.32
Transportation Code § 543.009                   33.13
Transportation Code §§ 543.102—543.104       33.13
Transportation Code § 544.002                   Ch. 70
Transportation Code § 544.003                   70.29
Transportation Code § 545.305                   72.02
Transportation Code § 545.352                   71.31
Transportation Code § 545.356                   71.31
Transportation Code § 550.067(c)                70.09
Transportation Code § 552.0071                  115.076
Transportation Code §§ 601.001 et seq.         113.082
Transportation Code § 621.002                   71.18
Transportation Code § 621.101                   71.18
Transportation Code § 621.501                   71.18
Transportation Code Ch. 681                      72.04
Transportation Code § 681.003                   72.04
Transportation Code Ch. 683, Subch. E            33.02
Transportation Code Ch. 2303                     112.02
Transportation Code § 2303.002                  112.02
 
 
Texas Code Cites                Code Section
UTILITIES CODE
Utilities Code Ch. 54           52.04;
                                90.107
Utilities Code §§ 54.204—54.52.20
 
 
Texas Code Cites Code Section
WATER CODE
Water Code §§ 16.311 et seq157.01
Water Code §§ 26.001 et seq51.30
Water Code § 26.121         158.99
Water Code § 26.123(a)      158.99
Water Code § 26.124         158.99
                             
 
REFERENCES TO 1998 CODE
 
1998 Code 2014 Code
1-2             10.05
1-6             10.19
1-7             10.99
2-1             30.02
2-31            30.20
2-32            30.21
2-61            30.03
2-62            30.04
2-63            30.05
2-64            30.06
2-65            30.07
2-101           34.25
2-102           34.26
2-103           34.27
2-104           34.28
2-105           34.29
2-106           34.30
2-107           34.31
2-108           34.32
2-109           34.33
2-110           34.34
2-111           34.35
2-112           34.36
2-113           34.37
2-141           36.01
2-161           36.15
2-162           36.16
2-163           36.17
2-164           36.18
2-181           36.02
2-185           36.30
2-186           36.31
2-187           36.32
2-188           36.33
2-201           37.01
2-202           37.02
2-203           37.03
2-204           37.04
2-205           37.05
2-206           37.06
2-207           37.07
2-208           37.07
2-209           37.08
2-210           37.09
2-211           37.09
2-212           37.10
2-213           37.11
2-214           37.12
2-215           37.13
2-216           37.14
6-1             110.01
6-2             110.02
6-3             110.03
6-4             110.04
6-5             110.05
6-6             110.06
6-7             110.06
6-8             110.06
6-9             110.06
10-1            119.01
10-2            119.02
10-3            119.03
10-4            119.04
10-5            119.05
10-6            119.06,
                119.99
10-7            119.07
10-8            119.08
10-9            119.09
10-10           119.10
10-11           119.11
10-12           119.12
10-13           119.13
10-14           119.14
10-15           119.15
10-41           119.30
10-42           119.31
10-43           119.32
10-44           119.33
10-45           119.34
14-1            118.001
14-2            118.002
14-3            118.003
14-4            118.004
14-5            118.005
14-6            118.006
14-7            118.999
14-31           118.020
14-32           118.021
14-33           118.022
14-34           118.023
14-35           118.024
14-36           118.025
14-37           118.026
14-61           118.040
14-62           118.041
14-63           118.042
14-64           118.043
14-65           118.044
14-66           118.045
14-67           118.046
14-81           118.047
14-82           118.048
14-83           118.049
14-84           118.050
14-85           118.051
14-86           118.052
14-87           118.053
14-88           118.054
14-89           118.055
14-90           118.056
14-91           118.057
14-111          118.070
14-112          118.071
14-131          118.072
14-132          118.073
14-133          118.074
14-134          118.075
14-135          118.076
14-137          118.077
18-1            95.001
18-2            95.002
18-3            95.003
18-31           95.015
18-32           95.016
18-33           95.017
18-34           95.018
18-35           95.019
18-36           95.020
18-37           95.021
18-38           95.021
18-39           95.021
18-40           95.022
18-41           95.023
18-42           95.024
18-43           95.025
18-44           95.026
18-45           95.027
18-46           95.028;
                95.999
18-47           95.029
18-71           95.040
18-72           95.041
18-101          95.055
18-102          95.056
18-103          95.057
18-104          95.999
18-107          95.004
18-121          95.070
18-122          95.071;
                95.999
18-123          95.072;
                95.999
18-124          95.073;
                95.999
22-1            150.001
22-31           150.050
22-32           150.051
22-33           150.052
22-61           150.065
22-91           151.001
22-92           151.002
22-110          151.015
22-111          151.016
22-112          151.017
22-113          151.018
22-114          151.019
22-115          151.020
22-131          151.035
22-132          151.036
22-161          151.050
22-162          151.051
22-163          151.052
22-164          151.053
22-165          151.054
22-166          151.055
22-167          151.056
22-168          151.057
22-169          151.058
22-170          151.059
22-171          151.060
22-172          151.061
22-173          151.062
22-174          151.063
22-175          151.064
22-176          151.065
22-177          151.066
22-178          151.067
22-201          151.080
22-202          151.081
22-203          151.082
22-204          151.083
22-205          151.084
22-206          151.085
22-209          151.087
22-210          151.088
22-211          151.089
22-212          151.090
22-241          152.01
22-242          152.02
22-243          152.03
22-261          152.04
22-281          150.071
22-282          150.071
22-301          150.020
22-302          150.021
22-303          150.022
22-304          150.023
22-305          150.024
22-306          150.025
22-307          150.999
22-308          150.026
22-309          150.027
22-310          150.028
22-311          150.029
22-312          150.030
22-313          150.031
22-317          150.032
22-318          150.033
22-319          150.034
22-320          150.035
22-321          150.036
22-325          150.037
22-326          150.999
22-341          153.01
22-342          153.02
22-361          153.15
22-362          153.16
22-363          153.17
22-369          153.18
22-431          154.01
22-432          154.02
22-433          154.03
22-434          154.04
22-451          154.05
22-452          154.05
22-501          150.066
22-502          150.066
22-521          122.01
22-522          122.02
22-523          122.03
22-524          122.04
22-525          122.05
22-541          122.20
22-542          122.21
22-543          122.22
22-544          122.23
22-545          122.24
22-546          122.25
22-547          122.26
22-548          122.27
22-549          122.28
22-550          122.29
22-551          122.30
22-565          150.067
22-571          150.068
22-572          150.068
22-573          150.999
22-580          150.069
22-586          150.070
26-31           116.01
26-32           116.02
26-33           116.03
26-61           117.01
26-62           117.02
26-63           117.03
26-64           117.04
26-65           117.05
26-66           117.06
26-67           117.07
26-68           117.08
26-69           117.09
26-70           117.10
26-71           117.11
26-72           117.12
26-73           117.99
26-74           117.99
34-31           35.30
34-32           35.31
34-33           35.32
34-34           35.33
34-35           35.34
34-36           35.35
34-37           35.36
34-38           35.37
34-39           35.99
38-4            33.04
42-1            30.01
46-31           35.01
46-32           35.02
46-33           35.03
46-34           35.04
46-35           35.05
46-36           35.07
46-37           35.08
46-38           35.09
46-39           35.10
46-40           35.11
46-41           35.12
46-43           35.13
46-44           35.14
46-45           35.15
46-46           35.16
46-47           35.17,
                35.18
50-3            150.002,
                150.999
50-31           94.009
50-32           94.009
50-61           120.01
50-63           120.02
50-64           120.03
50-65           120.04
50-66           120.05
50-81           120.20
50-82           120.21
50-83           120.22
50-84           120.23
50-85           120.24
50-86           120.25
50-88           120.26
50-89           120.27
50-90           120.28
50-91           120.29
50-111          120.45
50-112          120.46
50-113          120.47
50-114          120.48
50-115          120.49
50-116          120.50
50-117          120.51
50-118          120.52
50-119          120.53
50-120          120.54
50-121          120.55
50-122          120.56
50-123          120.57
50-124          120.58
50-125          120.59
50-151          121.01
50-152          121.99
50-153          121.02
50-171          121.15
50-172          121.16
50-173          121.17
50-174          121.18
50-175          121.19
50-176          121.20
50-191          121.35
50-192          121.36
50-193          121.37
50-194          121.38
50-195          121.39
50-210          158.01
50-211          158.02
50-212          158.03
50-213          158.04
50-231          158.20
50-232          158.23
50-241          158.21
50-251          158.22
50-261          158.23
50-271          158.24
50-281          158.25
50-291          158.99
50-301          158.99
50-311          158.99
50-321          158.05
54-1            32.115
54-2            32.116
54-3            32.117
54-4            32.118
54-5            32.119
54-6            32.119
54-7            32.119
54-8            32.120
54-9            32.121
54-10           32.122
54-11           32.999
54-12           32.123
54-13           32.123
54-14           32.123
54-15           32.123
54-31           32.135
54-32           32.136
54-33           32.137
54-34           32.138
54-35           32.139
54-36           32.140
54-37           32.141
54-38           32.142
54-39           32.143
54-40           32.144,
                32.999
54-41           32.145
54-42           32.146
54-101          96.15
54-102          96.16
54-103          96.17
54-104          96.18
54-105          96.19
54-125          96.30
54-126          96.31
54-127          96.32
54-128          96.33
54-129          96.34
54-130          96.99
58-31           157.01
58-32           157.02
58-33           157.03
58-34           157.04
58-35           157.05
58-36           157.06
58-37           157.07
58-38           157.08
58-39           157.09
58-40           157.10
58-41           157.11
58-42           157.12
58-61           157.25
58-62           157.25
58-63           157.26
58-64           157.27
58-81           157.40
58-82           157.41
58-83           157.42
58-84           157.43
58-85           157.44
58-86           157.45
62-3            94.001
62-4            94.002
62-5            94.003
62-6            94.004;
                94.999
62-7            94.005
62-8            94.006
62-9            94.007;
                94.999
62-10           94.008
62-111          94.999
62-112          94.025,
                94.999
62-113          94.026
62-114          94.027
62-115          94.028
62-116          94.029
62-118          94.030
62-119          94.031
62-120          94.032
62-141          94.045
62-142          94.046
62-143          94.047
62-144          94.048
62-145          94.049
62-149          94.050
62-150          94.999
62-151          94.051
62-152          94.999
62-181          111.01
62-182          111.02
62-183          111.03
62-184          111.04
62-185          111.05
62-186          111.06
62-187          111.07
62-188          111.08
62-189          111.99
66-1            93.01
66-31           93.15
66-32           93.16
66-33           93.17
66-34           93.18
66-35           93.19
66-36           93.20
66-37           93.21
66-38           93.22
66-39           93.23
66-40           93.24
66-41           93.25
66-42           93.26
66-43           93.27
66-44           93.28
66-45           93.29
66-46           93.30
66-47           93.99
66-48           93.99
70-1            32.040
70-2            32.041
70-3            32.042
70-4            32.043
70-5            32.044
70-6            32.045
70-7            32.046
70-8            32.047
70-9            32.048
70-10           32.049
70-31           32.060
70-32           32.061
70-33           32.062
70-34           32.063
70-35           32.064
70-36           32.065
70-37           32.066
70-61           32.080
70-62           32.081
70-63           32.082
70-64           32.083
70-65           32.084
70-91           32.095
70-92           32.096
70-93           32.097
70-94           32.098
70-95           32.099
70-96           32.100
70-97           32.101
74-1            156.01
74-2            156.02
74-31           156.15
74-32           156.16
74-33           156.17
74-34           156.18
74-35           156.19
74-36           156.20
74-37           156.21
74-38           156.22
74-39           156.23
74-40           156.24
74-41           156.25
74-42           156.26
74-43           156.27
74-44           156.28
74-45           156.29
74-46           156.30
74-47           156.31
74-61           156.45
74-62           156.46
74-63           156.47
74-64           156.48
74-65           156.49
74-66           156.50
74-67           156.51
74-68           156.52
74-69           156.53
74-80           156.03
78-1            130.01
78-2            130.02
78-3            130.02
78-4            130.03
78-6            130.04
78-7            130.05
78-8            130.06
78-9            130.07
78-9            130.99
78-10           130.08;
                130.99
78-51           130.25
78-52           130.26
78-53           130.27
78-54           130.28
78-55           130.99
78-57           130.29
78-81           130.09;
                130.99
78-86           130.10,
                130.99
82-1            92.01
82-2            92.02,
                92.99
82-3            92.03
82-4            92.04,
                92.99
82-5            92.05,
                92.99
82-6            92.06
82-7            92.07
82-31           31.01
82-32           31.02
82-33           31.03
82-34           31.04
82-35           31.05
82-36           31.06
82-37           31.07
86-1            115.001
86-31           115.015
86-32           115.016
86-51           115.017
86-52           115.018
86-53           115.019
86-54           115.020
86-55           115.021
86-56           115.022
86-57           115.022
86-58           115.022
86-59           115.022
86-71           115.023
86-72           115.024
86-73           115.025
86-74           115.026
86-75           115.027
86-76           115.028
86-77           115.029
86-78           115.030
86-79           115.031
86-80           115.032
86-81           115.033
86-82           115.034
86-101          115.045
86-102          115.046
86-103          115.047
86-104          115.048
86-121          115.049
86-122          115.050
86-124          115.051
86-125          115.052
86-126          115.053
86-127          115.054
86-128          115.055
86-129          115.056
86-130          115.057
86-171          115.070
86-172          115.071
86-173          115.072
86-174          115.073
86-175          115.074
86-176          115.075
86-191          115.076
90-31           32.025
90-32           32.026
90-33           32.999
90-34           32.027
90-35           32.028
90-36           32.029
90-61           31.20
90-63           31.22
90-64           31.23
90-65           31.24
90-66           31.25
90-67           31.26
90-121          32.001
90-122          32.002
90-123          32.003
90-124          32.004
90-125          32.005
90-126          32.006
90-127          32.007
90-128          32.008
90-151          32.009
90-171          32.010
90-172          32.010
90-221          34.01
90-222          34.02
90-223          34.03
90-224          34.04
90-225          34.05
90-226          34.06
90-227          34.07
90-228          34.08
90-229          34.09
90-230          34.10
90-231          34.11
90-232          34.12
94-31           114.01
94-32           114.02
94-33           114.03
94-34           114.04
94-35           114.05
94-36           114.06
94-37           114.07
94-38           114.08
94-39           114.09
94-61           114.20
94-62           114.21
94-63           114.22
94-64           114.23
94-65           114.24
94-66           114.25
94-67           114.26
94-68           114.27
98-1            155.001
98-2            155.002
98-3            155.003
98-4            155.004
98-5            155.005
98-6            155.006
98-7            155.007
98-31           155.085
98-32           155.086
98-33           155.087,
                155.999
98-61           155.020
98-62           155.021
98-63           155.022
98-64           155.023
98-65           155.024
98-66           155.025
98-67           155.026
98-91           155.040
98-92           155.041
98-93           155.042
98-94           155.043
98-95           155.044
98-96           155.045
98-97           155.046
98-98           155.047
98-99           155.048
98-100          155.049
98-101          155.050
98-102          155.051
98-131          155.065
98-132          155.066
98-133          155.067
98-134          155.068
98-135          155.069
98-136          155.070
102-1           53.01
102-2           53.02
102-3           53.03
102-4           53.04
102-5           53.05
102-6           53.06
102-7           53.07
102-8           53.08
102-9           53.09
102-10          53.10
102-11          53.11
102-12          53.12
102-13          53.13
102-15          53.15
102-16          53.16
102-17          53.17
102-18          53.18
102-19          53.19
102-20          53.20
102-21          53.21
102-22          53.22
102-23          53.23
102-24          53.24
102-25          53.99
102-51          94.065
102-52          94.066
102-53          94.067
102-54          94.068
102-55          94.069
102-56          94.070
102-57          94.071
102-58          94.072
102-59          94.073
102-60          94.999
106-1           90.001
106-2           90.002
106-3           90.003
106-4           90.004
106-5           90.005
106-6           90.006
106-7           90.007
106-8           90.008
106-9           90.009
106-11          90.010
106-12          90.011
106-13          90.012
106-41          90.025
106-42          90.026
106-43          90.027
106-44          90.028
106-45          90.029
106-46          90.030
106-47          90.031
106-71          90.045
106-72          90.046
106-73          90.047
106-74          90.048
106-75          90.049
106-76          90.050
106-77          90.051
106-78          90.052
106-79          90.053
106-80          90.054
106-81          90.055
106-82          90.056
106-113         90.070
106-114         90.071
106-115         90.072
106-116         90.073
106-117         90.074
106-118         90.075
106-119         90.076
106-120         90.077
106-143         90.090
106-144         90.091
106-145         90.092
106-146         90.093
106-147         90.094
106-171         90.105
106-172         90.106
106-173         90.107
106-174         90.108
106-175         90.109
106-176         90.110
106-177         90.111
106-178         90.112
106-179         90.113
106-180         90.114
106-181         90.115
106-182         90.116
114-1           36.45
114-2           36.46
114-31          36.47
114-54          36.47
114-56          36.47
114-57          36.99
118-1           70.01
118-2           70.02
118-3           70.03
118-4           70.04
118-5           70.05
118-6           70.06
118-7           70.07
118-8           70.08
118-9           70.09
118-10          70.10
118-11          70.11
118-31          71.01
118-32          71.02
118-33          71.03
118-34          71.04
118-35          71.05
118-36          71.06
118-37          71.07
118-38          71.08
118-39          71.09
118-40          71.10
118-41          71.11
118-42          71.12
118-43          71.13
118-44          71.14
118-45          71.15
118-46          71.16
118-47          Ch. 76, Schd. I
118-48          71.17
118-49          71.18,
                71.99
118-73          70.25
118-74          70.26
118-75          70.27
118-76          70.28
118-77          70.29
118-78          70.30
118-79          70.31
118-80          70.32
118-81          70.33
118-111         71.30
118-112         71.31
118-113         71.32
118-114         71.33
118-141         73.01
118-142         73.02
118-143         73.03
118-144         73.04
118-171         74.01
118-173         74.02
118-191         74.03
118-192         74.04
118-194         74.06
118-195         74.05;
                74.07
118-221         72.01
118-223         72.02
118-225         72.03
118-226         72.04
118-227         72.05
118-228         72.06
118-229         72.07
118-230         72.08
118-231         72.09
118-232         72.10
118-233         72.25
118-234         72.26
118-235         72.27
118-236         72.28
118-241         72.11
118-242         72.12
118-261         75.01,
                75.99
118-262         75.02
118-263         75.03
118-264         75.04
118-276         74.20
118-277         74.21
118-278         74.22
122-2           50.001
122-3           50.002
122-4           50.003
122-31          51.01
122-32          51.02
122-33          51.03
122-34          51.04,
                51.99
122-35          51.05
122-36          51.06
122-37          51.07
122-38          51.08
122-39          51.09
122-40          51.10
122-41          51.11,
                51.99
122-61          51.25
122-62          51.26
122-63          51.27
122-64          51.28
122-65          51.29
122-66          51.30
122-67          51.31
122-68          51.32
122-69          51.33
122-70          51.34
122-71          51.35
122-72          51.36
122-73          51.37
122-74          51.38
122-75          51.39
122-76          51.40
122-77          51.41
122-78          51.42
122-79          51.43
122-80          51.44
122-81          51.45
122-82          51.46
122-83          51.99
122-84          51.47
122-85          51.60
122-86          51.61
122-87          51.62
122-88          51.63
122-89          51.64
122-90          51.65
122-91          51.66
122-92          51.99
122-111         50.015
122-112         50.016
122-113         50.017
122-114         50.018
122-115         50.019
122-116         50.020
122-117         50.021
122-118         50.022
122-119         50.035
122-120         50.036
122-121         50.037
122-122         50.038
122-123         50.039
122-127         50.043
122-128         50.044
122-130         50.045
122-139         50.060
122-140         50.061
122-141         50.062
122-142         50.063
122-143         50.064
122-144         50.065
122-145         50.066
122-146         50.067
122-147         50.999
122-151         50.080
122-152         50.081
122-153         50.082
122-154         50.083
122-155         50.084,
                50.999
122-171         52.01
122-172         52.02
122-173         52.03
122-174         52.04
122-175         52.05
122-176         52.06
122-177         52.07
122-178         52.08
122-179         52.09
122-180         52.10
122-181         52.11
122-182         52.12
122-183         52.13
122-184         52.14
122-185         52.15
122-186         52.16
122-187         52.17
122-188         52.18
122-189         52.19
122-190         52.20
122-191         52.21
122-192         52.22
122-193         52.23
122-194         52.24
122-195         52.25
122-196         52.26
126-30          112.01
126-31          112.02
126-32          112.03
126-33          112.04
126-34          112.05
126-35          112.06
126-36          112.07
126-37          112.07
126-38          112.07
126-39          112.08
126-42          112.09
126-43          112.10
126-44          112.11
126-45          112.12
126-46          112.13
126-47          112.14
126-48          112.15
126-49          112.16
126-50          112.17
126-51          112.18
126-52          112.19
126-53          112.20
126-54          112.21
126-55          112.22
126-131         113.001
126-132         113.002
126-134         113.003
126-135         113.004
126-151         113.020
126-152         113.021
126-153         113.022
126-154         113.023
126-155         113.024
126-171         113.035
126-172         113.036
126-173         113.037
126-174         113.038
126-175         113.039
126-176         113.040
126-180         113.041
126-181         113.042
126-183         113.043
126-184         113.044
126-201         113.055
126-202         113.056
126-203         113.057
126-204         113.058
126-205         113.059
126-206         113.060
126-209         113.061
126-210         113.062
126-211         113.063
126-212         113.064
126-213         113.065
126-214         113.066
126-231         113.080
126-232         113.081
126-234         113.082
126-235         113.083
126-236         113.084
126-237         113.085
126-251         113.100
126-252         113.101
126-253         113.102
126-254         113.103
126-255         113.104
126-256         113.105
126-257         113.106
126-258         113.107
126-259         113.108
126-260         113.109
126-261         113.110
126-281         113.125
126-282         113.126
126-283         113.127
126-284         113.128
126-285         113.129
126-286         113.130
126-287         113.131
126-288         113.132
126-289         113.133
126-311         112.35
126-312         112.36
126-313         112.37
126-314         112.38
126-315         112.39
126-316         112.40
126-317         112.41
126-318         112.42
126-319         112.43
126-321         112.44
130-1           91.01
130-21          91.15
130-22          91.16
130-23          91.17
130-24          91.18
130-25          91.19
130-26          91.20
130-27          91.21
130-28          91.22
130-29          91.23
App. A, § 40-1 160.001
App. A, § 40-2 160.002
App. A, § 40-3 160.003
App. A, § 40-4 160.004
App. A, § 40-5 160.005
App. A, § 40-6 160.006
App. A, § 40-10160.020
App. A, § 40-11160.021
App. A, § 40-12160.022
App. A, § 40-13160.023
App. A, § 40-14160.024
App. A, § 40-15160.025
App. A, § 40-16160.026
App. A, § 40-18160.027
App. A, § 40-19160.028
App. A, § 40-22160.029
App. A, § 40-23160.030
App. A, § 40-24160.031
App. A, § 40-28160.032
App. A, § 40-29160.033
App. A, § 40-30160.034
App. A, § 40-31160.035
App. A, § 40-32160.036
App. A, § 40-33160.037
App. A, § 40-34160.038
App. A, § 40-35160.039
App. A, § 40-36160.040
App. A, § 40-38160.041
App. A, § 40-40160.042
App. A, § 40-41160.043
App. A, § 40-42160.044
App. A, § 40-43160.045
App. A, § 40-44160.046
App. A, § 40-45160.047
App. A, § 40-46160.048
App. A, § 40-47160.049
App. A, § 40-48160.050
App. A, § 40-49160.051
App. A, § 40-51160.052
App. A, § 40-52160.053
App. A, § 40-54160.080
App. A, § 40-56160.081
App. A, § 40-57160.082
App. A, § 40-58160.083
App. A, § 40-59160.084
App. A, § 40-60160.085
App. A, § 40-61160.086
App. A, § 40-62160.087
App. A, § 40-63160.088
App. A, § 40-65160.089
App. A, § 40-66160.090
App. A, § 40-67160.091
App. A, § 40-68160.092
App. A, § 40-69160.093
App. A, § 40-76160.105
App. A, § 40-77160.106
App. A, § 40-78160.107
App. A, § 40-79160.108
App. A, § 40-80160.109
App. A, § 40-81160.110
App. A, § 40-82160.111
App. A, § 40-83160.112
App. A, § 40-84160.113
App. A, § 40-85160.999
App. A, § 40-86160.114
App. A, § 40-87160.115
App. A, § 40-88160.116
App. A, § 40-90160.065
App. A, § 40-91160.066
App. A, § 40-92160.067
App. A, § 40-93160.068
App. A, § 40-94160.069
                
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
93-73 11-17-1973 35.32
93-37 7-7-1993   72.11,
                 72.12
                 150.050,
                 150.065,
                 150.071,
93-52 9-22-1993  151.080,
                 152.04,
                 153.01,
                 154.05
93-53 9-22-1993  152.04
93-54 9-22-1993  154.05
93-55 9-22-1993  151.080
93-57 9-22-1993  150.050,
                 150.051
93-58 9-22-1993  150.071
93-59 9-22-1993  153.01
93-60 9-22-1993  150.065
93-47 9-30-1993  120.23
                 155.001—
                 155.007,
                 155.020—
                 155.026,
                 155.040—
93-69 11-17-1993 155.051,
                 155.065—
                 155.068,
                 155.085—
                 155.087,
                 155.999
                 35.30;
93-73 11-17-1993 35.32;
                 35.99
93-74 1-19-1994  112.35—
                 112.44
                 53.01—
93-75 1-19-1994  53.13;
                 53.15—
                 53.24
94-01 1-19-1994  95.001—
                 95.003
94-03 3-2-1994   92.03
                 160.006,
                 160.024,
                 160.025,
                 160.033—
                 160.035,
94-05 4-20-1994  160.051,
                 160.080,
                 160.083,
                 160.089,
                 160.091,
                 160.093,
                 160.109
94-10 6-8-1994   117.05
94-14 8-31-1994  92.05,
                 92.99
94-22 11-16-1994 155.026
                 130.25—
94-27 12-21-1994 130.28,
                 130.99
                 154.02,
95-11 7-5-1995   154.03,
                 154.05
95-17 11-15-1995 53.99
                 92.04,
95-21 12-6-1995  92.99,
                 130.09,
                 130.99
95-23 12-20-1995 130.25
95-25 12-20-1995 30.06
                 160.006,
                 160.037,
95-26 1-3-1996   160.051,
                 160.081,
                 160.106
96-20 6-19-1996  36.02
                 151.001,
96-21 8-7-1996   151.080,
                 151.087
                 111.01—
96-32 8-21-1996  111.08,
                 111.99
96-37 9-4-1996   53.16
97-9  4-2-1997   50.080
                 150.050,
                 150.051,
                 150.065,
                 150.071,
98-1  1-7-1998   151.080,
                 152.04,
                 153.01,
                 153.02,
                 154.05
97-26 1-21-1998  160.084
98-2  2-4-1998   53.02
98-6  2-11-1998  34.33
98-5  2-18-1998  94.047
                 130.25—
98-21 6-17-1998  130.28,
                 130.99
                 94.006—
98-29 11-25-1998 94.008,
                 94.999
98-57 11-25-1998 90.012
98-37 12-2-1998  160.106
                 96.30—
98-56 12-2-1998  96.34,
                 96.99
98-64 12-16-1998 35.03
99-15 4-7-1999   52.01—
                 52.26
                 155.003,
                 155.020,
                 155.026,
                 155.047,
99-28 5-5-1999   155.049—
                 155.051,
                 155.065,
                 155.069,
                 155.086
99-33 6-2-1999   93.01
99-38 7-21-1999  36.30—
                 36.33
99-49 7-21-1999  37.07
99-42 8-18-1999  160.065—
                 160.068
99-43 8-18-1999  160.051
99-51 8-18-1999  90.105—
                 90.116
99-50 8-25-1999  160.024,
                 160.025
99-56 9-15-1999  94.028
99-76 12-15-1999 31.01—
                 31.07
                 120.03,
99-78 1-19-2000  120.26,
                 120.28
01-05 3-7-2000   32.009
                 120.03,
00-24 3-15-2000  120.26,
                 120.28
00-38 7-5-2000   152.03,
                 154.04
00-42 7-19-2000  155.065
00-51 9-6-2000   160.024—
                 160.026
00-54 9-6-2000   160.086
00-55 9-20-2000  155.003,
                 155.066
00-62 10-4-2000  32.010
00-63 10-4-2000  32.010
                 32.009,
00-74 11-1-2000  32.115,
                 32.135,
                 32.136
01-07 3-21-2001  160.050
01-08 3-21-2001  51.04,
                 51.99
01-16 7-3-2001   155.065
01-32 7-21-2001  160.107
01-38 9-19-2001  160.052
                 121.01,
                 121.17—
                 121.19,
01-55 12-5-2001  121.35,
                 121.36,
                 121.39,
                 121.99
01-64 1-16-2002  160.110
                 150.050,
                 150.051,
                 150.065,
                 150.067,
                 150.068,
                 150.071,
01-65 1-17-2002  150.999,
                 151.080—
                 151.085,
                 151.090,
                 152.04,
                 153.01,
                 153.02,
                 154.05
02-01 2-6-2002   160.086
02-07 2-6-2002   30.20
02-05 2-20-2002  70.11,
                 94.008
02-31 7-17-2002  151.080
02-41 9-18-2002  71.17
02-53 12-4-2002  156.01,
                 156.02
03-01 2-19-2003  71.18,
                 71.99
03-08 3-5-2003   130.08,
                 130.99
                 118.001—
03-12 4-2-2003   118.006,
                 118.999
                 150.069,
03-09 4-16-2003  153.02,
                 160.024,
                 160.025
03-15 5-21-2003  95.004
03-16 6-4-2003   91.15—
                 91.23
03-22 7-2-2003   32.010
03-30 8-6-2003   156.03
03-39 10-1-2003  32.010
03-38 10-15-2003 112.01—
                 112.22
03-49 11-5-2003  112.01—
                 112.22
03-58 12-10-2003 118.026
03-55 12-17-2003 36.02
04-05 3-3-2004   30.20
04-12 4-7-2004   118.026
04-08 4-21-2004  112.22
04-10 5-5-2004   155.070
                 32.135—
                 32.146,
                 32.999,
                 150.050,
                 150.052,
04-15 5-19-2004  150.066,
                 150.067,
                 150.070,
                 150.071,
                 152.04,
                 153.01,
                 154.05
04-18 5-19-2004  30.07
04-14 6-2-2004   32.009
                 151.020,
04-16 6-2-2004   151.035,
                 151.036
04-30 7-7-2004   32.009
04-32 7-21-2004  94.025
04-33 7-21-2004  94.030
04-34 7-21-2004  94.031
                 150.020—
04-35 9-1-2004   150.037,
                 150.999
04-50 10-20-2004 34.33
                 112.06,
04-53 11-3-2004  112.21,
                 112.22
04-54 11-3-2004  155.067
05-05 4-6-2005   32.009
05-16 5-18-2005  150.002,
                 150.999
05-17 5-18-2005  150.999
05-18 6-15-2005  115.015—
                 115.034
                 113.001—
                 113.004;
                 113.020—
                 113.024,
                 113.035—
                 113.044,
05-19 7-6-2005   113.055—
                 113.066,
                 113.080—
                 113.085,
                 113.100—
                 113.110,
                 113.125—
                 113.133
05-20 7-6-2005   115.045—
                 115.057
                 95.070—
05-08 7-20-2005  95.073,
                 95.999
05-29 8-3-2005   95.072,
                 95.999
05-46 10-2-2005  160.026
                 118.040—
05-30 10-5-2005  118.043,
                 118.045—
                 118.057
                 112.06,
05-45 10-5-2005  112.21,
                 112.22
05-53 12-7-2005  94.008
06-03 1-18-2006  32.010
06-05 2-1-2006   30.20
06-08 2-15-2006  30.20
06-14 4-5-2006   160.026
06-21 6-7-2006   160.069
06-23 6-7-2006   160.040
06-24 6-7-2006   160.046
06-31 7-19-2006  32.010
06-36 10-4-2006  160.069
06-41 12-6-2006  32.009
                 160.006,
                 160.024—
06-42 12-6-2006  160.040,
                 160.043,
                 160.087
07-08 2-7-2007   32.009
07-03 2-17-2007  32.010
07-10 2-21-2007  130.10,
                 130.99
07-12 3-7-2007   130.10,
                 130.99
07-13 3-7-2007   95.028,
                 95.999
07-14 3-7-2007   95.029
07-20 5-2-2007   72.11,
                 72.12
07-22 6-20-2007  30.21
07-25 8-1-2007   160.026
07-26 8-1-2007   160.083
07-27 8-1-2007   115.076
07-29 8-15-2007  36.02
07-34 9-19-2007  32.010
                 130.25—
07-35 9-19-2007  130.29,
                 130.99
07-39 11-7-2007  160.091
07-45 11-7-2007  160.051
07-44 11-21-2007 71.10
07-46 12-5-2007  92.07
                 150.050,
                 150.065—
                 150.067,
                 150.070,
                 150.071,
07-48 12-19-2007 151.080,
                 152.04,
                 153.01,
                 153.15,
                 153.16,
                 154.05
07-51 12-19-2007 32.009
08-05 1-16-2008  160.047
08-08 2-20-2008  32.010
08-16 5-7-2008   157.40,
                 157.43
08-17 5-7-2008   160.069
08-21 5-21-2008  118.026
08-22 5-21-2008  32.136
08-31 7-16-2008  160.091
08-39 9-17-2008  32.010
08-40 10-15-2008 160.053
                 51.25,
                 51.37,
08-46 11-19-2008 51.60—
                 51.66,
                 51.99
                 50.015—
                 50.022,
                 50.035—
                 50.039;
08-47 11-19-2008 50.043—
                 50.045,
                 50.060—
                 50.067,
                 50.999
08-43 12-3-2008  160.041,
                 160.042
08-48 12-3-2008  160.067,
                 160.084
08-52 12-17-2008 32.009
09-06 2-18-2009  32.009
08-56 2-21-2009  32.116
                 159.001—
                 159.009,
                 159.020—
                 159.032,
                 159.045—
08-29 10-21-2009 159.056,
                 159.070—
                 159.082,
                 159.095—
                 159.100,
                 159.999
09-30 10-21-2009 160.083
09-36 11-18-2009 32.999
09-37 12-2-2009  51.66
                 158.01—
                 158.05,
10-05 3-17-2010  158.20—
                 158.25,
                 158.99
10-16 7-7-2010   94.030
10-15 7-21-2010  92.02,
                 92.99
                 115.016,
                 115.017,
                 115.045,
                 115.047,
10-20 9-15-2010  115.049,
                 115.050,
                 115.056,
                 115.070—
                 115.075
10-25 11-3-2010  50.021,
                 50.038
10-33 12-15-2010 94.005
11-04 3-2-2011   115.016,
                 115.017
                 114.01,
11-11 4-20-2011  114.20,
                 114.22—
                 114.24
                 118.022,
11-12 4-20-2011  118.025,
                 118.026
11-14 5-4-2011   32.010
11-20 7-6-2011   118.020,
                 118.025
                 92.03,
11-21 7-6-2011   92.06,
                 92.07
11-24 8-17-2011  74.20—
                 74.22
11-30 9-7-2011   32.010
11-31 9-21-2011  53.99
11-35 10-19-2011 118.020,
                 118.025
11-42 11-16-2011 50.062
11-43 12-7-2011  36.02
12-13 4-4-2012   53.99
                 112.03,
12-14 5-2-2012   112.04,
                 112.17,
                 112.22
12-26 7-18-2012  71.33
12-43 12-5-2012  Ch. 76, Schd. I
13-04 3-20-2013  30.20
13-09 4-3-2013   94.029
13-10 4-3-2013   156.49
                 94.005;
                 94.007;
13-12 4-17-2013  94.025;
                 94.046;
                 94.999
13-08 5-1-2013   72.13
                 112.37;
                 112.38;
                 112.40;
                 112.43;
                 112.44;
                 113.003;
                 113.004;
                 113.037;
13-16 6-19-2013  113.039;
                 113.040;
                 113.042;
                 113.058—
                 113.060;
                 113.062;
                 113.063;
                 113.066;
                 113.109;
                 113.132
                 118.002;
                 118.004—
                 118.006;
13-17 6-19-2013  118.070—
                 118.073;
                 118.077—
                 118.083
                 94.009;
                 120.02;
                 120.21;
                 120.23—
                 120.29;
                 121.02;
13-23 8-7-2013   121.15—
                 121.20;
                 121.35;
                 121.38;
                 121.39;
                 121.99;
                 150.002;
                 150.999
                 32.048;
13-39 9-4-2013   32.060—
                 32.062;
                 32.066
13-41 9-18-2013  30.07
13-44 9-18-2013  160.054
                 115.002;
                 115.017;
13-36 10-2-2013  115.045;
                 115.047;
                 115.051;
                 115.054
13-38 10-2-2013  119.30
                 33.01—
13-54 12-18-2013 33.03;
                 33.05—
                 33.13
14-11 5-21-2014  35.01—
                 35.18
14-07 6-4-2014   Adopting Ordinance
14-12 6-4-2014   50.038
14-27 10-15-2014 32.009
14-30 11-5-2014  50.999
                 150.050—
                 150.052,
                 150.065—
                 150.071,
                 150.999,
                 151.002,
                 151.015—
                 151.020,
                 151.035,
                 151.036,
                 151.050—
                 151.055,
                 151.057—
15-42 12-16-2015 151.059,
                 151.061—
                 151.067,
                 151.080,
                 151.081,
                 151.083—
                 151.088,
                 151.090,
                 152.01—
                 152.04,
                 153.01,
                 153.02,
                 154.01—
                 154.05
                 96.01,
15-43 12-16-2015 96.02,
                 Ch. 96 App. A
16-01 2-17-2016  112.01—
                 112.23
16-02 2-17-2016  130.10
                 160.035,
16-18 6-1-2016   160.037,
                 160.045,
                 160.051
16-23 7-6-2016   32.010
16-37 12-21-2016 32.010
16-38 12-21-2016 32.009
17-15 5-3-2017   32.010
                 50.036,
17-19 6-21-2017  50.038,
                 50.999
17-21 8-16-2017  119.16
18-02 1-17-2018  32.010
18-14 7-18-2018  32.010
19-09 4-17-2019  36.02
19-11 6-5-2019   37.15
19-12 6-5-2019   52.111
                 Charter Art. I, § 3,
                 Charter Art. II, § 5,
                 Charter Art. III, § 2,
                 Charter Art. III, § 3,
                 Charter Art. III, § 8,
                 Charter Art. IV, § 3,
                 Charter Art. V, § 2,
19-31 11-18-2019 Charter Art. IX, § 1,
                 Charter Art. XI, § 1,
                 Charter Art. XI, § 5,
                 Charter Art. XIV, § 1,
                 Charter Art. XIV, § 2,
                 Charter Art. XVII, § 9,
                 Charter Art. XVII, § 11,
                 Charter Art. XVIII, § 9,
                 Charter Art. XVIII, § 16, Charter Art. XVIII, § 20
                
 
 
