7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/385
City of University Park
Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 12
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included as enacted through Ordinance 19/012
adopted 4/16/19.
HOME RULE
CHARTER
* Editor's note–Printed herein is the charter of the City of University Park, Texas. Apart from minor nonsubstantive changes in style and
formatting, the charter is reproduced as it appeared in the 1996 Code of Ordinances. Capitalization, punctuation and grammar have been
retained. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Material enclosed in brackets has been added for clarification.
Amendments to the charter are indicated by a history note following the amended provision. The absence of a history note indicates the
material is unchanged from the original charter.
State constitution reference–Charter to be consistent with constitution and general laws, art. XI, sec. 5.
CHAPTER 1
INCORPORATION, BOUNDARIES, AND LIMITS
1.01 INCORPORATION
All inhabitants of the City of University Park, Dallas County, Texas, as the boundaries and limits of said city have
heretofore been established and now exist or may hereafter be established shall constitute a municipal body politic
incorporated under and known by the name “The City of University Park,” with such powers, rights, duties,
privileges, and immunities as are herein provided.
1.02 BOUNDARIES AND LIMITS
The boundaries and limits of the City of University Park shall be those as established and described in ordinances
duly passed by the city council of the City of University Park in accordance with state law. The city secretary shall
at all times keep a correct and complete description and official map on file, with recent annexations or
disannexations.
1.03 ANNEXATION AND DISANNEXATION
The city may from time to time alter its boundaries by annexing any territory adjoining its present or future
boundaries in any size or shape desired in any manner provided by state law, with or without the consent of the
owners of such territory or the inhabitants thereof. The city may from time to time alter its boundaries by
disannexing any territory adjoining its present or future boundaries by passage of an appropriate ordinance
describing the territory being disannexed. Any additional territory annexed to the city shall be a part of the city for
all purposes, and the property situated therein shall bear its pro rata part of the taxes levied by the city as provided
by state law. The inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of all the citizens and shall be
bound by the acts, ordinances, and resolutions of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/385
State law references–Municipal boundaries and annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 41 et seq.; municipal annexation,
V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 43; authority of home-rule municipality to annex area, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec.
43.021.
CHAPTER 2
FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND POWERS
2.01 FORM OF GOVERNMENT
Municipal government for the City of University Park shall be a “council-manager government.” Except as
otherwise provided by this Charter and the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, all powers conferred on the
city shall be exercised by a city council to be composed of four (4) councilmembers and a mayor, elected by the
qualified voters of the entire city for a term of two (2) years[.]
State law reference–Form of government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 26.021.
2.02 POWERS OF THE CITY
The City of University Park shall be a Home Rule City under the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas and
shall have all powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every kind and nature granted to a home rule
city under Article XI, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Texas, known as the home rule amendment, and
all other laws passed by the Legislature of the State of Texas relating thereto, or which may hereafter be passed by
said Legislature in relation to such matters including, but not limited to the following powers:
(1) To sue and be sued, to contract and be contracted with, to buy, sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage,
and control such property as its interests require.
(2) To institute and prosecute suits without giving security therefor, and appeal from judgments of the
courts without giving supersedeas or cost bonds, other bonds or security whatever.
(3) To acquire property within or without its boundaries or within the boundaries of other
municipalities for any public purpose, in fee simple or lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise,
lease or condemnation when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by
this Charter or by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas.
(4) To assess, levy, and collect taxes for general and special purposes on all lawful subjects of
taxation.
(5) To borrow money on the faith and credit of the city by the issue or sale of bonds, warrants,
certificates of obligation, notes or other securities authorized by the laws of the State of Texas
(6) To create offices, determine the method for selection of officers, and prescribe the qualifications,
duties, and tenure of office for officers.
(7) To appropriate the money of the city for all lawful purposes to create, provide for, construct,
regulate and maintain public works and public improvements of any nature and to furnish municipal
services as may be provided by resolution or ordinance of the city council, or as required by law.
(8) To make and enforce all police, health, sanitary and other regulations, and pass such ordinances as
may be expedient for maintaining and promoting the peace, good government and welfare of the city,
for the performance of the functions thereof, for the order and security of its inhabitants, and to protect
the peace, lives, health, and property of such inhabitants, and to provide suitable penalties for the
violation of any ordinance enacted by the city.
(9) To lay out, open, close, establish, alter, widen, lower, extend, grade, supervise, maintain, and
improve streets, alleys, and parks and to regulate the use thereof and require removal of all obstructions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/385
or encroachments of every nature and character upon said public streets, sidewalks or other public
property.
(10) To have the exclusive right to erect, own, maintain and operate a waterworks and sanitary sewer
system for the use of said city and its inhabitants and to regulate the same, including the right to
prescribe rates for water and sanitary sewer services, and to make such rules and regulations as the
council may deem expedient, including the power to extend water and sanitary sewer lines and assess a
portion or all of the cost therefor and affix a lien against the property and the owner thereof, and do
anything whatsoever necessary to operate and maintain said waterworks and to compel the owners of all
property and the agents of such owners to pay all charges for water and sanitary sewer services
furnished.
(11) To fix and regulate the rates of gas, water, electricity, and other utilities, and to regulate and fix
the fares, tolls, and charges of local telephones and exchanges, public carriers and motor vehicles where
they are transporting passengers, freight or baggage, and generally to fix and regulate the rates, tolls or
charges and the kind of service of all public utilities of every kind, unless otherwise required by state
law.
(12) To acquire, by purchase, gift or devise, or by the exercise of the right of condemnation, and own,
in fee simple or otherwise, either public or private property located inside or outside of the corporate
limits of the city, for the extension, improvement and enlargement of its waterworks system, including
riparian rights, water supply reservoirs, stand pipes, watersheds, dams, the laying, building, maintenance
and construction of water mains, rights-of-way in connection therewith, and the laying, erection,
establishment or maintenance of any necessary appurtenance or facilities which will furnish to the
inhabitants of the city an abundant supply of wholesome water; for sewerage plants and systems; rightsof-
way for water and sewer lines; parks, playgrounds, fire stations, police stations, incinerators or other
garbage disposal plants; streets, boulevards, and alleys or other public ways; municipal buildings,
garages and parking facilities, or any rights-of-way needed in connection with any property used for any
purpose hereinabove named; for the straightening or improving of the channel of any stream, branch or
drain or for any other municipal purpose.
State law references–Powers of home-rule municipality, V.T.C.S. art. 1175; general powers of home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, sec. 51.071 et seq.; authority of local self-government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 51.072.
2.03 POWERS - GENERAL
The enumeration of particular powers in the Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive, but in addition to
the powers enumerated herein, implied thereby or appropriate to the exercise thereof, the city shall have and may
exercise all other powers which under the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas it would be competent for the
Charter specifically to enumerate.
CHAPTER 3
CITY COUNCIL
3.01 MAYOR
The person elected as mayor shall be the presiding officer at all meetings of the city council. He shall have a vote
on all matters coming before the council unless otherwise disqualified, but no power to veto. He shall be the
official head of the city government.
3.02 QUALIFICATIONS
Each candidate for election to the city council or office of mayor shall be a qualified voter of the city, shall be not
less than twenty-one (21) years of age, shall have resided in the city not less than twelve (12) months immediately
preceding election day, shall meet the requirements of the Texas Election Code, and shall not, after notice of any
delinquency, be in arrears in the payment of any taxes or other liabilities due the city. Each councilmember and the
mayor must continually reside within the city during his term of office, and any removal of his residence from the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/385
city during his term of office shall constitute a vacation of his office, and such vacancy shall be filled as provided in
Section 3.05. Candidates may be residents of any portion of the city.
3.03 LIMITATION ON SUCCESSIVE TERMS
No person shall serve as mayor for more than three (3) successive terms, and no person shall serve as
councilmember for more than three (3) successive terms. A term of office shall be for a period of two (2) years or
any portion thereof.
3.04 COMPENSATION
Members of the city council shall serve without compensation, except that councilmembers shall be entitled to
reimbursement of all necessary and reasonable expenses incurred in the performance of their official city council
duties, upon approval of such expenses by the city council.
State law reference–Compensation of officers in home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 141.004.
3.05 VACANCIES IN THE CITY COUNCIL; FILLING OF VACANCIES
A. The office of a councilmember or office of the mayor shall become vacant upon his death, resignation,
removal from office in any manner authorized by law, removal of his residence from the City of University Park or
forfeiture of his office.
B. A councilmember or the mayor shall forfeit his office if he lacks at any time during his term of office any
qualification for the office prescribed by this Charter or by state law, or if he violates any express prohibition of this
section or any other provision of this Charter, or if he fails to attend three (3) consecutive regular city council
meetings without being excused by the city council. The city council shall be the final judge in matters involving
forfeiture of office by a councilmember or the mayor.
C. If for any reason a single vacancy exists on the city council, a majority of the remaining members may fill the
vacancy by appointment within thirty (30) days of the occurrence of the vacancy by selection of a person qualified
for the position as described in this Charter, unless an election to fill the vacancy is required by Article XI, Section
11, of the Texas Constitution. The appointee to fill the vacancy serves until the next regular city election. In lieu of
appointing a person to fill a vacancy on the city council, a special election may be ordered to elect a person to fill
the vacancy. If two (2) or more vacancies on the city council exist at the same time, a special election shall be
ordered to fill the vacancies. Any special election called to fill a vacancy or vacancies on the city council shall be
called for a date prescribed by the Texas Election Code as a uniform election date, provided that if any vacancy or
vacancies occur within one hundred twenty (120) days of a regular city election, then no special election shall be
called, and the remaining city councilmembers shall fill the vacancy or vacancies until the regular city election.
State law reference–Special election to fill vacancy generally, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 201.051 et seq.
3.06 MEETINGS; QUORUM
Regular meetings of the city council shall be held at the city hall at such times as may be prescribed from time to
time by resolution of the city council. Special meetings shall be called by the city secretary upon the written request
of the mayor, the city manager or three (3) members of the city council. Notice of any regular or special meeting of
the city council shall state the subject to be considered at the meeting. All official meetings of the council and of all
committees thereof shall be open to the public as provided by state law. Those meetings involving an attorney and
client relationship need not be open to the public. A quorum shall consist of three (3) members. The council shall
determine its own rules of procedure, may punish its members for misconduct and may compel the attendance of
absent members.
State law reference–Open meetings, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 551.
3.07 MAYOR PRO TEM
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/385
The city council shall elect one of its members as mayor pro tem, who shall perform the duties of mayor in the case
of the absence or inability of the mayor to perform the duties of his office, and who shall, during that time, be
vested with all the powers belonging to the mayor.
CHAPTER 4
CITY MANAGER
4.01 CITY MANAGER - QUALIFICATIONS, APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL; DUTIES;
COMPENSATION
The city manager shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of the city. The city manager is appointed
by and serves at the will of the city council. The city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his
administrative ability, experience, and training. The city manager shall administer the business of the city, and the
city council shall ensure that such administration is efficient. The city council may by ordinance delegate to the city
manager any additional powers or duties it considers proper for the efficient administration of city affairs. The city
manager shall execute a bond conditioned that he will faithfully perform the duties of city manager. The amount of
such bond shall be as prescribed by ordinance adopted by the city council. The city council shall be authorized to
enter into a Contract of Employment with the city manager and to prescribe such compensation therein as it may
fix. The action of the city council in suspending or removing the city manager shall be final, it being the intention
of this Charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility for such suspension or removal in the city council.
4.02 CITY MANAGER - DIRECTION AND SUPERVISION OF EMPLOYEES, NON-INTERFERENCE
BY COUNCIL; APPOINTMENTS AND REMOVALS OF DEPARTMENT HEADS
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations as provided by this Charter or otherwise by law, the city
council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision
of the city manager solely through the city manager, and no member of the council shall give orders to any
subordinate of the city manager, either publicly or privately. Neither the council nor any of its members shall direct
or request the appointment of any person to or his removal from office by the city manager or by any of his
subordinates. The city manager shall be responsible for and have the power to appoint, suspend, and/or remove all
or any one of the directors of the departments of the city with the concurrence of the city council.
4.03 CITY MANAGER - SPECIFIC POWERS AND DUTIES
The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the proper administration of the affairs of the city and
shall have the power and duty to:
(1) Be responsible for the proper administration of all city affairs placed in his hands.
(2) Appoint, suspend, and/or remove employees not otherwise provided for in this Charter.
Appointments made by him shall be on the basis of executive and administrative experience and ability
and of training[,] fitness and efficiency of such appointees in the work which they are to administer.
(3) See that all laws and ordinances are enforced.
(4) Exercise control over all departments and subdivisions thereof created by this Charter or by
ordinance.
(5) Attend all city council meetings and take part in the discussion of city business.
(6) Prepare and recommend items for inclusion in the official agenda of all city council meetings and
meetings of the Boards and Commissions as established by this Charter or ordinance.
(7) Prepare and submit to the city council the annual budget and capital program, and administer the
budget as adopted by the city council.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/385
(8) See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city or its inhabitants in any public utility
franchise are faithfully kept and performed.
(9) Keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city,
and prepare and submit to the city council an annual report on the finances and administrative activities
of the city, including the report of annual audit required by state law.
(10) Recommend to the city council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or
expedient; to execute deeds, deeds of trust, easements, releases, contracts, and all other legal
instruments on behalf of the city when authorized by ordinance or resolution of the city council, and
approved as to form by the city attorney.
(11) Perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or as may be required by the city
council by ordinance or resolution, not inconsistent with this Charter.
CHAPTER 5
CITY SECRETARY
5.01 APPOINTMENT; REMOVAL; COMPENSATION
The city manager shall appoint, suspend, and/or remove the city secretary with the concurrence of the city council.
The city secretary shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by the city council.
5.02 DUTIES OF THE CITY SECRETARY
The city secretary shall:
(1) Attend all meetings of the city council and keep accurate records of all actions taken by the
council.
(2) Maintain the official records and files of the city.
(3) Administer oaths required by law.
(4) Attest contracts, assessment certificates, ordinances, resolutions, and other legal instruments when
executed by the authorized officers of the city.
(5) Serve as the election official for all city elections.
(6) Hold and maintain the city seal and affix it to all appropriate documents as required.
(7) Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager, this Charter, or the laws of the
State of Texas.
CHAPTER 6
MUNICIPAL COURT*
6.01 CREATION
The city council shall, by ordinance, create and provide for a municipal court to be known as the Municipal Court
of the City of University Park, Texas, and may appoint one or more municipal judges to serve in such court. The
court shall have all the powers and duties as are now or as may hereafter be prescribed by the laws of the State of
Texas in connection with the trial of misdemeanor offenses within its jurisdiction.
6.02 MUNICIPAL COURT JUDGE
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/385
The judge of the municipal court, and all alternates, shall be competent, duly qualified, and licensed attorneys in the
State of Texas. The judge of the municipal court shall be appointed to a term of two (2) years concurrent with the
mayor and city council, and may be appointed to additional and consecutive terms at the will and pleasure of the
city council. The judge shall receive such compensation as may be determined by the city council. This
compensation shall be fixed, and commensurate with the duties performed by the judge.
State law references–Municipal court judges, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.004; term of municipal court judge, V.T.C.A.,
Government Code, sec. 29.005.
6.03 CLERK OF THE COURT
There shall be a clerk of the municipal court appointed by the city manager. The clerk of the court and any deputies
appointed by the city manager shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the
seal of said court as necessary and as required by law, and generally do and perform any and all acts usual and
necessary to be performed by clerks and deputy clerks of municipal courts of the State of Texas.
State law reference–Municipal court clerk generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.010.
6.04 JURISDICTION, POWER, AND FINES
The municipal court shall have jurisdiction:
(1) Over all criminal cases arising under the ordinances of the city within the city limits and outside
the limits to the extent authorized by state law.
(2) Concurrent with the appropriate state court of all criminal cases arising under the criminal laws of
the state, where the offense is committed within the city limits and the penalty does not exceed that
which is established for municipal courts by state law.
(3) Over the forfeiture and collection of bonds given in proceedings therein, and to order the
forfeiture of cash acceptance bonds upon the failure of the defendant to appear, and to accept the same
in lieu of a fine.
(4) Enforce all process of the courts in accordance with state law and city ordinances, punish
witnesses for failing to obey subpoenas, and compel their attendance by process of attachment.
(5) Punish for contempt, admit to bail, and forfeit bonds under such circumstances and as provided by
law.
State law reference–Jurisdiction of municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.003.
6.05 COSTS, FINES, AND PENALTIES
All costs, fines, and penalties imposed by the municipal court shall be paid into the city treasury for the use and
benefit of the city, as may be consistent with present and future state laws.
State law reference–Municipal court fines, costs and special expenses, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 45.203.
CHAPTER 7
CITY ATTORNEY
7.01 APPOINTMENT
The city council shall appoint a competent licensed attorney of recognized ability and he shall be known as the city
attorney.
7.02 COMPENSATION
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/385
The city attorney shall receive for his services such compensation as may be fixed by the city council at the time of
his appointment, and from time to time by appropriate resolution.
7.03 DUTIES OF CITY ATTORNEY
The city attorney shall be the legal adviser of, and attorney for, all of the offices and departments of the city, and
shall represent the city in all litigation and legal proceedings, provided however, that the council may retain special
counsel at any time it deems appropriate and necessary. He shall review and approve as to form all documents,
contracts, resolutions, ordinances, and legal instruments in which the city may have an interest. The city attorney
shall perform other duties prescribed by the Charter, by ordinance or resolution of the city council.
CHAPTER 8
CITY DEPARTMENTS
8.01 ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
There shall be such administrative departments as are established by this Charter and as may be established by
ordinance and, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, such administrative departments shall be under the
direction and supervision of the city manager. The council may discontinue, redesignate, or combine any of the
department[s] and/or administrative offices of the city. The head of each department shall be a director who shall be
appointed by the city manager with the concurrence of the council, and such director shall have supervision and
control over his department. Two (2) or more departments may be headed by the same individual, and the city
manager may head one (1) or more departments.
8.02 POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
There is hereby created a Police Department of the City of University Park at the head of which shall be the chief
of police. There is hereby created a Fire Department of the City of University Park at the head of which shall be a
fire chief. The head of each department shall be a director who shall be appointed by the city manager with the
concurrence of the council, and such director shall have supervision and control over his department. The city
council may determine that efficiency of operation requires that the police and fire departments be combined and
headed by one (1) director. If so, such director shall be known as the chief of police/fire. Each department shall be
composed of the chief, whose office is hereby created and established, and such other positions as the city council
may provide by ordinance. The duties of the chief of the police and fire departments or the chief of the police/fire
department and the other officers and personnel of such department or departments shall be as provided by
ordinance.
State law references–Police force in home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 341.003; fire department in homerule
municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 342.011.
8.03 TAX ADMINISTRATION
A. There shall be a department of taxation to assess and collect taxes, the director of which shall be the city tax
assessor and collector who shall be appointed by the city manager with concurrence of the city council. The tax
assessor and collector shall provide a bond with such sureties and in such amount as the council may require, and
the premiums on such bond shall be paid by the city.
B. The city council shall have the power, and is hereby authorized, to levy, assess, and collect annual taxes not to
exceed the maximum limit set by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, as they now exist or as they may
be amended, on each one hundred dollars ($100.00) assessed valuation of all property having a situs within the
corporate limits of the city and not exempt from taxation by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas.
C. All taxes due the city shall be payable at the office of the city tax assessor and collector and may be paid at
any time after the tax rolls for the year have been completed and approved, which completion and approval shall be
not later than October 1. Taxes shall be paid before February 1 of each year succeeding the year for which the taxes
are levied, and all such taxes not paid prior to such date shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to such
penalty and interest as may be provided by law. Failure to levy and assess taxes through omission in preparation of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/385
the approved tax rolls shall not relieve the person, firm or corporation so omitted from the obligation to pay such
current or past due taxes shown to be payable by recheck of the rolls and receipts for the years in question, unless
otherwise provided by law.
D. All property having its situs in the city on the first day of January of each year shall stand charged with a lien
in favor of the city from said date for the taxes due thereon. The lien provided hereby shall be superior to all other
liens except other tax liens, regardless of when such other liens were created. All persons purchasing any of said
property on or after the first day of January in any year shall take the same subject to the lien herein provided. In
addition to the lien herein provided on the first day of January of any year, the owner of property subject to taxation
by the city shall be personally liable for the taxes due thereon for such year. The city shall have power to sue for
and recover personal judgment for taxes without foreclosure, or to foreclose its lien or liens, or to recover both
personal judgment and foreclosure. In such suit where it appears that the description of any property in the city
assessment rolls is insufficient to identify such property, the city shall have the right to plead a good description of
the property to be assessed, to prove the same, and to have its judgment foreclosing the tax lien and/or for personal
judgment against the owners for such taxes as such ownership and property appears on the approved tax rolls
furnished by the Dallas Central Appraisal District.
State law reference–Local taxation, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, ch. 301 et seq.
8.04 FINANCE DEPARTMENT
There shall be a department of finance, the director of which shall be appointed by the city manager with
concurrence of the city council. The head of the department of finance shall be known as the finance director who
shall also be the city treasurer. The finance director shall provide a bond with such surety and in such amount as the
council may require and the premiums on such bond shall be paid by the city. The finance director shall have
knowledge of municipal accounting and taxation and shall have experience in budgeting and financial control. The
finance director shall have the custody of all public monies, funds, notes and bonds, and other securities belonging
to the city. He shall make payments out of city funds upon order of the city council or other authorized city officer
as provided herein. He shall render a full and accurate statement to the city manager and the city council of his
receipts and payments at such times as the city manager or city council may require. The finance director shall
perform such other acts and duties as the council may prescribe.
8.05 FISCAL YEAR
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of October and end on the following September 30th, but the
fiscal year may be changed by the council by ordinance.
State law references–General fiscal power to establish fiscal year, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 101.022; city fiscal year,
V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 1.05.
8.06 ANNUAL BUDGET
It shall be the duty of the city manager to submit an annual budget not later than thirty (30) days prior to the end of
the current fiscal year to the council for its review, consideration and revision. The council shall call a public
hearing or hearings on the budget. The council may adopt a budget with or without amendments. The council may
increase or decrease amounts or programs and may delete any programs or amounts except expenditures required
by law or for a debt service, provided that no amendment shall increase the authorized expenditures to an amount
greater than the total of the estimated income for the current fiscal year plus funds available from prior years. At
the close of each fiscal year, the unencumbered balance of each appropriation shall revert to the fund from which it
was appropriated and shall be subject to future appropriations, but appropriations may be made in furtherance of
improvements or other objects of work of the city which will not be completed within the current year.
State law reference–Municipal budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 102.
8.07 FAILURE TO ADOPT ANNUAL BUDGET
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/385
If the council fails to adopt the budget by the 15th of September, the amounts appropriated for the current fiscal
year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month to month basis with all items in it prorated
accordingly until such time as the council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The levy of property tax will
be set to equal the total current fiscal year tax receipts, unless the ensuing fiscal year budget is approved by
September 15th of the current fiscal year.
8.08 BONDS AND OTHER EVIDENCES OF INDEBTEDNESS
The city shall have the power to borrow money on the credit of the city and to issue general obligation bonds and
other evidences of indebtedness for permanent public improvements or for any other public purpose not prohibited
by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas and to issue refunding bonds to refund outstanding bonds and
other evidences of indebtedness of the city previously issued. All such bonds shall be issued in conformity with the
laws of the State of Texas. The city shall further have the power to borrow money for the purpose of constructing,
acquiring, improving, extending or repairing of public utilities, recreational facilities or any other self-liquidating
municipal function not prohibited by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and to issue revenue bonds to
evidence the obligations created thereby. Such bonds shall be a charge upon and payable from the properties, or
interest therein pledged, or the income therefrom, or both. The holders of the revenue bonds of the city shall never
have the right to demand payment thereof out of monies raised or to be raised by taxation. All such bonds shall be
issued in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas. The city shall have the power to borrow money for public
improvements in any other manner provided by law, including certificates of obligation as authorized by Chapter
271 of the Texas Local Government Code. All bonds and evidences of indebtedness of the city having been
approved by the Attorney General and registered by the Comptroller of Public Accounts shall thereafter be
incontestable in any court or other forum for any reason, and shall be valid and binding obligations of the city in
accordance with their terms for all purposes.
State law references–Public Security Procedures Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 1201; municipal bonds, V.T.C.A., Government
Code, ch. 1331.
CHAPTER 9
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
9.01 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
The city council shall create a planning and zoning commission of the City of University Park and shall appoint
five (5) members and three (3) alternate members, each of whom shall be a citizen and taxpayer of the City of
University Park. Members and alternates shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years concurrent with the term of
the mayor. Such appointees shall serve without compensation and may not hold any elective office of the State of
Texas or any other political subdivision thereof during their terms. A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled
by the city council for the remainder of the term. A majority of the appointed members shall constitute a quorum,
and decisions may only be made with the affirmative vote of a majority or more of the members of the entire
commission. The city council shall name one (1) of the members to be the chairman and one (1) to be the vice
chairman.
State law reference–Authority of municipality to establish planning and zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec.
211.007.
9.02 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
The city council shall appoint a board of adjustment consisting of five (5) regular members and four (4) alternate
members, all of whom shall be qualified voters of the City of University Park. The board of adjustment shall have
the powers and authority set forth in Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code, and as hereafter amended,
and such additional powers and authority as may be duly assigned to it by ordinances of the city or other applicable
state law. The city council may remove a board member for cause on a written charge after a public hearing. A
vacancy on the board shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired term only.
State law reference–Establishment and authority of zoning board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 211.008 et seq.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/385
9.03 OTHER BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
The city council shall have the power and is hereby authorized to create, abolish, establish, and appoint such other
boards, commissions and committees as it deems necessary to carry out the functions of the city, and to prescribe
the purpose, composition, functions, and tenure of each such board, commission, or committee.
CHAPTER 10
ORDINANCES*
10.01 PROCEDURE FOR PASSING ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
The city council shall evidence its official actions by written ordinances, resolutions, or oral motion. The style of
all ordinances shall be: “Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of University Park, Texas,” and the style of
all resolutions shall be: “Be it resolved by the City Council of the City of University Park, Texas.” Each proposed
ordinance shall be introduced in the written or printed form required for adoption. An ordinance shall not be
amended or repealed except by the adoption of another ordinance. All ordinances and resolutions passed by the city
council shall become effective immediately from and after passage except where publication of a caption is
required or where the ordinance, state law, or other provisions of this Charter provide otherwise, in which case the
effective date shall be as prescribed in the ordinance.
10.02 PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES
The descriptive caption or title of each ordinance containing a penalty shall be published at least once in the official
newspaper of the city, unless otherwise provided by state law or this Charter.
State law reference–Publication of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 52.013.
10.03 CODE OF ORDINANCES
The city council shall have power to cause the ordinances of the city to be printed, in code form, and shall have the
same arranged and digested as often as the Council may deem advisable, provided that failure to print the
ordinances as herein provided shall not affect the validity of the same.
State law reference–Code of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 53.
10.04 ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS NOW IN EFFECT
All ordinances, portions thereof, resolutions, contracts, bonds, obligations, rules, and regulations now in force
under the city government of the City of University Park, and not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter,
shall remain in force under this Charter until altered, amended, or repealed by the city council in the manner
required by law.
10.05 [ORDINANCE OR RESOLUTION CHANGING SURFACE USE OF AREA USED AS PARK]
The City Council shall submit to popular vote any ordinance or resolution approved by the City Council which, if
implemented, would have the effect of permanently changing the surface use of more than 5,000 square feet of (i)
any green belt, field, wood, creek, pond, lagoon, or other water course that is one acre or larger in area, that is
owned by the city, and that is being used as a park, or (ii) Elena's Children's Park. (Section 10.05 added by election
of 5/13/06; Ordinance 06/11 adopted 5/23/06)
CHAPTER 11
ELECTIONS*
11.01 CITY ELECTIONS
The regular election of the city council will be held on the first Saturday in May in even numbered years,
commencing in May, 1990, or on such day as may be required by the Texas Election Code for municipal elections.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/385
The city council shall be responsible to specify places for holding such election. In such election, each qualified
voter shall vote for not more than four (4) candidates for councilmember, and for not more than one (1) candidate
for mayor. Such election shall be ordered by the city council as required by the Texas Election Code. Notice of such
election shall be given as provided by law. In the event a runoff election is necessary, the procedure set forth in
Section 11.07 shall be followed. All qualified electors of the state who reside within the city shall have the right to
vote in all City elections.
State law references–Date for election of officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 26.042; election dates, V.T.C.A., Election
Code, ch. 41; notice of elections, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 4.
11.02 SPECIAL ELECTIONS
The city council, by ordinance or resolution, may call such special elections as are authorized by the state law or
this Charter, fix the time and place of holding the same, and provide all means for holding such special elections,
provided that every special election shall be called and held as nearly as practicable, according to the provisions
governing regular elections.
11.03 REGULATION OF ELECTIONS
All city elections shall be governed by the Constitution of the State of Texas, general laws of the state, this Charter,
and by ordinance of the city regulating the holding of municipal elections. The city council shall appoint the
election judges and other election officials and shall provide for the compensation of all election officials in city
elections and for all other expenses in holding said elections.
State law reference–Appointment of election judges, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 32.005.
11.04 CANDIDATES: FILING FOR OFFICE
Any qualified person as prescribed by Section 3.02 may make application to have his name placed on the official
ballot for the position of councilmember or mayor. The application shall be made in accordance with all applicable
laws and shall state that the candidate agrees to serve if qualified and elected. Each candidate shall execute such
oath and other official form or affidavit as may be required by the city secretary pursuant to the Texas Election
Code. The city secretary shall review the application and notify the candidate whether or not the application
satisfies the requirements of this Charter and the Texas Election Code. If an application is insufficient, the city
secretary shall return it immediately to the candidate with a statement of such insufficiency. The candidate may file
a new application within the regular time for filing applications. The city secretary shall keep on file all
applications found sufficient at least until the expiration of the term of office for which such candidates filed.
State law references–Candidates for city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 143; candidate's application for home-rule city office,
V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 143.005.
11.05 OFFICIAL BALLOT
The order on the ballot of the names of the candidates shall be determined by the city secretary in accordance with
the procedures set out in the Texas Election Code. The name of each candidate seeking an elective office, except
those who have withdrawn, died or become ineligible prior to the time permitted for withdrawal, shall be printed on
the official ballot in the name designated by the candidate in accordance with the Texas Election Code. Provision
for absentee voting shall be made as provided by the Texas Election Code.
State law reference–Ballot form, content and preparation, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 52.
11.06 CANVASSING AND ELECTION RESULTS
Returns of every municipal election shall be delivered forthwith by the election judges to the city secretary, with a
copy of the returns being sent to the mayor. The city council shall canvass the returns, investigate the qualifications
of the candidates and declare the official results of the election not less than two (2) days nor more six (6) days
after the date of the election, or as may be otherwise provided by the Texas Election Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/385
State law reference–Canvassing elections, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 67.
11.07 RUNOFF ELECTION
A. The four (4) candidates receiving the greatest number of votes cast shall be declared elected to the city
council. The candidate for mayor receiving a majority of all votes cast for all the candidates for mayor shall be
declared elected mayor.
B. In the event of a tie for one (1) or more of the councilmember positions, a runoff election for that office is
required. In the event a candidate for the office of mayor fails to receive a majority of all votes cast for all the
candidates for mayor at such election or two (2) of such candidates for the office of mayor tie for the highest
number of votes, a runoff election for that office is required. If more than two (2) candidates tie for the highest
number of votes for the office of mayor or if two (2) or more candidates tie for one (1) or more of the
councilmember positions, the tied candidates shall cast lots to determine which two (2) are to be the runoff
candidates. The Mayor, as presiding officer of the canvassing authority, shall supervise the casting of lots under this
section.
C. Not later than the fifth (5th) day after the date of canvass of the returns, the city council shall order the runoff
election to be held in the city on the last Saturday in May.
State law reference–Runoff election, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 2.021 et seq.
CHAPTER 12
FRANCHISES*
12.01 POWER TO GRANT FRANCHISE
The city council shall have the power, subject to the provisions hereof, by ordinance to confer upon any person,
firm, corporation, or other legal entity the franchise or right to use the public property of the city for the purpose of
furnishing to the public any general public service or benefit, including, but not limited to, heat, light, power,
telephone service and transportation, for compensation or hire, provided that no franchise shall be granted by the
city to any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity to own, control or operate a waterworks therein. The city
council shall have the power by ordinance to grant, renew, and extend all franchises of all public utilities of every
character operating within the city. No such franchise shall be granted until after a public meeting shall have been
called and held and until such ordinance shall have been passed and accepted by the franchisee. No such ordinance
shall become effective until thirty (30) days after its passage.
12.02 TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE
No public utility or other franchise shall be transferable except with the approval of the city council expressed by
ordinance. This restriction shall not be construed to prevent the franchise holder from pledging the franchise as
security for a valid debt.
12.03 OWNERSHIP, USE AND CONTROL OF STREETS
No franchise or easement involving the right to use the same either along, over, across, under or upon the streets,
alleys, highways, parks and public ways shall be valid unless granted in compliance with the terms of this chapter.
No granting of a franchise by ordinance pursuant to this chapter shall convey any ownership or interest in any
property of the city other than the right to use the public property for purposes of such franchisee's operations as
expressed in the ordinance granting such franchise.
12.04 RIGHT OF REGULATION
In granting, amending, renewing and extending public service and utility franchises, the city shall retain the right
to:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/385
(1) Repeal such franchise by ordinance for failure to comply with the terms thereof, such power to be
exercised only after due notice and hearing.
(2) Require an adequate extension of plant and service as is necessary to provide adequate service to
the public, and maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency.
(3) Establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust
discrimination in service or rates.
(4) Impose regulations to ensure safe, efficient and continuous service to the public. The franchise
holder in opening and refilling all earth openings shall relay the pavement and do all other work
necessary to complete restoration of streets, sidewalks or grounds to a condition equally as good as or
better than when disturbed.
(5) To regulate, locate or prohibit the erection of any and all poles, wires or other utility equipment,
conveyance or structure, on the streets, alleys and public places of said city, and to cause the same to be
changed, removed, altered, increased, diminished, placed underground, or be supported by poles of such
material, kind, quality and class as may be determined by the city council whether the same be
telegraph, telephone, electric, cable television or otherwise, and to enforce the provisions hereof by
appropriate action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
12.05 COMPENSATION FOR FRANCHISE
All persons, corporations, or association of persons, to whom a franchise or privilege may hereafter be granted shall
pay to the city for such privilege such compensation as may be fixed by the city council in the grant of such
franchise or privilege. Such compensation as fixed by contract or provided by any Texas statute or statutes and any
amendments thereto shall become due and payable at such time as the city council shall fix in the grant of such
franchise or privilege, and upon the failure of any franchisee to pay said compensation when due shall result in
forfeiture of the franchise or privilege.
12.06 COUNCIL TO FIX AND REGULATE CHARGES, FARES OR RATES
The city council shall determine, fix and regulate the charges, fares or rates of any person, firm or corporation
enjoying a franchise or privilege granted under the provisions of this chapter, and shall prescribe the kind of service
to be furnished the public by such person, firm or corporation, and the manner in which it shall be rendered and
may from time to time alter or change such rules, regulations, and compensation after reasonable notice and public
hearing, provided that the rates, charges and fares so fixed shall at all times be reasonable and permit a reasonable
net return on the actual value of the physical properties and equipment of such utilities. In this connection, the city
council may require any utility or franchise holder to furnish such financial reports and information as the city
council may request, including reports of actual operating costs and the financial condition of its operations within
the city, and the city council may employ, at the expense of such franchisee, necessary outside experts to examine
and audit the accounts and records of the franchisee to determine the reasonableness of such charges, fares, or rates.
CHAPTER 13
GENERAL AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
13.01 EFFECT OF CHARTER ON EXISTING LAW
All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations in force in the city on the effective date of this Charter and not in
conflict with this Charter shall remain in full force and effect until altered, amended or repealed. All taxes,
assessments, liens, encumbrances, obligations and demands of or against the city, fixed or established before such
date, shall be valid if properly fixed or established either under the law in force at the time of such proceedings or
under the law after the adoption of this Charter.
13.02 CONTINUATION OF PRESENT OFFICES
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/385
All persons holding administrative office at the time this Charter takes effect shall continue in office and in the
performance of their duties in the capacities to which they have been appointed until provision shall have been
made in accordance with the terms of this Charter for the performance of such duties or the discontinuance of such
office, if any. The powers conferred and the duties imposed upon any office, department or agency of the city by
the laws of the state shall, if such office, department or agency be abolished by this Charter or under its authority,
be thereafter exercised and discharged by the office, department or agency designated by the council, unless
otherwise provided herein.
13.03 NEPOTISM
No officer of the City of University Park shall appoint, vote for, or confirm the appointment to any office, position,
clerkship, employment or duty, of any person related within the second degree by affinity or within the third degree
by consanguinity to any member of the city council or the mayor, when the salary, fees, or compensation of such
appointee is to be paid for, directly or indirectly, out of or from public funds or fees of office of any kind or
character whatsoever. However, this provision shall not prevent the appointment, voting for, or confirmation of any
person who shall have been continuously employed in any such office, position, clerkship, employment or duty for
at least thirty (30) days, if the officer is appointed, or at least six (6) months, if the officer is elected. When a person
is allowed to continue in any such position, the officer related shall not participate in the deliberation or voting
upon the appointment, reappointment, employment, confirmation, reemployment, change in status, compensation,
or dismissal of such person, unless such action is taken with respect to a bona fide class or category of employees.
State law reference–Nepotism, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 573.
13.04 OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER
The city council shall have the power to designate by resolution a newspaper of general circulation in the city as the
city's official newspaper. All ordinances, captions of ordinances, notices and other matters required to be published
by this Charter, by ordinance, or by state law, shall be published in the official newspaper.
13.05 JUDICIAL NOTICE
This Charter shall be recorded in the city secretary's office in a book kept for that purpose. As soon as practicable
after its adoption, an authenticated copy of the Charter shall be certified to the Secretary of State under the City
Seal. Once recorded by the city secretary and the Secretary of State of Texas, the Charter becomes a public act.
Such Charter provisions may be read in evidence without pleading or proof of their provisions, and judicial notice
shall be taken thereof in all courts and places.
13.06 CLAIMS FOR DAMAGE OR INJURY
The city shall never be liable for any personal injury or death or for claims for damages or injury to real or personal
property alleged to have been caused by the negligent act or omission of any officer, agent or employee of the city
unless the person who has been injured, the person who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such
death or injury, the person whose property has been injured or damaged, or someone on his behalf, shall file a claim
in writing with the city secretary within six (6) months after said injury, death or damage has occurred, stating
specifically when, where and how the injury, death or damage occurred, the full extent thereof, the amount of
damages claimed or asserted, and the basis claimed for liability on the part of the city. The person giving notice
under this section shall give the address of every place that he has resided at during the last six (6) months prior to
the injury, death or damage and shall subscribe his name thereto. Neither the mayor, city councilmember, city
manager, city secretary, city attorney, or any other officer or employee of the city shall have authority to waive any
of the provisions of this section, but the same may be waived only by resolution of the city council made and
passed before the expiration of said six (6) months' period.
State law reference–Texas Tort Claims Act, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, ch. 101.
13.07 PROPERTY NOT SUBJECT TO GARNISHMENT AND EXECUTION
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/385
No property owned or held by the city shall be subject to any garnishment or execution of any kind or nature except
as specifically provided by state law.
State law reference–Authority to provide that municipal funds not subject to garnishment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec.
101.023.
13.08 CONFLICT OF INTEREST
No member of the city council, the mayor, or any other officer, whether elected, appointed, paid or unpaid, who
exercises responsibilities beyond those that are advisory in nature, shall participate in a vote or decision on a matter
involving a business entity in which such officer has a substantial interest if it is reasonably foreseeable that an
action on the matter would confer an economic benefit on the business entity. If the officer or a person related to
the officer within the second degree of affinity or consanguinity has a substantial interest in the business entity that
would be pecuniarily affected by an official action of the city council, the officer, if a member of the city council,
shall file an affidavit stating the nature and extent of the interest and abstain from further participation in the matter.
State law references–Conflicts of interest of officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 171; public disclosure, V.T.C.A.,
Government Code, ch. 553.
13.09 PUBLIC MEETINGS AND RECORDS
All meetings of the city council and all boards appointed by the city council shall be governed by the provisions of
Article 6252-17 of the Revised Civil Statutes of Texas and any amendments thereto with regard to the posting of
agenda and the holding of public meetings. All public records of every office, department or agency of the city
shall be open to inspection by any citizen at all reasonable business hours, provided that records excepted from
public disclosure by Article 6252-17a of the Revised Civil Statutes of Texas and any amendment thereto shall be
closed to the public and not considered public records for the purpose of this section.
State law references–Open meetings, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 551; public access to records, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code,
sec. 201.009; public information, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 552.
13.10 INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS
The city council shall, by appropriate ordinance, provide for the indemnification and defense of the officers and
employees of the city, including members of the city council, or any board, commission, or committee, including
volunteers, against any loss, cost, or expense, including court costs and attorneys' fees, to the extent allowed by
law, arising out of any claim, suit, or judgment, or settlement thereof, resulting from any alleged negligent act or
omission of such officer, employee, member, or volunteer during the discharge of his duties and within the scope of
his office, employment, membership, or assigned voluntary position with the City, or in any other case where the
city is directed or authorized by law to do so, provided however, that such indemnification will not be provided for
any act arising out of the intentional or knowing violation of any penal statute or ordinance or arising out of any
conduct determined by final judgment to be an act of fraud or to have been taken with the intent to deceive or
defraud, or for any personal or private business of such officer, employee, member, or volunteer, or for the gross
negligence or official misconduct, or willful or wrongful act or omission of such officer, employee, member, or
volunteer.
13.11 AMENDMENT OF CHARTER
Amendments to this Charter may be submitted by the city council to the qualified voters of the city for their
approval at an election on the motion of the city council or upon petition signed by a number of qualified voters of
the city equal to five (5) percent of the number of qualified voters.
State constitution reference–Adoption or amendment of charter, Texas Constitution, art. 11, sec. 5.
State law reference–Adoption or amendment of charter, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 9.001 et seq.
13.12 BOND OR SECURITY NOT REQUIRED
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/385
It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the city is a party, for any bond, undertaking or
security to be executed on behalf of said city, that [and] all such actions, suits, appeals or proceedings shall be
conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had been given, and said city shall be liable
as if such obligation had been duly given and executed.
State law reference–Cities exempt from security for court costs, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, sec. 6.002.
13.13 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
If any chapter, section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Charter shall be held unconstitutional or invalid
for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter nor
the context in which such provision so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire chapter, section,
paragraph or sentence may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the provision to which such
holding shall apply directly.
13.14 MEANING OF WORDS
The provisions of this Charter shall be liberally construed for the purpose of effecting the objects and ends thereof.
Unless some other meaning is manifest, the word “city” shall be construed to mean the “City of University Park,”
and the word “and” may be read “or,” or the word “or” may be read “and” if the sense requires. Words in the
present tense include future tense and, except when a more restrictive meaning is manifest, singular may mean
plural. Throughout this Charter, words used in expressing masculine gender shall be construed to include the
feminine. The word “council” shall be construed to mean the City Council of the City of University Park. All
references in the University Park City Code or any other ordinance of the city to “board of commissioners” shall
read and be interpreted to mean “city council.”
13.15 TRANSITION PROVISIONS
A. This Charter shall take effect immediately following adoption by the voters and entry of the official order by
the city council declaring the same adopted as soon as practicable. After adoption the mayor shall certify to the
Secretary of State an authenticated copy of the Charter under the city's seal showing the approval by the voters. The
city secretary shall record the Charter in a book kept for that purpose and keep and maintain the same as the official
record of the city.
B. Upon adoption of this Charter, the present members of the city council filling elective offices will continue to
fill those offices for the terms to which they were elected. If the Charter is adopted, the city council shall call an
election for the regular municipal election date in May, 1990, to select a mayor and four (4) councilmembers for a
two (2) year term as provided in Chapter 3 hereof.
13.16 [NOTICE OF PROPOSED REDUCTION OF LAND BEING USED AS PARK OR GREEN
SPACE]
If the area of any land owned by the city and being used as a park or of any city-owned green space located within
or adjacent to any public street will be permanently reduced by a proposed, city-initiated public works project, the
city shall give written notice of the proposed project (i) to the record owner of each lot any portion of which is
located within 500 feet of the area where the reduction will occur, (ii) prior to or concurrently with the
advertisement by the city soliciting public bids for the proposed project. (Section 13.16 added by election of
5/13/06; Ordinance 06/11 adopted 5/23/06)
CHAPTER 14
ADOPTION OF CHARTER
14.01 SUBMISSION AND ELECTION
A. This Charter shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the City of University Park for adoption or rejection
on the 7th day of November, 1989, at which election, if a majority of the qualified voters voting in such election
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/385
shall vote in favor of the adoption of this Charter, it shall then immediately become the governing law of the City
of University Park, Texas, until amended or repealed.
B. It being impracticable to submit this Charter so that each subject may be voted on separately, it is hereby
prescribed that the form of ballot to be used in such election shall be as follows, to wit:
FOR ADOPTION OF THE CHARTER.
AGAINST ADOPTION OF THE CHARTER.
This Home Rule Charter for the City of University Park, Texas, is respectfully submitted to the Board of
Commissioners of the City of University Park for the purpose of calling an election on the question of adoption of
the Home Rule Charter this 6th day of July, 1989. This proposed Charter represents the recommendation of the
majority of the members of the Home Rule Charter Commission, whose membership and signatures are evidenced
below.
/s/ Morris Harrell
/s/ Mrs. E. Wilson “Sis” Germany
Morris Harrell, Chairman
Mrs. E. Wilson “Sis” Germany
/s/ Roy C. Coffee, Jr.
/s/ Don M. Houseman
Roy C. Coffee, Jr.
Don M. Houseman
/s/ George T. Connell
/s/ Forrest E. Keene
George T. Connell
Forrest E. Keene
/s/ J. Carlisle DeHay, Jr.
/s/ John H. Massey
J. Carlisle DeHay, Jr.
John H. Massey
/s/ Edward J. Drake
/s/ Harold F. Peek
Edward J. Drake
Harold F. Peek
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/385
/s/ Felix B. “Pete” Goldman /s/ Gage A. Prichard
Felix B. “Pete” Goldman
Gage A. Prichard
/s/ Trevor Wm. Rees-Jones
Trevor Wm. Rees-Jones
/s/ Ms. Deborah McCarthy Rhodus
Ms. Deborah McCarthy Rhodus
/s/ Ms. Joan L. Stansbury
Ms. Joan L. Stansbury
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.01 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.01.001 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the City of University Park, Texas, as compiled, edited and
published by Franklin Legal Publishing, Inc. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.002 Designation and citation of code
The ordinances embraced in this chapter and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be
designated the “Code of Ordinances, City of University Park, Texas,” and may be so cited. (Ordinance adopting
Code)
Sec. 1.01.003 Catchlines of articles, divisions and sections
The catchlines of the several articles, divisions and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the article, division or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such articles,
divisions and sections, nor as any part of the articles, divisions and sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/385
they be so deemed when any of such articles, divisions and sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.024.
Sec. 1.01.004 Definitions and rules of construction
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules
shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly
indicated.
City and town. Each means the City of University Park, Texas.
City administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The term “city administrator,”
“city manager,” “city secretary,” “chief of police” or other city officer or department shall be construed to mean the
city administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal officer or department,
respectively, of the City of University Park, Texas.
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before
any proceeding shall be had, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period is a
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or
legal holiday.
State law reference–Computation of time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.014.
Council. Whenever the term “council” or “city council” or “the council” is used, it shall mean the city council of
the City of University Park, Texas.
State law reference–References to municipal governing body and to members of municipal governing body, V.T.C.A., Local Government
Code, sec. 21.002.
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of Dallas, Texas.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code of Ordinances requires or authorizes an officer or
employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such officer or
employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the
provision specifically designate otherwise.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males.
State law reference–“Gender” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(c).
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed
as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
State law reference–Grants of authority, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.004.
May. The word “may” is permissive.
State law reference–Construction of word “may,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
State law reference–“Month” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/385
Must and shall. Each is mandatory.
State law reference–Construction of words “must” and “shall,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural
number shall include the singular.
State law reference–“Number,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(b).
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words
“affirm” and “affirmed.”
State law reference–“Oath,” “swear” and “sworn” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean standard time or daylight
saving time, as may be in current use in the city.
State law reference–Standard time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.016.
Or, and. The word “or” may be read “and,” and the word “and” may be read “or,” as the sense requires it.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships,
organizations, business trusts, estates, trusts, and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
State law reference–“Person” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Preceding, following. The terms “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
Property. The word “property” shall mean and include real and personal property.
State law reference–“Property” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Real property. The term “real property” shall mean and include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. The word “sidewalk” shall mean that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property
line intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State law reference–“Signature” and “subscribe” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
State. The term “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The word “street” shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks, alleys,
avenues, recessed parking areas and other public rights-of-way, including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.
State law reference–“Tense,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(a).
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Such abbreviations refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Statutes
Annotated.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/385
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of words,
letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
State law reference–“Written” or “in writing” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Year. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
State law reference–“Year” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.005 Severability of parts of code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be
declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this
code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in the code of any such
unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.013.
Sec. 1.01.006 Repeal of ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any
ordinance which has been previously repealed. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Effect of repeal of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.030.
Sec. 1.01.007 Amendments or additions to code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereafter enacted or
presented to the city council for enactment, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or
additions to, the Code of Ordinances. Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and
section of the code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter, article
and section; provided, however, the failure to do so shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of such
ordinances. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.008 Supplementation of code
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized
or directed by the city council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts
of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the
supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they
will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially
obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be current
through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be excluded
from the code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization
authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For
example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/385
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions of
the code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the code
and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other
subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this article,”
“this section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may be; and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
material inserted into the code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or
effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.009 General penalty for violations of code; continuing violations
(a) Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or whenever in this code or such ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) A person convicted of an offense under Title 7, Subtitle C, Transportation Code (the Uniform Act Regulating
Traffic on Highways) for which another penalty is not provided shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1.00 or
more than $200.00 plus such other penalties and costs as may be provided by such Subtitle C.
(c) A fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning or
public health and sanitation, including the dumping of refuse, may not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
(d) Unless otherwise specifically stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is
punishable by a fine that does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) does not require a culpable mental state,
and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. Unless otherwise specifically stated in
this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is punishable by a fine that exceeds five hundred
dollars ($500.00) shall require a culpable mental state.
(e) No penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws
of the state.
(f) Unless otherwise stated in this code or in any ordinance, each day any violation of this code or of any
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(g) In the event that any such violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, such
nuisance may be summarily abated by the city. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue
other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
State law references–Penalties for violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 54.001; penalty for class C misdemeanor, V.T.C.A.,
Penal Code, sec. 12.23; requirement of culpability, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 6.02.
ARTICLE 1.02 ADMINISTRATION*
Sec. 1.02.001 City seal
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/385
(a) The seal of the city shall be a design, circular in shape, with a star in the center, and around the outer edge of
the circle shall be written or printed the words: “CITY OF UNIVERSITY PARK, DALLAS COUNTY, TEXAS.”
(b) The official seal of the city shall be affixed to all ordinances of the city, the minutes of the meetings of the
city council, all deeds, contracts in writing made on behalf of the city, leases, bills of sale, bonds, and other
contracts and obligations of the city where required by law or custom, when signed by the mayor, or the mayor pro
tem in the absence of the mayor, and attested by the city secretary.
(1996 Code, art. 1.200; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.02.002 Execution of contracts, bonds and other obligations
No contract, warrant, bond or other promise to pay money or order therefor, as evidenced by an instrument of
writing, shall be binding upon the city unless executed by a duly authorized officer, and attested by the city
secretary, with the impress of the seal of the city where required by law. (1996 Code, art. 1.300; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 1.02.003 Notice of claims for damages
(a) The failure to so notify the city council or mayor within the time and manner specified herein shall exonerate,
excuse and exempt the city from any liability whatsoever.
(b) No act of any officer or employee of the city shall waive compliance or stop the city from requiring
compliance with the provisions of this section as to notice, but such provisions may be waived by resolution of the
city council, made and passed before the expiration of the six (6) month period herein provided and evidenced by
minutes of the city council.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.401; Ordinance adopting Code)
Charter reference–Claims for damage or injury, sec. 13.06.
State law reference–Texas Tort Claims Act, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, ch. 101.
Sec. 1.02.004 Liability and indemnification of city officers and employees
(a) Definitions.
City vehicle. A vehicle or mobile equipment either leased or owned by the city.
Loss. An amount which a plan member is legally obligated to pay resulting from an act or omission of the plan
member which is covered under this plan.
Plan. Means the city officer and employee liability plan.
Plan member. A person who is:
(1) An employee of the city;
(2) A member of a city board, council, or committee created by ordinance or resolution of the city;
(3) A member of the city council; or
(4) A volunteer who has been approved in writing as a volunteer by the city manager and who is
working under the direction of an employee of the city.
(b) Coverage.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/385
(1) The city will indemnify and defend a plan member, in accordance with the terms of this plan,
against a loss arising out of any claim, suit, or judgment or settlement thereof, resulting from an act or
omission of the plan member during the discharge of his duties and within the scope of his office,
employment, or assigned volunteer work with the city.
(2) A plan member whose position with the city terminates is entitled to coverage in accordance with
this plan for any event that occurred while the person was a plan member.
(c) Defense.
(1) The city will defend any suit against a plan member who is covered under this plan even if the suit
is groundless or fraudulent.
(2) The city may investigate, negotiate and settle any claim or suit as it determines necessary.
(d) Limits of coverage.
(1) The city will pay losses covered by this plan that a plan member is legally obligated to pay, except
that in cases arising from incidents or occurrences where the city's liability exists by virtue of the Texas
Tort Claims Act (sections 101.001–102.006 Civil Practice and Remedies Code, V.T.C.A.), whether or
not the city is a party defendant, the city will pay those losses covered by this plan that a plan member is
legally obligated to pay, up to but not exceeding the limits of liability provided by that act, as amended,
for units of local government.
(2) In addition to the coverage provided in subsection (1) the city will pay:
(A) The city's expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees, in investigating and defending the
claim or lawsuit;
(B) Costs taxed against a plan member in a suit covered by this plan and interest that accrues
prior to or after entry of judgment before the city has deposited payment with the court on that part
of the judgment which does not exceed the limits of coverage;
(C) Reasonable expenses of the plan member incurred at the city's request; and
(D) Attorney's fees ordered by the court to be paid by the plan member.
(e) Notice of occurrence, claim or suit; cooperation. To be entitled to coverage under the plan, a plan member
must:
(1) Notify the city attorney as soon as practicable upon receipt of written notice of a claim or lawsuit,
but no later than three (3) working days after receipt;
(2) Cooperate with the city attorney and, upon the city attorney's request, assist in making
settlements, in the conduct of suits, and in enforcing any right of contribution or indemnity against a
person or organization who may be liable to the city because of injury or damage covered under the
plan;
(3) Attend hearings and trials and assist in securing and giving evidence and obtaining the attendance
of witnesses;
(4) Not, except upon advice of the city attorney or when questioned by a police officer at the scene of
an accident, give any oral or written statement or enter into any stipulation or agreement concerning a
claim or lawsuit; and
(5) Not, except at his own cost, voluntarily make any payment, assume any obligation, or incur any
expense with respect to a claim or lawsuit without the consent of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/385
(f) Plan period. This plan covers only acts or omissions occurring or alleged to have occurred:
(1) While the plan is in effect;
(2) Before the plan was in effect and which are not barred by any statute of limitations; and
(3) If the plan is canceled, while the plan is in effect and which are not barred by any statute of
limitations.
(g) Exclusions. Coverage under this plan does not apply to a claim or lawsuit that is brought against a plan
member:
(1) By the city;
(2) Arising out of the intentional or knowing violation of a penal statute or ordinance committed by or
with the knowledge or consent of the plan member, or any claim arising out of acts of fraud committed
by or at the direction of the plan member with intent to deceive or defraud;
(3) Arising either while the plan member is operating a city vehicle with no authority to operate the
vehicle, or while the plan member is operating a city vehicle in the course of personal or private
business;
(4) For liability assumed by the plan member under a contract, unless the contract is entered into at
the request of the city;
(5) If the plan member joins or attempts to join with the suit against the plan member a claim against
the city for benefits under this plan; or
(6) If the plan member fails to comply with subsection (e) of this plan.
(h) Subrogation. If payment or legal representation is provided under this plan, the city is subrogated to the plan
member's rights of recovery against any person or organization to the extent of the city's liability and payments, and
the plan member must execute and deliver to the city attorney whatever documents are necessary to secure those
rights. The plan member must not do anything after a loss to prejudice those rights.
(i) Legal representation. The city will provide legal representation for a plan member in a claim or suit in which
the plan member is covered under this plan. The city council shall determine whether the city attorney or a private
attorney shall represent a plan member. Any private attorney will be selected by the city council.
(j) Determination of coverage. If the city denies coverage to a plan member, the plan member may seek a
determination of coverage by a court of proper jurisdiction in the county. If the court rules in favor of the plan
member, the city shall provide the plan member all benefits under the plan and shall reimburse the plan member for
reasonable attorney's fees, expenses and costs incurred in obtaining the determination of coverage.
(k) No creation of cause of action. Nothing contained in this plan shall be construed as creating a right or cause
of action against a plan member nor as giving a right to a third party to institute or maintain a suit which would not
otherwise exist under law as a legal claim against a plan member.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.402)
Charter reference–Indemnification of officers, sec. 13.10.
Sec. 1.02.005 9-1-1 emergency service fee
(a) There is hereby imposed on each telephone subscriber's local exchange access line, or its equivalent in the
city, an E 9-1-1 emergency service fee of six percent (6%) of the monthly residential base telephone rate per month
for each residential line, six percent (6%) of the monthly business base telephone rate per month for each business
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/385
line, or six percent (6%) of the monthly business trunk base telephone rate per month for each business trunk line.
Such fees shall be used to provide for the purchase, installation, operating and maintenance expenses of E 9-1-1
emergency service to be furnished pursuant to separate agreements between the city and local exchange carriers for
E 9-1-1 services.
(b) The city manager is authorized to execute a contract on behalf of the city with local exchange carriers
pursuant to the provisions of this section to provide for the implementation and maintenance of E 9-1-1 emergency
service for all telephone subscribers located within the municipal boundaries of the city. Such contract shall contain
no provision or term inconsistent with V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, chapter 772 and/or the rules and
regulations promulgated, issued and/or approved by the public utility commission of the state.
(c) A fee may not be imposed upon more than one hundred (100) local exchange access lines per telephone
subscriber per location; nor may a fee be imposed upon any coin operated or coin/card reader operated telephone
equipment. The fee shall be separately stated on each subscriber's bill, and the fee may not exceed six percent (6%)
of the local exchange carrier's base rate (recurring charge) exclusive of all taxes, fees, license costs or similar
charges for local exchange access lines or trunks or their equivalent. Furthermore, the fee shall be uniformly
applied to all local exchange access lines in the city limits.
(d) Local exchange carriers shall be advised with a certified copy of this section at least one hundred twenty
(120) days prior to the desired first billing date of the fees imposed by this section. One (1) or more public hearings
shall be conducted prior to the amendment of the emergency service fees imposed by this section. In the event the
city council desires to amend such fees it will provide local exchange carriers at least ninety (90) days' written
notice prior to the desired implementation date of such amended fees.
(e) Local exchange carriers will provide the city with a list of subscribers who have specifically refused to pay
the 9-1-1 emergency service fee. Such list shall be provided not more than once per calendar year. Local exchange
carriers will not be obligated to take any legal action to enforce the collection of any billed emergency service fees,
nor will they be obligated to disconnect any subscriber's telephone service for failure to pay the emergency service
fees.
(f) Local exchange carriers will retain records of the fees collected pursuant to this section. Such records will be
retained for a period not exceed two (2) years from the date of collection. The city may, at its sole cost and expense,
audit local exchange carriers' records of the collected fees not more often than once annually.
(g) Local exchange carriers will remit the collected 9-1-1 emergency service fees to the city on a periodic basis,
not more frequently than monthly, on or before the 60th day after the close of the month in which such fees were
collected. Local exchange carriers will retain, from their remittances to the city, two percent (2%) of the collected E
9-1-1 emergency service fees as compensation for providing such collection.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.1102)
State law reference–Local administration of emergency communications, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 772.
ARTICLE 1.03 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.03.001–1.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Planning and Zoning Commission†
Sec. 1.03.031 Powers and duties
(a) The provisions of chapter 212, Local Government Code, V.T.C.A, are hereby adopted, and all the powers and
duties of the city planning commission therein set out are hereby made the powers and duties of the planning and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/385
zoning commission.
(b) The planning and zoning commission shall act as an advisory body to the city council relating to all nature of
public improvements, civic improvements, city planning, opening, widening and changing of streets, routing of
public utilities, controlling and regulating traffic upon the public streets and ways, and such other matters relating
to city improvements as the planning and zoning commission and the city council may deem beneficial to the city.
(c) The planning and zoning commission shall be and it is hereby empowered to make its own rules and
regulations governing the platting of new subdivisions, or the replatting of old undeveloped subdivisions, and shall
also have the power to vary these regulations when, in its judgment, it is necessary in order to secure an appropriate
development of the area in question.
(d) The provisions of section 211.007, Local Government Code, V.T.C.A., are hereby adopted, and all the powers
and duties of the city zoning commission therein set out are hereby made the powers and duties of the planning and
zoning commission.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.101; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.03.032 Public hearing required prior to issuance of orders; notice of hearing
(a) Before entering any orders affecting the property rights of any person or persons, the planning and zoning
commission shall publish a notice of a public hearing in the official newspaper of the city and, at such public
hearing, any and all persons shall have a right to appear and object to the proposed order or action of the planning
and zoning commission.
(b) The city council shall not hold its public hearing or take action until it has received the final report of the
planning and zoning commission. However, after published notice, the city council may provide for the holding of
its hearing jointly with any public hearing required to be held by the planning and zoning commission, but the city
council shall not take action until it has received the final report of the planning and zoning commission.
(c) Written notice of all public hearings before the planning and zoning commission on proposed changes in
classification shall be sent to owners of real property lying within two hundred feet (200') of the property on which
the change in classification is proposed. Such notice has to be given, not less than ten (10) days before the date set
for hearing, to all such owners who have rendered their said property for city taxes as the ownership appears on the
last approved city tax roll. Such notice may be served by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid,
in the city post office.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.102; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.03.033 Fee for application for hearing
Any person who shall make application to the city for hearing before the planning and zoning commission shall, at
the time of filing the application with the city, pay a fee set by resolution by the city council. Such fee is to
reimburse the city for publication of notices and other administrative costs. (1996 Code, sec. 12.103)
ARTICLE 1.04 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.04.001 Emergency management director and coordinator
The following positions are hereby created for the purpose of establishing, coordinating, and operating a civil
defense and disaster relief program:
(1) Emergency management director of the city. In accordance with the executive order of the
governor of the state, this position shall be held by the mayor or the presiding officer of the city council.
The director shall be responsible for insuring that a comprehensive emergency management program is
established within the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/385
(2) Emergency management coordinator for the city. This position shall be held by the fire chief. The
fire chief shall be responsible for administering a comprehensive management program within the city
in accordance with the powers, duties and responsibilities set out below. The fire chief may delegate the
day-to-day responsibilities of this position to any other officer or employee of the city.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.801)
Sec. 1.04.002 Declaration of state of emergency
In the event of a disaster, the emergency management director and the city emergency coordinator shall be
immediately notified. A state of emergency may be declared by the emergency management director upon the
occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from any
natural or man-made cause, including fire, wind, storm, water contamination, epidemic, air contamination, blight,
drought, infestation, explosion, riot, hostile military or paramilitary action, other public calamity requiring
emergency action, or energy emergency. Upon declaration of a state of emergency, the director shall authorize the
city emergency coordinator to put into effect the plan for handling such an emergency. A state of emergency may
not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the city
council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a state of emergency shall be given
prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly in the office of the city secretary. (1996 Code, sec. 1.802;
Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.04.003 Emergency operating center
Emergency response activities will be coordinated from the emergency operating center (EOC) established by the
city manager. The EOC will be activated by the city manager upon notification of a possible or actual emergency.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.04.004 Emergency response system development
(a) The mayor of the city, as emergency management director, is responsible for assuring that coordinated and
effective emergency response systems are developed in accordance with sections 418.101–418.109, Government
Code, V.T.C.A. The emergency management organization is further defined by a document to be entitled
“Emergency Management Plan for the City of University Park.”
(b) The mayor, as emergency management director, shall request outside help and assistance from other political
jurisdictions or volunteer groups, to be used as an adjunct to existing city services, when outside assistance is
necessary.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.804)
Sec. 1.04.005 Emergency functions and responsibilities
Assignment of emergency functions and responsibilities shall be as follows:
(1) The mayor and city council have primary responsibility for the following:
(A) Declaring a state of emergency when required.
(B) Implementing the emergency powers of local government.
(C) Making emergency policy decisions.
(D) Providing emergency information to the citizenry through the public information officer.
(E) Directing the overall preparedness program for the city.
(F) Requesting outside assistance from state or federal governments.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/385
(G) Appointing the emergency preparedness coordinator, who shall be the fire chief unless
otherwise designated.
(2) The city manager has primary responsibility for the following:
(A) Directing the emergency operational response of city services.
(B) Coordinating the activities of outside agencies called in to assist.
(C) Acting as a staff advisor to the mayor and city council on emergency matters.
(D) Supporting the overall preparedness program in terms of its budgetary and organizational
requirements.
(E) Implementing the policies and decisions of the governing body.
(F) Serving as controller of the EOC during its activation.
(G) Assuring that all city departments develop, maintain, and exercise their respective services
during an emergency.
(3) The emergency preparedness coordinator is responsible for the following:
(A) Serving as a staff assistant to the mayor, city council, and city manager on emergency
matters.
(B) Coordinating the primary and general preparedness activities of the city.
(C) Serving as liaison between the city and state preparedness organizations.
(D) Insuring the operation of the EOC.
(E) Maintaining an emergency plan entitled “Emergency Operation Plan for the City of
University Park,” which shall be periodically updated and distributed to all city employees.
(F) Keeping the mayor, city council, and city manager advised of the city's current preparedness
status and future needs.
(G) Initiating and monitoring the increased readiness actions among the city services when
disaster threats occur.
(H) Preparing and maintaining a resource inventory.
(I) Maintaining liaison with volunteer groups and private groups.
(J) Analyzing the emergency training needs of the city and arranging for the training necessary.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.805)
Sec. 1.04.006 Operational policies; adoption of National Incident Management System
The city shall adopt and institutionalize the use of the Incident Command System/National Incident Management
System (ICS/NIMS) as directed by the Homeland Security Presidential Directive-5 (HPSD-5). The city will
employ the ICS/NIMS in order to maintain command and control, organization and assignment responsibilities.
The ICS/NIMS will provide a consistent nationwide template for all city departments and command level personnel
to work with federal, state, and other local jurisdictions to prevent, prepare for, respond to and recover from all
domestic incidents regardless of cause, size or complexity. The ICS/NIMS directs all city departments to integrate
the ICS/NIMS into functional and system-wide emergency operations policies, plans, and procedures; train
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/385
responders, supervisors and command level officers in ICS/NIMS; and conduct exercises with responders at all
levels from multi-disciplines and jurisdictions. (1996 Code, sec. 1.806)
Sec. 1.04.007 Override of existing regulations by emergency regulations
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect,
they shall supersede and override all existing orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent
therewith. (1996 Code, sec. 1.807)
Sec. 1.04.008 Conflict with other laws
This article shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval
order, rule, or regulation. (1996 Code, sec. 1.808)
Sec. 1.04.009 Liability
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health,
and safety, and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm,
partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying
with or attempting to comply with any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this
article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any person owning or
controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or
privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate
or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack shall,
together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or
about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the
property of such person. (1996 Code, sec. 1.809; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.04.010 Expenditures of public funds
Except as specifically authorized or otherwise allowed by state law and ordinances of the city, no person shall have
the right to expend any unappropriated or unbudgeted public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency
management activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have
any right to bind the city by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city
council. (1996 Code, sec. 1.810)
Sec. 1.04.011 Prohibited acts
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the implementation and operation of the emergency management plan. It shall
likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of
identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so has
been granted to such person by the proper officials. Convictions for violations of this article shall be punishable by
a fine as provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. (1996 Code, sec.
1.811)
ARTICLE 1.05 RECORDS MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.05.001 Definition of municipal records
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape,
electronic media, or other information-recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless
of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any
of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the
records of the city and shall be created, maintained and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article
or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. (1996 Code, sec. 8.1101)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/385
Sec. 1.05.002 Additional definitions
Department head. The officer who by ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city
that creates or receives records.
Essential record. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an
emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and
fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
Permanent record. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as
permanent.
Records control schedule. A document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing
the records maintained by the city, their retention periods and other records disposition information that the records
management program may require.
Records liaison officers. The persons designated under section 1.05.010 of this article.
Records management. The application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention,
preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of
recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and
information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and spaceeffective
storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and
correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other record storage systems.
Records management officer. The person designated in section 1.05.005 of this article.
Records management plan. The plan developed under section 1.05.007 of this article.
Retention period. The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the
fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(1996 Code, sec. 8.1102; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.05.003 City records declared public property
All city records as defined in section 1.05.001 are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No city official or
employee, by virtue of his or her position, has any personal or property right to such records, even though he or she
may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is
prohibited. (1996 Code, sec. 8.1103)
Sec. 1.05.004 Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the
creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a comprehensive
system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition,
consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records management
practice. (1996 Code, sec. 8.1104)
Sec. 1.05.005 Designation of records management officer
The city secretary is designated as records management officer for the city. The records management officer shall
cause his name to be filed with the director and librarian of the state library within thirty (30) days of the effective
date of this section. Any of the duties imposed upon the records management officer by this article may be
delegated to any employee of the city under the administrative control of the city manager. (1996 Code, sec.
8.1105; Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/385
Sec. 1.05.006 Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan
(a) The records management officer shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the
city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency
of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the city and to properly preserve those records of
the city that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry
out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively.
(b) Once approved by the city council, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments,
divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city, and records shall be
created, maintained, stored, or microfilmed [according to the plan].
(c) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do
not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this section and
the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to
participate in the records management program of the city.
(1996 Code, sec. 8.1107; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.05.007 Duties of records management officer
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall:
(1) Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its
implementation;
(2) Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures;
(3) In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for
each city office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to re-establish
operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
(4) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of
the city;
(5) Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies;
(6) Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design
and control system for the city;
(7) Provide records management advice and assistance to all city departments by preparation of a
manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation;
(8) Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and
archives commission to determine if the records management program and the city's records control
schedules are in compliance with state regulations;
(9) Disseminate to the city and department heads information concerning state laws and
administrative rules relating to local government records;
(10) Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records
management plan and their duties in the records management program;
(11) Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in
preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this article;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/385
(12) Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of city
records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management
program and the requirements of state law;
(13) Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules,
the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as
the result of such disposal or disposition;
(1996 Code, sec. 8.1108; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.05.008 Duties and responsibilities of department heads
In addition to other duties assigned by this article, department heads shall:
(1) Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures
established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the
requirements of this article;
(2) Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and
duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and
(3) Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction,
or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management
program of the city and the requirements of this article.
(1996 Code, sec. 8.1109)
Sec. 1.05.009 Designation of records liaison officers
Each department head shall designate a member of his or her staff to serve as records liaison officer for the
implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records liaison officer determines that
in the best interests of the records management program more than one records liaison officer should be designated
for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers specified by the
records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the
records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the city maintained by
the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or removal by action of the department head
of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to
fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison officer for his or her department. (1996 Code, sec.
8.1110)
Sec. 1.05.010 Duties and responsibilities of records liaison officers
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records liaison officers shall:
(1) Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for
the development of records control schedules;
(2) In cooperation with the records liaison officer, coordinate and implement the policies and
procedures of the records management program in their departments; and
(3) Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program.
(1996 Code, sec. 8.1111)
Sec. 1.05.011 Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/385
(a) The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall
prepare records control schedules on a department-by-department basis listing all records created or received by the
department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other
information regarding the disposition of the city's records as the records management plan may require.
(b) Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer
on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it
continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management
program of the city.
(c) Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by
the department head and the records management officer.
(d) Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director
and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to
make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the
director and librarian.
(1996 Code, sec. 8.1112; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.05.012 Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule
(a) A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 1.05.007 shall
be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the
records management plan.
(b) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open
records request is pending on the record, the subject of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit, or the
department head requests in writing to the records management officer that the record be retained for an additional
period.
(c) Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the
destruction must be obtained by the records management officer.
(1996 Code, sec. 8.1113; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.05.013 Destruction of unscheduled records
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction
has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records
management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction
authorization request. (1996 Code, sec. 8.1114)
Sec. 1.05.014 Records center
A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by section 1.05.007, shall be under the direct control and
supervision of the records management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the
records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under section 1.05.007. (1996 Code,
sec. 8.1115)
Sec. 1.05.015 Electronic retention
The records management plan will establish policies and procedures for the electronic retention of city records,
including policies to ensure that all electronic retention is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the
electronic retention of local government records established in rules of the state library and archives commission.
The plan will also establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for electronic retention and protocols
for ensuring that a electronic retention program that is exempted from the centralized operations is, nevertheless,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/385
subject to periodic review by the records management officer as to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency and
compliance with council rules. (1996 Code, sec. 8.1116; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 1.06 FINANCES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.06.001 Payment of fees, fines and other charges by credit card
(a) Authorization. Any official of the city who collects fees, fines, court costs, or other charges is hereby
authorized to accept payment by a credit card of any such fee, fine, court cost, or other charge. The specific
officials of the city who shall participate in such a program shall be designated by the city manager by appropriate
administrative order.
(b) Service charge if card not honored. If, for any reason, a payment by credit card is not honored by the credit
card company on which the funds are drawn, the city may collect a service charge, as adopted by resolution of the
city, from the person who owes the fee, fine, court cost, or other charge. The service charge is in addition to the
original fee, fine, court cost, or other charge and is for the collection of that original amount. Such service charge is
the same amount as the fee charged for the collection of a check drawn on an account with insufficient funds.
(1996 Code, art. 1.500)
State law reference–Payment of fees, fines, court costs or other charges by credit card, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 132.
Sec. 1.06.002 Establishment of fees for city services
Except as otherwise provided by this code or by other applicable law, all fees to be charged by the city for city
services shall be as established by an appropriate resolution of the city council enacted in the form provided by law
from time to time. Wherever a fee is referred to in this code, but is not set out in the applicable section or chapter,
such fee shall be established by the resolution unless set by other applicable law. (1996 Code, art. 1.600)
Editor's note–Fee resolutions are maintained on file in the office of the city secretary.
Secs. 1.06.003–1.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Fiscal Impact Statements
Sec. 1.06.031 Ordinance authorizing change in employee retirement fund
Any ordinance proposed for adoption by the city council which would authorize any changes in retirement benefits
for employees under the Texas Municipal Retirement System and/or the firemen's relief and retirement fund shall
contain a fiscal impact statement prepared by the city manager or his designated representative indicating the full
amount of appropriation necessary in the current or succeeding city budget to fund such entitlement. The fiscal
impact statement shall also contain the additional amount of unfunded liability created by such changes. (1996
Code, sec. 1.1201)
Sec. 1.06.032 Ordinance or resolution requiring expenditure of funds
Any ordinance or resolution providing for or requiring current or future expenditure of city funds which is
presented to the city council for consideration and adoption shall be accompanied by a fiscal impact statement
prepared by the city manager or his designated representative indicating the source of funds from which any such
expenditure will be made and the total dollar amount required to fund the obligation being assumed by the city by
virtue of such ordinance or resolution. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1202)
ARTICLE 1.07 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY*
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/385
Sec. 1.07.001 Generally
The chief of police may dispose of personal property which may come into the possession of the police department
as authorized by article 18 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1401)
Sec. 1.07.002 Notice to owner
Upon receipt of personal property during the course and scope of his duties, the chief of police shall notify the
owner thereof, if the identity of the owner is known or may be ascertained, that the property is in the possession of
the chief of police and may be reclaimed. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1402)
Sec. 1.07.003 Manner of sale
Property which can be sold under the authority of article 18 of the Code of Criminal Procedure shall be turned over
to the person designated by the city manager to schedule and hold public auctions whenever an auction has been
scheduled and advertised. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1403)
Sec. 1.07.004 Terms of sale
All personal property shall be sold for cash. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1404)
Sec. 1.07.005 Report of sale; deposit of funds
Upon completion of the sale of such property, the person designated by the city manager to handle such sales shall
make a report to the finance director, including the time and place of sale, the amount received for each item sold
and the name and address of each purchaser. Such report, along with all funds received, shall be delivered to the
finance director and deposited to the general fund of the city. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1405)
Sec. 1.07.006 Purchase by city personnel
An officer or employee of the city commits an offense if he bids on or purchases, either directly or indirectly, any
personal property offered for sale pursuant to the provisions of section 1.07.003 above. The prohibition contained
in the preceding sentence shall not apply if the auction is conducted by an outside auctioneering firm whose fee is
paid on a percentage of sales. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1406)
ARTICLE 1.08 RISK MANAGEMENT*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.08.001–1.08.030 Reserved
Division 2. Risk Management and Assumption Plan
Sec. 1.08.031 Definitions
The following terms, as used in this division, shall have the following meanings, unless the context requires
otherwise:
Act. Includes an omission or failure to act.
City vehicle. A vehicle or any mobile equipment leased or owned by the city.
Coverage determination action. An action by a plan member to determine coverage under the plan pursuant to
section 1.08.037 of this division.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/385
Coverage determination expenses. The reasonable expenses incurred by a plan member in connection with a
coverage determination action (including, but not limited to, costs awarded by a court and attorneys' fees) that the
city is not precluded from paying by law.
Covered act. Any act of a plan member that:
(1) Occurs during the discharge of the member's official duties for the city; and
(2) Is within the scope of the member's office, employment or assigned volunteer work with the city,
as applicable.
Excluded action. Any claim or suit against a plan member:
(1) By the city;
(2) That results from:
(A) An intentional or knowing violation of a law (including an administrative agency rule
having the force and effect of law) committed by, or with the knowledge and consent of, the plan
member; or
(B) An act of fraud committed by, or at the direction of, the plan member;
(3) That arises while the plan member is operating a city vehicle with no authority to do so;
(4) That asserts or alleges liability assumed by the plan member under a contract, unless the contract
is entered into at the request of the city;
(5) That includes a joinder by the plan member of a claim or suit of the plan member against the city
for benefits under the plan;
(6) For punitive damages that are not recoverable against the city in law;
(7) For damages or other payments that the city is precluded from paying by law; or
(8) For damages caused by intentional tort or any action outside the course and scope of a plan
member's duties.
Excluded loss. Any of the following:
(1) Any loss that arises out of an excluded action;
(2) Any loss the payment of which by the city is precluded by law;
(3) Any loss arising out of a claim or suit resulting from a covered act that occurred before the plan
took effect if such claim or suit is barred by any statute of limitations;
(4) Any loss arising out of a claim or suit resulting from a covered act that occurs while the plan is in
effect if:
(A) The plan member experiencing the loss becomes legally obligated to pay the loss after the
plan is terminated; and
(B) Such claim or suit is barred by any statute of limitations;
(5) Any loss arising out of a claim or suit resulting from a covered act that occurs after the plan is
terminated; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/385
(6) Any loss covered by the municipal workers' compensation law.
Loss. The damages that a plan member is legally obligated to pay that arise from a claim or suit resulting from a
covered act.
Loss expenses. Any of the following:
(1) The city's expenses in investigating or defending a claim or suit that may result in a plan claim;
(2) The costs taxed against a plan member in a suit that results in a plan claim and any pre-judgment
or post-judgment interest for which the plan member is liable;
(3) The reasonable expenses of a plan member incurred at the city's request in connection with a
claim or suit that may result in a plan claim; and
(4) Any attorneys' fees ordered by a court to be paid by a plan member in a suit that results in a plan
claim.
Plan. The city's risk management and assumption plan, as established by this division.
Plan claim. Any plan loss together with the plan loss expenses that result from the claim or suit giving rise to such
plan loss.
Plan loss. Any loss that is not an excluded loss.
Plan loss expense.
(1) Any loss expenses, except those incurred in connection with an excluded action; and
(2) Any coverage determination expenses.
Plan member. An individual who at any time (whether before or after the establishment of the plan) is or has been:
(1) An employee of the city;
(2) A member of the city council;
(3) A member of:
(A) A city board, council or committee created by charter, ordinance or resolution of the city; or
(B) The board of directors of any nonprofit corporation created under the authority of the city
council as an instrumentality of the city; or
(4) An individual who is a volunteer assisting the city pursuant to an official policy adopted or
approved by the city council.
Program ordinance. Ordinance No. 87/30 (which establishes the city self-insurance and risk management
program), as from time to time amended (division 3 of this article).
(1996 Code, sec. 8.901; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.08.032 Plan established
The city hereby establishes the city risk management plan, which shall consist of the policies, rights and duties
embodied in this division. The plan shall be implemented and administered as provided by this division. (1996
Code, sec. 8.902)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/385
Sec. 1.08.033 Defense and settlement of claims or suits
(a) The city will defend any suit, except an excluded action, against a plan member that results from a covered
act, even if the suit is groundless or fraudulent.
(b) The city may investigate, negotiate or settle any claim or suit against a plan member that results from a
covered act, as the city determines necessary or appropriate, without consent of such plan member.
(c) Investigation or defense by the city of a suit which is determined to be an excluded action shall not render the
act which is the alleged basis of the suit or claim a covered act if the city notifies the plan member that the act
might be determined to be an excluded action and advises the plan member to seek counsel.
(1996 Code, sec. 8.903)
Sec. 1.08.034 Payment of claims
(a) Subject to subsection (b) below, the city will pay each plan claim.
(b) If a plan claim arises out of a claim or suit in which the city's liability (or asserted liability) exists by virtue of
the Texas Tort Claims Act, as amended, chapter 101, Civil Practice and Remedies Code, Vernon's Texas Codes
Annotated, whether or not the city is a defendant, the city will pay such plan claim in an amount up to, but not
exceeding, the limits of liability applicable to the city provided by such statute or other applicable law.
(c) To be entitled to payment by the city for any plan claim, a plan member must:
(1) Notify the city secretary in writing as soon as practicable after receipt of written notice of any
claim or suit that may result in a plan claim and in any event not later than three (3) working days after
such receipt;
(2) Cooperate with the risk manager in the investigation, negotiation or settlement of any claim or suit
giving rise to the plan claim and enforcing any right of contribution or indemnity against an individual
or organization who may be liable to the city because of the payment by the city of a plan claim;
(3) Attend any hearing or trial held in connection with a plan claim, and assist in securing and giving
evidence, and obtaining the attendance of witnesses;
(4) Not, except upon advice of the city attorney or when questioned by a police officer at the scene of
an accident, give any oral or written statement or enter into any stipulation or agreement concerning a
claim or suit resulting in a plan claim;
(5) Not, except at the plan member's own cost, voluntarily make any payment, assume any obligation,
or incur any expense with respect to any claim or suit resulting in a plan claim without the consent of
the risk manager;
(6) Deliver to the risk manager, promptly upon receipt, any demand, summons, notice or other
process received by the plan member in connection with any claim or suit that may result in a plan
claim;
(7) Comply with the claims administration procedures of the risk manager; and
(8) Perform the duties and comply with the requirements imposed on the plan member by this
division or by the program ordinance (division 3 of this article).
(1996 Code, sec. 8.904)
Sec. 1.08.035 Legal representation
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/385
(a) The city will provide legal representation for a plan member in a claim or suit, except an excluded action, in
which the asserted or alleged liability of the plan member results from a covered act.
(b) If the city attorney determines that there exists a conflict of interest for the city attorney to represent a plan
member pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the city will pay the reasonable fee of a private attorney to
represent the plan member. The private attorney will be selected by the risk manager or his/her designee.
(1996 Code, sec. 8.905)
Sec. 1.08.036 Subrogation
If payment of a plan claim or legal representation is provided to a plan member under the plan, the city is
subrogated to the plan member's rights of recovery against any individual or organization to the extent of the city's
payment or liability for payment. A plan member shall execute and deliver to the risk manager such documents as
are necessary to secure this right of subrogation in the sole opinion of the city attorney. A plan member shall not do
anything after a plan claim is incurred to prejudice this right. (1996 Code, sec. 8.906)
Sec. 1.08.037 Determination of coverage
(a) If the city denies coverage under the plan to a plan member, the plan member may seek a determination by a
court of proper jurisdiction of whether the member is entitled to such coverage.
(b) If the court rules in favor of the plan member, the city shall provide such coverage to the plan member and
shall reimburse the member for the coverage determination expenses.
(1996 Code, sec. 8.907)
Sec. 1.08.038 No creation of cause of action
Nothing contained in this division shall be construed as creating a right or cause of action against a plan member or
as giving a right or cause of action against a plan member [sic] or as giving a right to a third party to institute or
maintain a suit that would not otherwise exist under law as a legal claim against a plan member. (1996 Code, sec.
8.908)
Sec. 1.08.039 Administration
The risk manager is responsible for the administration of the plan in accordance with its terms, subject to the
superior authority of the city council. In the course of carrying out this responsibility, the risk manager shall
interpret and apply the provisions of this division. (1996 Code, sec. 8.909; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.08.040 Amendment, repeal and termination
This division may be repealed or amended at any time, subject to existing rights of plan members under section
1.08.034 of this division, and the city may modify or terminate the plan at any time. (1996 Code, sec. 8.910)
Sec. 1.08.041 Purpose and intent
The regulations provided in this division are hereby declared to be governmental and for the health, safety and
welfare of the general public. (1996 Code, sec. 8.911)
Sec. 1.08.042 Payments subject to appropriation
All amounts payable under this division are subject to available and appropriated funding therefor, except that
appropriation shall not be required to the extent funding is available therefor under the program ordinance (division
3 of this article). (1996 Code, sec. 8.912)
Sec. 1.08.043 No right to risk management fund
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/385
This division does not grant any right to any plan member in or to the risk management fund created by the
program ordinance (division 3 of this article). (1996 Code, sec. 8.913)
Secs. 1.08.044–1.08.070 Reserved
Division 3. Self-Insurance and Risk Management Program*
Sec. 1.08.071 Definitions and interpretation
(a) Definitions. The following terms, as used in this division, have the following meanings, unless the context
requires otherwise:
Act. Includes omission or failure to act.
Administrative expenses. The expenses of administering the program, to the extent designated as such by the city
manager, including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) The compensation paid to the risk manager or to any risk management consultant;
(2) The compensation paid to any person or organization for the administration of the risk
management program, including, but not limited to, claims adjuster, loss control services, management
information services providers or any professional actuary;
(3) The expenses of defending any claim, including, but not limited to, the following:
(A) Compensation paid to expert witnesses;
(B) Attorneys' fees and expenses and court costs; and
(C) Investigation expenses;
(4) Any expenses incurred by the city in the course of any financing undertaken to provide funding
for the fund or to repay any obligation incurred by the city in the course of such a financing; or
(5) The cost of program insurance that is purchased in accordance with this division.
Advertising injury. Any injury to a person that results from the promotional activities of the city if such injury
arises out of libel, slander, defamation, violation of right to privacy, commercial piracy, unfair competition, or
infringement of copyright, title or slogan, registered trademark, service mark or trade name.
Advertising injury claim. A program general liability claim in which the damages are asserted to be the result of
advertising injury.
Annual period. The period of twelve (12) consecutive calendar months beginning on the effective date of the
program and on each successive anniversary of the effective date of the program.
Assumed general liability claim. Any plan claim for which the city, in the judgment of the risk manager, is liable.
Assumed risks. The risks for which the city has assumed liability pursuant to the risk assumption ordinance
(division 2 of this article).
Bodily injury. Any physical harm or physical illness sustained by any individual, including a resulting death.
City attorney. The city attorney of the city.
City council. The governing body of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/385
City manager. The duly appointed and designated city manager of the city.
Claim. Any claim or suit against the city, or any claim or suit against any plan member that the city is responsible
for defending under the risk assumption ordinance (division 2 of this article), regardless of whether any damages
resulting from such claim or suit are permitted under this division to be paid from the fund.
Claims adjuster. Any person designated as a claims adjuster as provided for by section 1.08.074(b) of this division.
Corporate general liability claim. Any corporate general liability damages, together with the corporate general
liability expenses that result from the claim giving rise to such corporate general liability damages, but does not
include a workers' compensation payment.
Corporate general liability conduct. Any of the following:
(1) Any error or omission that causes an injury;
(2) Any conduct of the city or a plan member that:
(A) Causes bodily injury, property damage, or regulatory injury that is not intended or expected
by the actor;
(B) Causes advertising injury that (i) is not intended or expected by the actor, and (ii) does not
arise out of any statement that the actor knows is false; or
(C) Causes personal injury or property damage (regardless of whether intended or expected by
the actor) that results from (i) the use of reasonable force for the purpose of protecting persons or
property, or (ii) the discharge of the actor's official duties for the city.
Corporate general liability damages. The damages for which the city, in the judgment of the risk manager, is liable
as a result of a claim arising from corporate general liability conduct.
Corporate general liability expenses. The court costs, pre-judgment and post-judgment interest, attorneys' fees, and
any other expenses or costs for which the city, in the judgment of risk manager, is liable as a result of a claim
giving rise to corporate general liability damages.
Corporate general liability risks. The risks for which the city, as a municipal corporation, may be held liable by
operation of law in the course of performing its governmental or proprietary functions.
Damages. Compensatory damages, punitive damages, special damages or any other classification of damages that
lawfully may be awarded against the city or a plan member as a result of a claim.
Error or omission. Any act of a plan member that results in or constitutes an erroneous or improper discharge of
such plan member's official duties for the city (including the making of an incorrect statement), but that does not
constitute legally actionable fraud or an intentional or knowing breach of duty.
Excluded payment. Any of the following payments:
(1) The payment of a program claim that is not made while the program is in effect in accordance
with applicable claims administration procedures;
(2) The payment of any program claim involving damages that arise from the exercise by the city of
is power of eminent domain;
(3) The payment of all or that portion of any program claim, or of any other item for which a
withdrawal from the fund is permitted by section 1.08.073(a) of this division, that, in lieu of payment
from the fund, can be paid from:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/385
(A) The proceeds of insurance carried by the city, including, but not limited to, casualty or
liability insurance, workers' compensation insurance or property insurance;
(B) The proceeds of any insurance carried under any health, accident or similar plan of benefits
provided by the city; or
(C) Any fund, reserves or other source of payment available to the city that has been designated
or otherwise set aside for such purpose;
(4) The payment of any program general liability claim arising from an injury that results from the
distribution (whether by sale, gift or otherwise) of an alcoholic beverage, other than a distribution at an
activity or function that is incidental to the city's business, that:
(A) Is in violation of the law;
(B) Is to a minor or to an individual who is under the influence of alcohol; or
(C) Causes or contributes to the intoxication of an individual.
(5) The payment of any program claim arising from an injury that results from declared or undeclared
war (including civil war, insurrection, rebellion or similar hostility) or any act or condition incident to
war; or
(6) The payment of any program claim:
(A) In which the city's liability exists by virtue of the Texas Tort Claims Act, chapter 101, Texas
Civil Practice and Remedies Code, Vernon's Texas Code Annotated, regardless of whether the city
is a defendant, that exceeds the limits on liability applicable to the city under that statute;
(B) That the city is otherwise granted immunity from paying or precluded from paying by law;
or
(C) In an amount that exceeds any limits prescribed by this division on the amounts of
withdrawals that may be made from the fund to pay program claims.
Finance director. The individual having the responsibility for the management of the city's financial affairs.
Fund. The risk management fund created by section 1.08.075 of this division.
Fund surplus. The amount of money in the fund that is in excess of the amount that, in the opinion of a professional
actuary, is required to maintain the fund on an actuarially sound basis, to the extent reasonably practicable, for the
period of time and the risks of loss for which it is then funded.
Injury. Any of the following injuries:
(1) Advertising injury;
(2) Personal injury;
(3) Property damage;
(4) Regulatory injury.
Law. Includes the federal and state constitutions and statutes, the city ordinances, any administrative rules having
the force and effect of law, and any controlling judicial decisions applicable to the city.
Occurrence. An episode, an incident or series of related incidents, or an event or series of related events that result
in compensable injury to one (1) or more persons.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/385
Person. Includes an individual; partnership, trust or other association; corporation; or governmental entity or
agency.
Personal injury. Any:
(1) Bodily injury;
(2) Mental harm, anguish, or illness (regardless of whether accompanied by bodily injury);
(3) Discrimination;
(4) Humiliation;
(5) Assault;
(6) False or improper service of process;
(7) False imprisonment;
(8) Damage to character, reputation or integrity;
(9) Invasion of privacy;
(10) Violation of property rights; or
(11) Violation of civil rights.
Personal injury claim. Any program general liability claim in which the damages are asserted to be the result of
personal injury.
Plan claim. Any plan claim as defined in the risk assumption ordinance (division 2 of this article).
Plan loss expenses. Any plan loss expenses as defined in the risk assumption ordinance (division 2 of this article).
Plan member. Any plan member as defined in the risk assumption ordinance (division 2 of this article).
Program. The city self-insurance and risk management program established by section 1.08.072(a) of this article.
Program claim. Any program general liability claim.
Program general liability claim. Any assumed general liability claim or any corporate general liability claim.
Program insurance. Any insurance (other than the self-insurance provided by the fund) that is obtained by the city
pursuant to section 1.08.075(c) of this division.
Program ordinance. This division and any amendments hereto.
Program risks. Any of the following risks:
(1) The assumed risks; and
(2) The corporate general liability risks.
Property damage. Any damage to or destruction of tangible property or the loss of use of tangible property.
Property damage claim. A program general liability claim in which the damages are asserted to be the result of
property damage.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/385
Regulatory injury. Any economic loss sustained by a person as a result of any act by the city in the performance of
its regulatory or property acquisition functions.
Risk assumption ordinance. Ordinance No. 87/29 (which establishes the city risk management plan), as from time
to time amended (division 2 of this article).
Risk manager. The person serving as the risk manager pursuant to section 1.08.075(a) of this division.
Termination date. January 1, 1998, or any other date of termination of the program specified by ordinance or
resolution of the city.
(b) Interpretation. Whenever the context requires:
(1) References in this division of the singular number shall include the plural and vice versa; and
(2) Words used in this division denoting gender shall be construed to include the masculine, feminine
and neuter.
(c) Titles. The table of contents and the titles given to any section of this division are for convenience only and
are not intended to modify or affect the meaning of this division.
(1996 Code, sec. 8.1001; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.08.072 Program established;; risk management fund created
(a) Program established. The city hereby establishes the city self-insurance and risk management program, which
shall consist of the policies, rights and duties embodied in this division. The program shall be implemented and
administered as provided by this division.
(b) Powers, duties and functions of risk manager.
(1) The risk manager may exercise the powers and shall perform the duties and functions prescribed
by this division, the risk assumption ordinance and any other ordinance of the city.
(2) The risk manager may establish rules governing the conduct of its affairs.
(3) The risk manager may take such actions as are necessary to enable it to properly and effectively
exercise the powers and perform the duties and functions delegated to it under this division or any other
ordinance of the city.
(c) Administration of program. The risk manager is responsible for the administration of the program in
accordance with this division, subject to the superior authority of the city council. In the course of carrying out this
responsibility, the risk manager shall interpret and apply the provisions of this division and the risk assumption
ordinance.
(d) Risk management fund created.
(1) The risk management fund is hereby created.
(2) The fund is a special trust fund of the city, created for the purpose of providing capital for the
program to be used as provided by this division.
(3) No person (including any plan member), other than the city, has or is granted or vested with any
right to any of the money in the fund.
(4) The fund shall be maintained at the city's depository bank unless required to be maintained
elsewhere by another city ordinance or by agreement entered into by the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/385
(e) Capitalizing the fund.
(1) The fund may be funded with money:
(A) Provided by contributions made from time to time, upon the order of the city commission,
from budgeted, appropriated and currently available city money; or
(B) Derived from time to time by the city from any other lawfully available source of funding.
(2) The city council directs that $1,000,000.00 of the proceeds of the city's certificates of obligation,
Series 1987, together with $1,275,000.00 of the city's reserves, be deposited in the fund on or prior to
January 1, 1988.
(f) Risk retention policy. It is the policy of the city, subject to budgetary and general economic conditions, to
self-insure against program risks through the fund and to provide such self-insurance by depositing money into the
fund in amounts sufficient, under actuarial determinations, to provide for the defined self-insurance coverages
prescribed by this division. It is further the policy of the city, under the appropriate conditions, to obtain program
insurance as provided by this division.
(g) No admission of liability for claims. The city, by virtue of establishing and maintaining the program, is not
admitting liability for any claim. The city reserves the right to assert any defense to the payment or collection of
any claim that is available to it under any theory of law.
(1996 Code, sec. 8.1002; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.08.073 Regulation of risk management fund
(a) Authorized withdrawals from fund.
(1) Money may be withdrawn from the fund only for the following purposes:
(A) To reimburse the city for administrative expenses;
(B) To pay any program claim;
(C) To pay any fund surplus to the city;
(D) To retire (by scheduled payment, prepayment, defeasance, or otherwise) any obligation of
the city incurred in connection with providing funding for the fund; or
(E) To reimburse the city for any payment made under any agreement to provide funding for the
fund that is permitted to be paid to the city pursuant to such agreement, or, to the extent and under
the terms and conditions provided in such agreement, to cure a default in payment by the city
under such agreement.
(2) No withdrawal from the fund may be made except in accordance with this division.
(3) Money may not be withdrawn from the fund to make any excluded payment.
(b) Control of withdrawals from fund.
(1) Subject to the regulations and limitations provided by this division, the determination of whether
money in the fund is to be withdrawn is in the discretion of the city manager and finance director, upon
recommendation from the city's risk manager.
(2) An aggregate amount exceeding $1,000,000.00 may not be withdrawn from the fund to pay the
program claims of any one claimant that arise from the same occurrence unless the city council
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/385
approves a greater amount for the purpose.
(c) Method of withdrawal from fund. Withdrawals from the fund may be made, upon the order of the risk
manager, by check or electronic transfer drawn on the fund.
(d) Withdrawals of fund surplus. Fund surplus may not be withdrawn from the fund more often than once a year.
(e) Limits on amount of withdrawals for program claims.
(1) The aggregate amount of withdrawals from the fund to pay all corporate general liability claims
that arise from any one occurrence may not exceed the following amounts for the following respective
classifications of corporate general liability claims:
(A) For personal injury claims: $1,000,000.00.
(B) For property damage claims: $1,000,000.00.
(C) For advertising injury claims: $1,000,000.00.
(D) For regulatory injury claims: $1,000,000.00.
(2) The aggregate amount of withdrawals from the fund to pay all assumed general liability claims
that arise from any one occurrence may not exceed $1,000,000.00.
(3) The aggregate amount of withdrawals from the fund in any one annual period to pay program
general liability claims may not exceed $3,000,000.00.
(f) Investment of fund. The finance director shall direct the investment of money in the fund in investments that
are eligible as lawful investments for other public funds of the city. By ordinance, the city council shall determine
when and what portion, if any, of the realized investment income shall be withdrawn from the fund for deposit to
the other accounts of the city.
(1996 Code, sec. 8.1003; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.08.074 Administration of claims
(a) Generally. The risk manager is responsible for the administration of claims.
(b) Claims adjusters.
(1) The risk manager may allow one (1) or more claims adjusters (each a “claims adjuster”) to adjust
or otherwise administer claims for the city.
(2) Each person that is to serve as a claims adjuster shall be designated or authorized by the risk
manager. A claims adjuster may be selected from among the city's administrative staff, or a professional
claims handling or management service may be retained as a claims adjuster.
(3) If a professional claims handling or management service is to be retained as a claims adjuster,
such employment shall be on a nonexclusive basis, and the contract under which such service is retained
shall be made terminable by the city upon the expiration of a reasonable term fixed by the risk manager.
(4) Each claims adjuster shall be directly responsible to the risk manager or his designee and shall
follow any claims administration policies and procedures established by the risk manager.
(c) Defense of claims.
(1) The risk manager shall direct the defense of the city in claims.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/385
(2) The risk manager, under supervision of the city attorney, may retain attorneys, experts and
investigators in connection with the defense of any claim.
(d) Settlement of claims.
(1) The risk manager, in his discretion, may settle claims, subject to the limitations prescribed by this
section.
(2) The claims of any one claimant that arise from the same occurrence may not be settled for an
aggregate amount exceeding $25,000.00 without the approval of the city council.
(3) The risk manager may authorize claims adjusters to settle, with the approval of the city manager
but without the advance approval of the city council, the claims of any one claimant that arise from the
same occurrence for an aggregate amount not exceeding $25,000.00.
(e) Payment of non-covered claims. Any claim that the city is legally obligated to pay that is not a program claim
or, if a program claim, that is in excess of the amount permitted under this division to be withdrawn from the fund
to pay such program claim, may be paid by the city only at such times and from such sources of payment as
required by law.
(1996 Code, sec. 8.1004; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.08.075 Risk management activities; program insurance
(a) Risk manager.
(1) The program shall include the services of a risk manager (the “risk manager”).
(2) The risk manager may be an individual selected by the city manager from among the city's
administrative staff or an individual selected by the city manager who is hired as a city employee, or a
professional risk management service may be retained as the risk manager. If a professional risk
management service is to be retained as the risk manager, the selection of the service shall be made by
the city manager.
(3) The risk manager shall perform the duties and functions prescribed by this division, subject to the
superior authority of the city manager.
(b) Risk management activities generally.
(1) The risk manager shall coordinate the following activities:
(A) Identify and quantify (to the extent practicable) the risks that have the potential to result in
loss to the city or plan members resulting from claims;
(B) Subject to approval of the city manager, devise and implement programs designed to reduce
the city's and the plan members' exposure to loss due to program risks, including, but not limited
to, risk assumption, risk reduction, risk retention and risk transfer, including purchase of program
insurance;
(C) Develop and maintain for the city manager an information system, in coordination with any
existing systems of the city, for the efficient recording of program information, including, but not
necessarily limited to, information concerning claims, plan loss expenses and corporate damage
expenses, administrative expenses, withdrawals from the fund, and program insurance premium;
(D) Perform such other services as may be specified by the city manager.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/385
(2) Subject to applicable budgetary restrictions and with the consent of the city manager, the risk
manager may coordinate the safety and other risk management policies and procedures that are to be
followed by the city.
(c) Program insurance.
(1) Insurance (“program insurance”) may be obtained under the following circumstances:
(A) As excess coverage over that provided by the fund, at [as] reinsurance for the fund, or at
[as] first-dollar coverage in lieu of that provided by the fund (which may result in converting
coverage provided by the fund into excess coverage) if, in each case, the insurance is obtainable
on a fiscally sound basis, giving consideration to the investment opportunities for the fund and any
shock loss exposure of the city due to the program risks;
(B) When services that are necessary to effectively administer the program can be obtained only
through the obtaining of the insurance;
(C) When the city is required by contract or law to obtain the insurance; or
(D) When the limitations on coverage under the fund do not result in long-term economic
advantage to the city, and the insurance obtained either does not contain, or offsets or reduces,
such limitations.
(2) The procurement of program insurance shall be coordinated by the risk manager and approved by
the city council.
(3) Program insurance shall be obtained from sources determined to be in the best interests of the city.
No particular insurance or financial quality rating is required, but the insurance provider must be in
excellent financial condition as determined by the risk manager.
(4) When practicable, the remuneration of agents or brokers providing insurance services to the city
pursuant to this division shall be on a fee basis.
(d) Cooperation by city employees. To promote the efficient and effective administration of the program, the
various department heads and other employees having administrative responsibilities for the city are encouraged
and directed to cooperate with the risk manager.
(1996 Code, sec. 8.1005; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.08.076 Miscellaneous provisions
(a) Report to city council on program status. The risk manager or finance director, at least quarterly, shall report
to the city council on the status and experience of the program, including the financial status of the fund.
(b) Alteration and termination of program.
(1) Subject to subsection (2) below, the city, by ordinance, may alter the program from time to time or
terminate the program at any time without notice to any plan member or other person.
(2) The city, by agreement approved by the city council, may limit its right to alter or terminate the
program.
(c) Effective date; program duration. The program shall become effective at 12:01 a.m. on January 1, 1988, and
shall continue in effect until 11:59 p.m. on the termination date.
(1996 Code, sec. 8.1006; Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/385
ARTICLE 1.09 PARKS AND RECREATION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.09.001 Rental of Goar Park pavilion
(a) City-related functions shall have the first priority on the pavilion and shall use the pavilion without charge.
(b) Bona fide residents of the city may use the pavilion for personal use for a fee.
(c) All other groups who use the pavilion for personal use, except those specified in the following section, shall
pay a fee.
(d) All applicants that desire to use the facility for business, commercial or professional gatherings, may apply
for the use of said pavilion for daytime hours between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., and if such application is
approved, the applicant shall pay the parks director a fee, but the applicant may make no charges nor collect any
money of any kind or character from any person whatsoever for the use of the pavilion.
(e) There shall be a charge for installation of the public address system if required by the person renting the
pavilion.
(f) All users of the facility, excluding the July 4th parade committee, shall follow the procedures listed below:
(1) A request for a reservation must be made to a representative of the city manager, who shall
determine the priority of the requests if more than one (1) is received for any time period.
(2) A permit shall be issued by the reservation clerk stating the time, date, fee, and amount of deposit
and any other pertinent information desired by the city.
(3) All users, except city-related users, shall deposit a fee with the reservation clerk. Such deposit is
to cover the costs of any necessary cleanup or vandalism during the rental period of an applicant. The
chief of police/fire shall designate a person to inspect all premises after usage and sign a deposit release
if cleanup is not necessary or vandalism has not occurred. The accounting department will subsequently
refund such deposit if a waiver is signed by the chief's representative.
(4) Under section 1.09.033 of this Code of Ordinances, alcoholic beverages are prohibited.
(5) Music may be played only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., under the terms of
section 8.01.001 of this Code of Ordinances.
(6) Unauthorized vehicles will not be allowed in the park.
(7) All permits must be obtained in person and such individual must sign such permit indicating that
he/she agrees to the terms of the permit, the deposit restrictions, and ordinances of the city.
(8) Decorations cannot be used on the pavilion that would tend to deface the structure, such as, but
not limited to, staples, tacks, crepe paper, or any material that will stain.
(9) Any open flame, candle, torch, etc., cannot be used in the pavilion, and use of any decoration or
equipment must meet appropriate fire and electrical codes.
(g) Users can be excluded by the city manager from use of the facility for the following reasons:
(1) From past history, the organization requesting the use tended to incite disorder.
(2) That the potential user has been denied the use of any public facility in the city or in the area
constituting the Highland Park Independent School District.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/385
(3) That a particular group has requested use of a certain time period to the exclusion of all other
groups wanting such time period.
(h) All monies received from the use of the pavilion shall be kept in a separate account, whether fees or deposits,
and such money shall be used for the maintenance of the pavilion. Any money received in excess of the
maintenance cost shall be spent in the park system for permanent trees or other improvements.
(i) The city manager shall determine the category of charge when there is an interpretation needed.
(j) All decisions in regard to the category of the fee, the non-refund of any portion of the deposit, or the denial of
the use of the facility can be appealed to the city council at the next regularly scheduled meeting, if the applicant so
desires.
(k) No group or individual may use the pavilion without first having obtained a permit.
(1996 Code, art. 13.400; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 1.09.002–1.09.030 Reserved
Division 2. Park Rules
Sec. 1.09.031 Hours
(a) Each and every park within the boundaries of the city shall be open to the general public between the hours of
6:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m. each day.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, except a member or members of the police or fire department, or other
employees of the city, engaged in the performance of official duty, to be in or within the boundaries of any park in
the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:59 a.m.; except that a special event may be held in a designated
public park which lasts during the hours of 11:01 p.m. to 5:59 a.m. provided a special permit is obtained therefor
from the city council.
(1996 Code, sec. 13.101)
Sec. 1.09.032 Motorized vehicles; bicycles
(a) Motorized vehicles, including go-carts, motorcycles, minibikes, automobiles, pickup trucks, and trucks, are
hereby prohibited from driving or being driven in each and every park within the boundaries of the city except [on]
designated hard-surfaced parking areas and excepting official park maintenance vehicles and police and fire
vehicles.
(b) Bicycles are hereby prohibited from being ridden in areas within the parks designated by the parks director or
his representative by appropriate “No Bicycles” signs.
(1996 Code, sec. 13.102; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.09.033 Alcoholic beverages
The consumption of alcoholic beverages, including wine, beer, ale and mixed drinks, is hereby prohibited in each
and every park within the boundaries of the city. (1996 Code, sec. 13.103)
Sec. 1.09.034 Swimming in streams or lakes
No person shall swim or wade in any of the lakes, streams or ponds in the city park system. (1996 Code, sec.
13.104)
Sec. 1.09.035 Riding skateboards, bicycles, etc., or use of cleated shoes on tracks
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/385
No person shall ride any skateboard or skates or run or jog in any cleated shoes, except those with 3/8" spikes
(track shoes), on any track surface within the parks of the city, nor shall any person ride a bicycle, tricycle or any
other pedal vehicle on such track surfaces in said parks. (1996 Code, sec. 13.105)
Sec. 1.09.036 Dogs prohibited in posted areas
No owner or keeper of any dog shall permit any dog to enter or remain in any fenced area of a city park which is
posted to indicate such restriction. (1996 Code, sec. 13.106)
Sec. 1.09.037 Golfing
No person shall play or practice the game of golf in any city park. (1996 Code, sec. 13.107)
Sec. 1.09.038 Red flag field closure
In order to preserve the surface of designated athletic fields and open turf areas in the city's parks, the following red
flag field closure regulations shall apply:
(1) This section shall take effect on December 1, 2009;
(2) A flagpole will be erected and maintained by the city in each park (Burleson, Caruth, Coffee,
Curtis, Germany, and Smith Parks), Goar and Williams (city hall flagpole) and a red flag raised and
displayed at such park during the time the parks director or his designee has determined that, due to
periods of inclement weather, use of designated athletic fields and open turf areas would be damaging to
them;
(3) During the periods of red flag closure, it shall be unlawful and an offense for any person or group
of persons, including but not limited to the YMCA groups, HPISD groups, residents with field
reservations or anyone using the parks for open play, to use the closed fields for any play, sport or
activity;
(4) Any person violating the red flag field closure regulations shall be warned to cease such violation
and stay off the designated athletic field or open turf area; any person, having received such warning,
[who] continues to violate the closure shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense and loss of field use privileges; and
(5) Persons may call the city's field closure hotline at 214.987.5680 with any questions.
(1996 Code, sec. 13.108)
Secs. 1.09.039–1.09.070 Reserved
Division 3. Tennis Courts
Sec. 1.09.071 Use for purpose other than tennis prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any tennis court in any park in the city for any purpose other than playing
the game of tennis. (1996 Code, sec. 13.201)
Sec. 1.09.072 Reservations; closing time
Only persons with a current tennis court permit can make a tennis court reservation. Reservations may only be
made for a current permit holder. No person may exclusively use any tennis court at a particular time without a
reservation having been made with a representative of the parks department. No permit holder may reserve a court
for more than 1.5 hours per day. A permit holder must have his or her permit card in his or her possession at all
times when using a reserved city tennis court. Reservations must be cancelled within a reasonable time in advance
of the time reserved if the resident is unable to use the reserved court. Repeated violations of the policies of this
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/385
division may result in cancellation of the violator's tennis court permit. The city reserves the right to reschedule
reservations due to court or lighting maintenance requirements. Notwithstanding that the parks are open until 11:00
p.m. daily, tennis courts shall close at 10:00 p.m. daily so as to reduce lighting impact and noise in the
neighborhood surrounding the tennis court. (Ordinance 13/022, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/13)
Sec. 1.09.073 Footwear
It shall be unlawful for any person to play tennis on any tennis court in any park of the city while wearing any
footwear other than tennis shoes. (1996 Code, sec. 13.203)
Sec. 1.09.074 Permits
A qualified resident of the city, upon making application, may secure an annual tennis permit. Residents of the area
of the City of Dallas known as Greenway Parks, lying generally between the Dallas North Tollway, Mockingbird
Lane, Inwood Road, and University Blvd., shall be authorized to secure an annual tennis permit for use of the
tennis courts at Germany Park only. Such permit shall be numbered and coded so as to indicate the time of its
validity. The charges for individual tennis permits, under twelve years of age permits and over sixty-five years of
age permits shall be established by resolution of the city council. The permit number shall be used in obtaining a
reservation from the reservations office. (Ordinance 13/022, sec. 1, adopted 7/2/13)
Sec. 1.09.075 Enforcement
The chief of police or his designated representatives shall check players using the tennis courts to see if one
member on each court has a permit. Also, the enforcement agency may see that reservation times are observed. The
agency may file under the general penalty provision of this code. (1996 Code, sec. 13.205)
Sec. 1.09.076 Tennis instructors
All tennis instructors who wish to use the tennis courts of the city for instructing tennis pupils must secure a permit
from the city. The permit application must be submitted with an instructor permit fee as set by appropriate
resolution of the city council. A registered tennis instructor must have his or her permit in his or her possession at
all times when providing instruction on a city tennis court. Tennis instructors may provide instruction on a city
tennis court only to persons holding a current city tennis court permit, and the permit holder's invited guests who
are present, and who have reserved the tennis court for that time period. Tennis instructors shall not be permitted to
make tennis court reservations. Any violation of this section by a tennis instructor may result in the cancellation of
his or her instructor permit and any and all privileges associated with the use of the permit. (Ordinance 13/022, sec.
1, adopted 7/2/13)
Secs. 1.09.077–1.09.100 Reserved
Division 4. Swimming Pools
Sec. 1.09.101 Use generally
The city swimming pools may be used under the regulations contained in this division.
Sec. 1.09.102 Definitions
Bona fide guest of qualified resident. A bona fide guest of a qualified resident.
Family. Mother and father and all children residing in the same residence.
Qualified resident. A bona fide resident of the city.
Sec. 1.09.103 Persons who may use pools
The persons listed in this section may use the city swimming pools, to wit:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/385
(1) Qualified residents of the city;
(2) Nonresidents who own real estate located in the city;
(3) Residential real property owners in those areas within the City of Dallas or Town of Highland
Park which are in the Highland Park Independent School District;
(4) Students and teachers, sixteen (16) years of age or older, enrolled or working in day care centers
located within the city limits;
(Ordinance 10/17 adopted 6/1/10)
(5) Members of any swim team, whose membership consists primarily of city residents, which has
been approved by the parks director, may use the pool as a practice area;
(6) Members of the families and bona fide guests of qualified residents or property owners described
in subsections (2) or (3) above; and
(7) Former mayors who are nonresidents of the city.
(Ordinance 13/14 adopted 4/2/13)
Sec. 1.09.104 Permits, passes and tags
(a) Fees.
(1) Any person, six (6) years of age or older, entitled to use the city's swimming pools, upon making
application in person or through his authorized representative, may secure an annual permit to gain entry
to the pools. The charge for this permit shall be as established by resolution of the city council.
(2) A day care center located in the city may purchase annual passes for its teachers and students six
(6) years of age or over. The annual pass for each day care center shall be issued upon payment of a fee.
Use of the pass is subject to the condition that the day care center have in attendance at the swimming
pool during any time the pass is being used at least one (1) teacher for each five (5) students who are
using the pool at the time. The permit is subject to the further limitation that the students and teachers
may only use the pool between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. All nonresident students of such
day care centers in the city who are six (6) years of age or older shall pay a fee and shall be subject to
the same time limitation and supervision ratio required for the day care center for residents.
(3) A qualified resident of the city may secure permission for bona fide guests to use pools by paying
a cash fee for each guest each time each guest uses the pool.
(4) Any person entitled to use the city's swimming pools, but not owning an annual permit (tag), may
use the swimming pools upon paying a charge per person for each time the pool is used.
(b) Issuance of tags. The city manager, or his representative, shall issue a tag for each family member residing at
any given address within the city upon application for the same. The applicant, or his representative, must sign a
receipt for the tag and a pledge that the tag will be used only by the person to whom it is issued. The tag must be
worn on the swimming suit in a manner so that it can be seen by the swimming pool attendants. The day care
centers shall be issued a permit or card for the teachers and students under six (6) years of age. Upon entering the
pool, the designated leader of the group shall identify himself and the teachers and students coming into the pool
under the permit authority.
(c) Lost tags. If the tag is lost, a duplicate may be secured from the city for a fee.
(d) Tags not transferable. Any person using a tag belonging to someone else may be ejected by the swimming
pool attendant and the tag taken up. In such cases, the tag may be restored to the proper owner if sufficient proof is
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/385
offered that the illegal use was without the owner's permission.
(e) Sales of tags final. All sales of tags are final. No refunds or partial refunds shall be made to anyone,
regardless of whether the purchaser has or has not used the tag, or for any other reason.
Sec. 1.09.105 Free use prohibited
There shall be no free passes of any kind. No person shall be permitted to use the facilities or enjoy the privilege of
the swimming pools without first paying the charges as herein provided.
Sec. 1.09.106 Hours and days open
(a) The opening and closing dates of the swimming pools as well as the hours of opening shall be established
each year by the pool manager. The swimming pools shall be open seven (7) days a week, except when required
maintenance is needed.
(b) In case of inclement weather, it shall be within the discretion of the pool manager or his designate to decide if
the pool shall be closed.
Sec. 1.09.107 Swimming instruction classes
(a) Special classes for swimmers may be authorized by the pool manager, and, when so authorized, subject a fee
to be established by a city council resolution. Classes are limited in size. Scheduling of all swimming classes is
subject to change at any time.
(b) An enrollment fee shall accompany the application for admission to a swimming class. In the event a person's
name is dropped from a class roster because of two (2) successive unexcused absences, an additional enrollment fee
will be charged when application is made for reenrollment in any other class.
Sec. 1.09.108 Diseased persons not to enter pools
No person who has an infectious, contagious or communicable disease, a skin disorder or open sores shall use the
swimming pool. The pool attendant and the police are authorized to immediately eject from the pool any person
who has an infectious, contagious or communicable disease, a skin disorder or open sores, and such person shall be
denied further use of the pool unless a certificate of a licensed physician is furnished certifying that such person is
free of all contagious, infectious, or communicable diseases.
Sec. 1.09.109 Use by children under six years of age
(a) Children under six (6) years of age who are qualified residents or bona fide guests of qualified residents may
use any of the pools without charge when accompanied by a parent or guardian 16 years of age or older at all times.
(b) If the parent or guardian desires to enroll such child in one of the swimming instruction classes, an
enrollment fee shall be paid for the child.
(Ordinance 10/17 adopted 6/1/10)
Sec. 1.09.110 Use by children generally
A child under six (6) years of age who is an authorized user of the city's swimming pools under this division may
use any of the pools between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. without cost, provided the child is accompanied
by a paying parent or guardian. A child six (6) years of age or older shall not be permitted to use the small pools.
Only small children five (5) years of age or younger may enter (swim) in the small pools. (Ordinance 10/17
adopted 6/1/10; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.09.111 Rules of conduct for city swimming pool
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/385
(a) The parks director is authorized to promulgate rules of conduct for persons using the city swimming pool
facilities. The rules shall be reviewed and approved by the city council.
(b) The parks director shall post appropriate signs at the swimming pool giving notice of the rules of conduct.
The notice shall include a statement that such rules are authorized by this Code of Ordinances.
(c) The parks director, pool manager, or person in charge of the swimming pool facilities shall have authority to
enforce such rules by requiring a person violating them to discontinue use of the facilities for a specified period of
time, or by ejection from the pool facilities, or by refusal of admission of the person to the pool facilities or by a
means provided in section 1.09.112.
(d) Specific rules applicable to a particular facility of the pool, such as diving boards, water slide, and/or splash
pad, shall be posted in writing on or near the facility to which they apply.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.09.112 Enforcement
(a) The attendants may eject, from any pool, anyone guilty of indecent conduct, or for violation of any of the
above regulations, or anyone who is so using any pool as to annoy other bathers, preventing their full enjoyment of
any pool, after first having been warned by the attendant.
(b) The attendants may also take the tag from a violator if he continues to violate the rules after being warned,
and the attendants shall deliver such tag to the city manager as soon as is practical.
(c) The pool manager shall investigate the conduct of such bather, and after doing so the pool manager is hereby
authorized to return such tag or suspend such tag for a definite period of time or revoke such tag. If the bather
objects to the ruling of the pool manager, he may appeal such decision to the parks director.
(Ordinance 10/17 adopted 6/1/10)
Secs. 1.09.113–1.09.150 Reserved
Division 5. Reservation of Parks and Playing Fields
Sec. 1.09.151 Use of parks and park facilities for individual or group training or instruction
(a) City-related functions shall have the first priority on the parks and shall use the parks without charge. (1996
Code, sec. 13.501)
(b) No person shall sell, offer for sale or solicit the sale of any food or other merchandise in a public park. Except
as provided in this Section, no person shall offer any services for monetary gain in a public park. The policies of
this section shall not apply to persons acting pursuant to and with the written authorization of the city council or its
designee. (Ordinance 13/022, sec. 2, adopted 7/2/13)
(c) The use of picnic areas and play equipment is on a first come, first served basis. No reservations are made.
(1996 Code, sec. 13.501)
(d) Any group of two hundred (200) or more people not sponsored by the city and desiring to use a city park as a
gathering place or for an event or function of any kind shall be subject to the following requirements:
(1) The organizer or representatives of the group desiring use of the park for an event or function
shall file an application for a special permit with the parks department at least thirty (30) days in
advance of the proposed date for the event or function. The application will be on a form approved and
provided by the parks department and will include the following information:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/385
(A) The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons responsible for the event
or function;
(B) A description of the event and its proposed date and hours of duration;
(C) Estimated number of people who will be in attendance;
(D) A description of any special features which may be involved (e.g., pony rides, petting zoos,
bounce machines, port-a-johns, tents, etc.);
(E) The park and park area being requested for use;
(F) The nature and number of vehicles which will be used to transport people in attendance to
and from the event;
(G) A description of any food and beverages which will be served at the event;
(H) A description of any voice or musical amplification equipment to be used;
(I) Any other information that may be required by the city council, city manager or any affected
department of the city in order to establish additional requirements for the preservation of the
public health, safety and general welfare.
(1996 Code, sec. 13.501; Ordinance 13/022, sec. 2, adopted 7/2/13)
(2) When an application has been filed with the parks department, the city council and/or city
manager will be notified of the action and will be provided copies of the application for review. The city
council and the city manager are authorized to request more information from the parties filing the
application for the purposes stated above and for the purposes of assessing the demand placed upon city
services by the event and the impact upon the area surrounding the park. (1996 Code, sec. 13.501;
Ordinance adopting Code)
(3) In addition to the requirements set forth in this section, the group shall comply with any and all
other applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, resolutions and rules governing use of the park. These
include, but are not limited to, the payment of any fees or deposits which may be required for the use of
city parks by this code. (1996 Code, sec. 13.501)
(e) All individuals or groups conducting any type of for-profit camp, clinic or personal instruction in city parks
must register annually with the city. Registrations must be submitted with annual fees as set by appropriate
resolution of the city council. An instructor must have his or her registration card in his or her possession at all
times when providing physical training or instruction to an individual or group in a city park. At least 51% of the
participants must be city residents. The instructor will furnish a roster of participants to the parks department at
least three days in advance of the beginning of instruction, provided that the director of parks or his designee may,
for good cause shown, waive or vary such three-day requirement when he finds it to be in the best interest of the
city and the participants. The director of parks, or his designee, will specify a location in a park for conduct of each
training group based on planned activity and group size. Classes shall not be permitted to use playgrounds,
swimming pools, gazebos or other structures, picnic tables or benches, fences, utility poles, picnic areas, basketball
or tennis courts to conduct physical training or instruction to an individual or group.
(f) The use of lights, or equipment weighing more than twenty-five (25) pounds, is prohibited. Physical training
or instruction may not be conducted in a park before 6:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. All city, YMCA and HPISD
programming will have priority at all times over use of a city park by an instructor. The use of park and city
structures as workout devices or for anchoring is prohibited. Park benches and picnic tables may not be used for
physical training activities, such as for step-ups. Resistance bands may not be connected to park fencing, signs,
poles, trees or shrubs, drinking fountains or any other appurtenance in the park. Any violation of this section by an
individual or group may result in the cancellation of his or her registration.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/385
(g) Amplified music and bullhorns are prohibited in a city park, except for authorized city programs. Interruption
of another person's park use or reservation is prohibited. The use of signs or banners to advertise on park property
is prohibited. The use of profanity in the parks is prohibited. The city reserves the right to reschedule any
reservation due to maintenance requirements.
(Ordinance 13/022, sec. 2, adopted 7/2/13)
Sec. 1.09.152 Playing field reservations
(a) Generally. Reservations may be made for the exclusive use of playing fields in the following parks: Burleson,
Caruth, Coffee, Curtis, Germany, Gore, Smith, and Williams.
(b) Residency requirement. Only bona fide residents of the city can make a reservation for the exclusive use of a
playing field. A majority of the team or group members using the playing field pursuant to such reservation must
also be residents of the city.
(c) Application; fee. Residents may reserve playing fields by application to the reservations clerk, for an hourly
fee to be established by the master fee resolution.
(d) YMCA and school district. Reservations for the Park Cities YMCA shall be made and fees established in
accordance with the agreement between the city and the YMCA. Reservations for the use of Germany Park by the
Highland Park Independent School District will be made in accordance with the agreement between the city and the
HPISD.
(e) Use without reservation. In the event playing fields are not previously reserved as provided in this section,
and there is no conflict with city-sponsored events, field maintenance, or inclement weather conditions, playing
fields may be used by the public without a reservation during approved hours of park operation, subject to all park
regulations contained in or authorized by this code.
(f) Germany Park. Based on an agreement entered into by the city in 1974, residents of the Greenway Parks
Addition in Dallas may reserve the playing field and tennis courts in Germany Park (formerly known as Park A) in
the same manner and at the same fee adopted for city residents.
(1996 Code, sec. 13.502; Ordinance adopting Code)
(g) Use with reservation. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, remain or be in or upon any park, field,
playground or park facility, including the city swimming pool, city tennis courts, and the track and field at
Germany Park (“park facility”) in the city during a period of time when such park facility has been reserved by the
city for use by another individual or organization for his or its exclusive use. (Ordinance 11/01 adopted 1/4/11)
Sec. 1.09.153 Sports clinics
(a) Any individual or group wishing to use a park or playing field to conduct a sports clinic as a profit-making
venture shall reserve the park or playing field by filling out the appropriate application forms in the park
department office and pay a fee for each hour the clinic is scheduled to be operated in the park or on the playing
field reserved. If, after the conduct of the clinic is completed, the number of hours during which the park or playing
field was actually in use exceeds the fee paid, the applicant shall be liable and responsible to pay the additional fee
in the park department office within five (5) days after completion of the clinic. If the actual number of hours is less
than the fee paid, the applicant shall receive a pro rata refund. The application forms and all fees must be in the
park office at least one (1) week before the clinic is scheduled to begin. (1996 Code, sec. 13.503)
(b) No person shall operate a sports clinic in a city park without registration with the parks department. A
registration fee established by appropriate city council resolution shall be required with an application to conduct a
sports clinic. The registration fee must be paid at least three business days prior to the operation of the sports clinic.
The person registered to operate a sports clinic shall submit a roster of participants at least one week prior to the
operation of the sports clinic. At least 51% of its participants listed on the roster shall be city residents. “Seasonal
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/385
rental period” is March, April, May, June and July. Field rentals for sports clinics will be allowed only during the
seasonal rental period, and may only operate in Burleson, Caruth and Coffee parks.
(c) Amplified music and bullhorns are prohibited in a city park, except for authorized city programs. Interruption
of another person's park use or reservation is prohibited. The use of signs or banners to advertise on park property
is prohibited. The use of profanity in the parks is prohibited. The use of tennis courts for sports clinic activities is
prohibited. Using fields during inclement weather closure is prohibited. The city reserves the right to reschedule
any reservation due to maintenance requirements. Any violation of this section by a registered sports clinic operator
may result in the cancellation of his or her registration.
(Ordinance 13/022, sec. 2, adopted 7/2/13)
ARTICLE 1.10 TREES, SHRUBS, WEEDS AND GRASS IN PUBLIC PLACES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.10.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the words and phrases used herein shall have the following meanings:
Alley. From the middle of the alley to the subject property line.
Maintain or maintenance. When used in reference to parkway trees and shrubs, shall mean and include pruning,
trimming, topping, root pruning, removal, spraying, watering, treating for disease, or any similar act which
promotes the life, growth, health, or beauty of trees.
Parkway. The area between the curb and the property line.
Shrub. Any woody vegetation or woody plant having multiple stems and bearing foliage from the ground up.
Tree. Any woody plant normally having one (1) stem or trunk bearing its foliage from the ground up.
Weed. Plants that are considered by the general populace to be noxious and are usually not cultivated for
landscaping purposes.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.1901)
Sec. 1.10.002 Prohibited conditions
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to grow or allow to remain on any alley, parkway, or public
place abutting the property of such person, firm, or corporation any tree, shrub, weeds, or grass which has or may
become an obstruction to traffic, a hazard, or unsightly, or which does or may interfere with proper street lighting
on such property. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1902)
Sec. 1.10.003 Responsibility of abutting property owner or occupant
The abutting property owner, lessee or person in charge of property has the responsibility of maintaining all trees,
shrubs, grass or growing matter of any kind in the parkways and alleys abutting such property and shall maintain
parkways and alleys so that grass and weeds do not grow to a height greater than eight (8) inches in any such
parkway or alley. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1903)
Sec. 1.10.004 Removal or trimming by city; replacement of damaged materials
(a) Generally. All materials placed within the city's parkways and alleys are subject to removal, relocation, or
damage during the course of the operation and maintenance of the public infrastructure. Nothing herein prevents
the city from removing or trimming trees or shrubs from parkways and alleys when such shrubs and trees are
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/385
infested, defective, or dangerous to traffic or people. Such trees and shrubs may also be removed to protect
sidewalks, curbs, pavement, sewers, or other utilities. Any materials on public property that are removed or
damaged during the operation, maintenance, or repair of the public infrastructure will be replaced by the city in the
manner and with a material of the city's choosing.
(b) Tree stump removal service. When trees are cut down on the parkways for any of the above reasons, the city
may remove the tree stump(s) for the abutting property owner for a fee to be established by resolution of the city
council.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.1904)
Sec. 1.10.005 Notice of violation
The fire marshal, public works director, community development director or their representative shall notify any
person in violation of the provisions of this article and such notice shall give ten (10) days for abatement of the
violation prior to filing by the fire marshal, public works director, or their designated representative in the city
court. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1905)
Secs. 1.10.006–1.10.030 Reserved
Division 2. Trees in Parks and Parkways
Sec. 1.10.031 Definitions
Park trees. Trees in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public
has free access as city property.
Parkway trees. Trees on land lying between the back of curb and the city sidewalk on either side of all streets,
avenues or ways on public property.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.1921)
Sec. 1.10.032 Tree board
There is hereby created and established a city tree board for the city which shall consist of the mayor, appointed
members of the park advisory board and the city's urban forester. The board will also review the planning and
implementation of the city's annual Arbor Day celebration. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1922)
Sec. 1.10.033 Duties of urban forester
It shall be the responsibility of the city urban forester to study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update
annually, and administer, a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or
disposition of trees along streets and in other public areas. The city urban forester, when requested by the park
advisory board or city council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special
matter or question coming within the scope of his work. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1923)
Sec. 1.10.034 Approved species for planting in parkways
The following list constitutes the official tree species for the city. No species other than those included in this list
may be planted in a parkway.
Tree Common Name Botanical/Scientific Name
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/385
Bald Cypress Taxodium distichum
Bur Oak Quercus macrocarpa
Cedar Elm Ulmus crassifolia
Chinese Pistachio Pistachia chinensis
Chinqapin Oak Quercus muehlenbergi
Crape Myrtle* Lagerstroemia indica
Mexican White Oak Quercus mexiana
Live Oak Quercus virginiana
Red Oak Quercus shummardi
Yaupon Holly* Ilex vomitoria
*Trees recommended for planting under power lines with a mature height estimated at less than 25
feet.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.1924)
Sec. 1.10.035 Approved species for planting in parks
Trees from the official tree species list for the city may be planted within the city park system. Any additions to this
list, including small ornamental trees, shall be reviewed and approved by the parks director, the city's urban forester
and the park advisory board. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1925)
Sec. 1.10.036 Distance from street corners, fireplugs and utility lines
No parkway tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet to any street corner or 15 feet to any alley corner, measured
from the point of the nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No parkway tree shall be planted closer than 10 feet to
any fireplug. No parkway tree shall be planted within 20 feet of an overhead power line unless its mature height is
less than 25 feet. For underground lines, call Dig Tess (1-800-Dig-Tess) prior to digging. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1926)
Sec. 1.10.037 Planting, maintenance or removal by city
The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees within the lines of all streets, alleys,
avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance
the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The city urban forester may remove or cause order to be removed
any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/385
electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus,
insect or other pest. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1927)
Sec. 1.10.038 Pruning of trees overhanging parkway or right-of-way
Every owner of any tree overhanging any parkway or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that
such branches shall not become an obstruction to traffic, a hazard, or unsightly, or interfere with lights from any
street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection, and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet (8')
above the sidewalk and fourteen feet (14') above the curbline. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or
dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs, that constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have
the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it overhangs a public right-of-way or easement and
interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight or interferes with visibility of any
traffic-control device or sign. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1928)
Sec. 1.10.039 Interference with city employees
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with a city employee or agent while he is engaging
in the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any parkway tree or park tree as
authorized in this article. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1929)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 2.01.001 Definitions
The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
Abandon or abandoned. The dumping, deserting or leaving any animal on public or private property negligently or
with the intent to terminate any further responsibility for the animal, or the failure to properly redeem an animal
impounded or quarantined by the city or its animal control contractor. (Ordinance 18/011, sec. 1, adopted 3/6/18)
Animal control officer. An employee of the city or a designated contractor responsible for enforcement of this
chapter.
At large. Not under the immediate physical control of a person by means of a leash, rope, or fenced enclosure.
Cat. A domestic feline.
Chief of police. The chief of police of the city, and includes representatives, agents, or city employees designated
by the chief of police to enforce or administer this chapter.
City manager. The city manager of the city, and includes representatives, agents, or city employees designated by
the city manager to enforce or administer this chapter.
Dog. A domestic canine.
Owner. A person owning, keeping, or exercising control over an animal, or harboring an animal for more than three
(3) days.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/385
(1996 Code, sec. 2.101)
Sec. 2.01.002 Animal control officer
There is hereby created the office of animal control officer for the city. The animal control officer shall be
employed by and under the direction and control of the chief of police or shall be a responsible professional agency
performing the functions of animal control in accordance with this chapter by contract with the city. In either case,
the animal control officer or contracting entity, or their agents or employees, shall have those duties and
responsibilities as provided herein. (1996 Code, sec. 2.102)
Sec. 2.01.003 Administration and enforcement
The chief of police shall be charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter unless otherwise
specified. (1996 Code, sec. 2.103)
Sec. 2.01.004 Keeping livestock or wild animals prohibited
A person commits an offense if he possesses, keeps, or harbors a cow, calf, hog, pig, goat, horse, colt, bear, lion,
fox, wildcat, jaguar, cheetah, bobcat, wolf, jackal, leopard, hyena, raccoon, skunk, ocelot, monkey, or any other
wild animal in the city. (1996 Code, art. 2.200)
State law reference–Dangerous wild animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 822.101 et seq.
Sec. 2.01.005 Keeping fowl prohibited
A person commits an offense if he possesses, keeps, or harbors a chicken, rooster, chick, turkey, duck, duckling,
pigeon, or any other fowl within the city. (1996 Code, sec. 2.301)
Sec. 2.01.006 Keeping venomous reptiles
(a) Generally. A person commits an offense if he possesses, keeps, or harbors a venomous reptile within the city.
A school, university or YMCA may possess a venomous reptile pursuant to a permit issued by the city council
according to the terms in subsection (b) of this section.
(b) Issuance of permit.
(1) A school, university or YMCA desiring to keep a reptile or reptiles as provided in subsection (a)
of this section shall first make application to the city manager, giving the following information:
(A) The name and address of the applicant;
(B) A description of the facilities designed for keeping the reptile or reptiles;
(C) The number and kind of reptiles; and
(D) The purpose for which the reptile or reptiles are being kept.
(2) The city manager shall present the application to the city council at a regular meeting. If the city
council approves the application, the city manager shall issue a permit for the keeping of such reptiles in
accordance with the approval of the city council.
(c) Revocation of permit. The permit may be revoked by the city council upon a showing that the keeping of the
reptile or reptiles is adversely affecting neighboring property because of unreasonable odor, or is creating an
unreasonable danger to persons occupying or using the neighboring property.
(1996 Code, art. 2.000)
Sec. 2.01.007 Keeping bees
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/385
A person commits an offense if he possesses, keeps or harbors bees in a beehive when such beehive is located
within one hundred feet (100') of a lot used for residential purposes other than the lot of the possessor of such hive.
(1996 Code, art. 2.500)
Sec. 2.01.008 Noisy animals
The owner of a dog, cat or other animal commits an offense if he allows such animal by unreasonable barking,
howling or other noise to cause unreasonable discomfort to a person of ordinary sensibility. (1996 Code, sec. 2.603)
ARTICLE 2.02 DOGS AND CATS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.02.001 Vaccination
(a) Required. The owner of each dog or cat more than four (4) months old in the city shall have such dog or cat
immunized annually with an anti-rabies vaccine by a person licensed to practice veterinary medicine by the state.
Such owner shall obtain from such veterinarian:
(1) A certificate of vaccination stating the name and address of the owner, the name, sex and breed of
the dog or cat, and the date of vaccination; and
(2) A vaccination tag.
(b) Possession of unvaccinated animal prohibited. An owner commits an offense if he possesses within the city a
dog or cat which has not been vaccinated within the preceding twelve (12) month period according to the
requirements contained in subsection (a) above. Each day an owner possesses such dog or cat shall constitute a
separate offense. The failure or refusal of an owner to produce to the animal control officer, upon request, a current
certificate of vaccination shall constitute prima facie proof that such dog or cat has not been vaccinated according
to the requirements contained in subsection (a) above.
(1996 Code, sec. 2.607)
State law references–Rabies vaccinations, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.021 et seq.
Sec. 2.02.002 Licensing
(a) Required. The owner of each dog or cat more than four (4) months old in the city shall obtain a license for
such dog or cat from the city manager or his designee. At the time of application for such license, the owner shall
present the certificate of vaccination specified in section 2.02.001(a), and pay a licensing fee for each dog and cat.
(b) Possession of unlicensed animal prohibited. A person commits an offense if he possesses within the city a
dog or cat which has not been licensed according to subsection (a) above. The failure or refusal of an owner to
produce to the animal control officer, upon request, a current license tag shall constitute prima facie proof that such
dog or cat has not been licensed according to the requirements contained in subsection (a) above.
(1996 Code, sec. 2.608)
State law reference–Registration of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.031 et seq.
Sec. 2.02.003 Tags
(a) Issuance. Upon the presentation of the vaccination certificate and payment of the licensing fee, the city
manager or his designee shall issue to the owner a license tag. The tag shall be so marked as to indicate the period
of time such license is valid. The license tag shall be valid for a period of one (1) year. The license tag and
vaccination tag shall be affixed to a collar, which shall be attached to the animal's neck and worn by such animal at
all times.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/385
(b) Lost or destroyed tags. In the event a license tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate shall be issued by the city
manager upon presentation of a receipt showing payment of the license fee. The duplicate license tag shall be valid
only for the period of time that remains on the original license receipt.
(1996 Code, sec. 2.609)
Sec. 2.02.004 Maximum number of dogs and cats
An owner, other than the proprietor of an animal clinic or pet shop, commits an offense if he possesses more than
three (3) dogs or three (3) cats, over six (6) months of age, within the city. For the purpose of this section, there
may be no more than one (1) owner within a residential dwelling unit. (1996 Code, sec. 2.604)
Sec. 2.02.005 Dogs running at large
The owner of a dog commits an offense if he permits such dog to run at large in the city or if he fails, by whatever
means are necessary, to prevent such dog from running at large in the city. A dog found at large within the city shall
be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section and that the owner of such dog failed to prevent such dog from
running at large in the city. (1996 Code, sec. 2.601)
State law reference–Restraint, impoundment and disposition of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.033.
Sec. 2.02.006 Dogs prohibited in food establishments
The owner of a dog or the proprietor or manager of an establishment where food items are sold or offered for sale
or consumption on or off the premises commits an offense if a dog is permitted to enter or remain in such food
establishments. This section shall not apply to service animals individually trained to do work or perform tasks for
the benefit of an individual with a disability, including, but not limited to, guiding individuals with impaired vision,
alerting individuals with impaired hearing to intruders or sounds, providing minimal protection or rescue work,
pulling a wheelchair, or fetching dropped items. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.02.007 Dogs on school property or adjacent public property
A person commits an offense if, without the express permission of an authorized school official, he or she allows,
suffers, permits a dog under his or her ownership, custody, or control to go on or be on any school grounds or other
property of the Highland Park Independent School District, or any private preschool, kindergarten, primary or
secondary school, at any time, or to go on or be on any sidewalk, parkway or public property abutting school while
school is in session. (1996 Code, sec. 2.606)
Secs. 2.02.008–2.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. Dangerous Dogs*
Sec. 2.02.041 Definitions
In this division:
Animal control authority. The animal control officer of the city.
Dangerous dog. A dog that:
(1) Makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than
the enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from
leaving the enclosure on its own; or
(2) Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and
that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/385
cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that person.
Dog. A domesticated animal that is a member of the canine family.
Owner. A person who owns or has custody or control of the dog.
Secure enclosure. A fenced area or structure that is:
(1) Locked;
(2) Capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children;
(3) Capable of preventing the escape or release of a dog;
(4) Clearly marked as containing a dangerous dog; and
(5) In conformance with the requirements for enclosures established by this Code of Ordinances.
Serious bodily injury. An injury characterized by severe bite wounds or severe ripping and tearing of muscle that
would cause a reasonably prudent person to seek treatment from a medical professional and would require
hospitalization, without regard to whether the person actually sought medical treatment.
(1996 Code, sec. 2.605(a))
Sec. 2.02.042 Authority to order seizure
The municipal court shall order the animal control officer to seize a dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the
seizure:
(1) On the sworn complaint of any person that the dog has caused the death of or serious bodily injury
to a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person; and
(2) On showing of probable cause to believe that the dog caused the death of or serious bodily injury
to the person as stated in the complaint.
(1996 Code, sec. 2.605(b))
Sec. 2.02.043 Impoundment of seized dog
The animal control officer shall seize the dog or order its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog
in secure and humane conditions until the court orders the disposition of the dog. (1996 Code, sec. 2.605(c))
Sec. 2.02.044 Disposition of seized dog
After notice and a hearing as required by section 822.003 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, the court may order
the disposition of the dog, including its destruction as provided by section 822.004 of the Health and Safety Code,
provided that provocation or location of an attack by a dog that causes a person's death or serious bodily injury
shall be irrelevant in such proceeding. (1996 Code, sec. 2.605(d))
Sec. 2.02.045 Requirements for owner
(a) Not later than the thirtieth day after a person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous dog, the
person shall:
(1) Register the dangerous dog with the animal control authority;
(2) Restrain the dangerous dog at all times on a leash in the immediate control of a person or in a
secure enclosure;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/385
(3) Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least
$100,000.00 to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog causing bodily injury to a
person and provide proof of the required liability insurance coverage or financial responsibility to the
animal control authority; and
(4) Comply with any applicable city or county regulations, requirements, or restrictions on dangerous
dogs.
(b) The owner of a dangerous dog who does not comply with subsection (a) shall deliver the dog to the animal
control authority not later than the thirtieth day after the owner learns that the dog is a dangerous dog.
(c) If, on application of any person, the court finds, after notice and hearing as provided below, that the owner of
a dangerous dog has failed to comply with this section, the court shall order the animal control authority to seize
the dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The authority shall seize the dog or order its seizure and
shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions.
(d) The owner shall pay any costs or fees assessed by the city related to the seizure, impoundment, and
destruction of the dog.
(e) The court shall order the animal control authority to humanely destroy the dog if the owner has not complied
with subsection (a) before the eleventh day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered to the authority.
The court shall order the authority to return the dog to the owner if the authority [owner] complies with subsection
(a) before the eleventh day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered to the authority.
(f) The court may order the humane destruction of a dog if the owner of the dog has not been located before the
fifteenth day after the seizure and impoundment of the dog.
(g) For the purposes of this section, a person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous dog when:
(1) The owner knows of an attack described in this division;
(2) The owner receives notice that a court has found that the dog is a dangerous dog; or
(3) The owner is informed by the animal control authority that the dog is a dangerous dog.
(1996 Code, sec. 2.605(e))
Sec. 2.02.046 Determination that dog is dangerous
(a) If a person reports an incident described herein, the animal control authority may investigate the incident. If,
after receiving the sworn statements of any witnesses, the animal control authority determines the dog is a
dangerous dog, it shall notify the owner of that fact.
(b) An owner, not later than the fifteenth day after the date the owner is notified that a dog owned by the owner is
a dangerous dog, may appeal the determination of the animal control authority to the municipal court. An owner
may appeal the decision of the municipal court in the same manner as appeals for other cases from the municipal
court.
(1996 Code, sec. 2.605(f))
Sec. 2.02.047 Registration
The animal control authority shall annually register a dangerous dog if the owner presents proof of liability
insurance or financial responsibility as required herein, current rabies vaccination of the dangerous dog, and the
secure enclosure in which the dangerous dog will be kept, and pays an annual registration fee as adopted by city
council. The animal control authority shall provide to the owner registering a dangerous dog a registration tag. The
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/385
owner must place the tag on the dog's collar. An owner of a registered dangerous dog shall notify the animal control
authority of any attacks the dangerous dog makes on people. (1996 Code, sec. 2.605(g); Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.02.048 Attack by dangerous dog
A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous dog and the dog makes an unprovoked
attack on a person or an animal outside the dog's enclosure that causes bodily injury to the person or animal. Unless
the attack causes serious bodily injury or death, any offense under this division shall be subject to the penalties
provided herein. If a person is found guilty of an offense under this division, the court may order the dangerous dog
destroyed by the animal control authority. In addition to criminal prosecution, a person who commits an offense
under this division is liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $10,000.00. Upon direction by the city manager or city
council, the city attorney may file suit in court of competent jurisdiction to collect a penalty. Penalties collected
under this section shall be retained by the city. (1996 Code, sec. 2.605(h))
Sec. 2.02.049 Violations; defenses
A person who owns or keeps custody or control of a dangerous dog commits an offense if the person fails to
comply with the requirements hereof as to registration or the keeping of such dog or any other applicable city
regulation relating to dangerous dogs. It shall be a defense to prosecution that the person is a veterinarian, a peace
officer, a person employed by a recognized animal shelter, or a person employed by the city to deal with stray
animals and has temporary ownership, custody, or control of the dog in connection with that position. It shall
further be a defense that the person is a dog trainer or an employee of a guard dog company licensed by the state.
(1996 Code, sec. 2.605(i))
ARTICLE 2.03 IMPOUNDMENT*
Sec. 2.03.001 Dogs and cats running at large
It is the duty of the animal control officer to take possession of any dog found at large in the city, if the capture of
such dog does not reasonably threaten the safety of the animal control officer, and to place such dog in the city
animal shelter, in a veterinary clinic, or in some other suitable place. It is further the duty of the animal control
officer to take possession of any dog or cat running at large within the city which has been temporarily impounded
by any resident of the city and presented to the animal control officer. (1996 Code, sec. 2.611(a))
Sec. 2.03.002 Records; notice to owner
The animal control officer or chief of police, upon receipt of a dog, cat or other animal, shall make a registry of the
type, breed, color, and sex of such animal and whether such animal is wearing a license tag. If licensed, he/she shall
record the name and address of the owner and the number of the license tag. If the owner is known, he/she shall
notify the owner of the impoundment either by telephone or in writing. (1996 Code, sec. 2.611(c))
Sec. 2.03.003 Redemption of impounded animal
An owner who desires to redeem an impounded animal shall make application to the chief of police during normal
business hours for the redemption of such animal. The impounded animal shall be released to its owner upon:
(1) Proof that the animal is vaccinated and licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter;
(2) Payment of the impoundment fee specified in section 2.03.004; and
(3) Posting of an appearance bond for any municipal court citations issued for any alleged violations
of this chapter.
(1996 Code, sec. 2.611(d))
Sec. 2.03.004 Fees
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/385
The city manager or his designee shall collect a fee for the impoundment of any animal, for observation for rabies
or any other reason, prior to the release of such animal. The amount of the impoundment and other service or
administrative fees shall be established by the city council in the master fee resolution of the city from time to time.
(1996 Code, sec. 2.611(e))
Sec. 2.03.005 Disposition of unredeemed animals; destruction of diseased animals
An impounded animal shall be kept for a minimum of five (5) days, or a longer period at the discretion of the
animal control officer. If the animal has not been redeemed by the owner during the impoundment period, the
animal will be considered to have been abandoned by the owner, ownership will be divested and the animal will
become the property of the city as abandoned personal property. At that time, a healthy animal may be placed for
adoption, sent to a rescue organization or shelter facility, or humanely euthanized. While impounded, the animal
will receive feeding, care and treatment. If the animal is suffering from rabies or a disease or injury which cannot
reasonably be treated without undue expense, the animal will be humanely euthanized. (Ordinance 18/011, sec. 2,
adopted 3/6/18)
ARTICLE 2.04 RABIES CONTROL*
Sec. 2.04.001 Reporting of suspected rabid animal
A person who has knowledge of an instance where a dog, cat or other animal has bitten, scratched, or attacked a
person, or has exhibited signs of rabies, shall immediately report such occurrence to the chief of police or the
animal control officer. (1996 Code, sec. 2.610)
State law reference–Reports of rabies, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.041.
Sec. 2.04.002 Quarantine of suspected rabid animal
(a) It is the duty of the animal control officer to take possession of any dog, cat, or any other animal in the city
which bites, scratches, or attacks a person, or exhibits symptoms of rabies, or may have been exposed to a rabid
animal, and to place such animal in a veterinary clinic or the city animal shelter. Such animal shall be quarantined
for a period of ten (10) days for the purpose of determining whether such animal is affected by rabies.
(b) At the discretion of the local health authority, such animal may be quarantined at the owner's home or other
suitable place. For purposes of this section, the local health authority shall mean the animal control officer of the
city, the city health officer, or a professional entity with which the city has contracted to perform animal control
services. If the city has contracted with an entity for animal control services, the entity, or its officer or employees,
shall be designated as the local health authority for purposes of this section. Quarantine at the owner's home is
appropriate if:
(1) Such animal is securely chained or penned so that it cannot escape the control and custody of the
owner; and
(2) The owner agrees that such animal may be inspected at reasonable times by the animal control
officer.
(c) An owner commits an offense if he refuses to allow the animal control officer to inspect the quarantined
animal.
(d) The provisions of chapter 826 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, to the extent it provides for rabies control
by additional or more stringent regulations than this chapter, is hereby adopted, together with the standards adopted
by the state board of health in connection therewith.
(1996 Code, sec. 2.611(b))
State law references–Quarantine of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.042; release or disposition of quarantined
animal, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.043.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/385
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 3.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 3.01.001 Public works construction specifications adopted
The Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction–North Central Texas, second edition, is adopted as the
specifications for public works projects carried out within the city. As formal amendments are developed by the
advisory committee and adopted by the North Central Texas Council of Governments Executive Board and
published, they shall be included and substituted in the specifications adopted hereby, and shall thereafter have the
force of law, the same as if originally adopted hereby, provided that any new edition or republication of such
standard specifications shall be adopted by amendatory ordinance of the city. (1996 Code, art. 3.1300)
Sec. 3.01.002 Mobile homes and portable structures prohibited as residences
No mobile home, trailer home, portable home, nor any similar temporary structure shall be assembled, parked,
placed, stored, occupied, or used as a place or abode on any residential lot in the city, nor may any of said structures
or buildings be used or occupied as a residential building on any lot in the city. (1996 Code, art. 3.300)
State law reference–Authority to prohibit installation of mobile homes used for residences, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec. 1201.008.
Sec. 3.01.003 Encroachments in alley easements; surface materials allowed
(a) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the words and phrases used herein shall have the following
meanings:
Alley easement. The area dedicated to the use of the public by plat, deed or public use between the property lines of
lots or tracts of land, the abutting property owner on each side having fee title to the underlying land from the
centerline of the alley paving to his property line.
Encroachment. Any blockage, impediment, structure, personal property or landscape material that prevents free
passage or use or impedes or obstructs an alley easement.
(b) Surface materials allowed.
(1) Grass, gravel, pavers, and other permeable materials shall be permitted surfaces in an alley
easement.
(2) Concrete shall be a permitted surface in an alley easement.
(3) All installations of the above-listed materials in an alley easement must be done in accordance
with city specifications.
(1996 Code, art. 3.2400)
(c) Removal of encroachments.
(1) Masonry and/or concrete retaining walls must be removed from the alley easement upon issuance
of a building permit, other than a permit for repairs and/or replacement of existing structures, valued in
excess of $10,000.00 for any work on the abutting private property. For purposes of this chapter, “repair
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/385
and/or replacement” shall mean the reconstruction or renewal to original condition of any damaged or
deteriorated part or component of an existing building for the purpose of its maintenance; “remodel”
shall mean work which changes the original size, location or material of a part or component of an
existing building. (Ordinance 13/025 adopted 7/16/13)
(2) Fences must be removed from the alley easement upon issuance of a building permit valued in
excess of $10,000.00 for any work on the abutting private property, or upon issuance of any permit to
construct, replace, repair, or alter any fence thereon. (1996 Code, art. 3.2400)
ARTICLE 3.02 TECHNICAL AND CONSTRUCTION CODES AND STANDARDS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.02.001–3.02.050 Reserved
Division 2. Building Code*
Sec. 3.02.051 Adopted
The city adopts by reference the International Building Code, 2015 edition as the building code of the city (this
“code”), governing the construction and maintenance of buildings in the city. The amendments to the various
sections adopting the code and the amendments thereto are as set out in exhibit A to Ordinance 17/002. A copy of
this code and the approved amendments, shall be kept on file at all times in the office of the city secretary for
reference and inspection during regular city business hours. The building inspector of the city shall also be
furnished a copy of each code with a true and correct copy of the ordinance adopting this code, for his use and
reference. (Ordinance 17/002 adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 3.02.052 Interpretation
Any requirements considered necessary for the safety, strength or stability of any existing or proposed building or
structure, or for the safety or health of the occupants thereof, shall be in accordance with the provisions of the
International Building Code, or any amendments, specifications or revisions thereto, and the meaning and intent of
such provisions shall be interpreted and determined by the community development director, subject to the right of
appeal contained in such codes, if any. (1996 Code, sec. 3.102)
Secs. 3.02.053–3.02.100 Reserved
Division 3. Residential Code*
Sec. 3.02.101 Adopted
The city adopts by reference the International Residential Code, 2015 edition as the residential code of the city (this
“code”), governing the construction and maintenance of buildings in the city. The amendments to the various
sections adopting the code and the amendments thereto are as set out in exhibit A to Ordinance 17/002. A copy of
this code and the approved amendments, shall be kept on file at all times in the office of the city secretary for
reference and inspection during regular city business hours. The building inspector of the city shall also be
furnished a copy of each code with a true and correct copy of the ordinance adopting this code, for his use and
reference. (Ordinance 17/002 adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 3.02.102 Interpretation
Any requirements considered necessary for the safety, strength or stability of any existing or proposed building or
structure, or for the safety or health of the occupants thereof, shall be in accordance with the provisions of the
International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, or any amendments, specifications or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/385
revisions thereto, and the meaning and intent of such provisions shall be interpreted and determined by the
community development director, subject to the right of appeal contained in such codes, if any. (1996 Code, sec.
3.102; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 3.02.103–3.02.150 Reserved
Division 4. Energy Conservation Code*
Sec. 3.02.151 Adopted
The city adopts by reference the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 edition as the energy conservation
code of the city (this “code”), governing the construction and maintenance of buildings in the city. The
amendments to the various sections adopting the code and the amendments thereto are as set out in exhibit A to
Ordinance 17/002. A copy of this code and the approved amendments, shall be kept on file at all times in the office
of the city secretary for reference and inspection during regular city business hours. The building inspector of the
city shall also be furnished a copy of each code with a true and correct copy of the ordinance adopting this code, for
his use and reference. (Ordinance 17/002 adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 3.02.152 Interpretation
Any requirements considered necessary for the safety, strength, or stability of any existing or proposed building or
structure, or for the safety or health of the occupants thereof, which varies from the provisions of the 2009
International Energy Conservation Code, or any amendments, specifications or revisions thereto, shall be
interpreted and determined by the community development director, subject to the right of appeal contained in such
code, if any. (Ordinance 10/39, sec. 1, adopted 11/2/10)
Secs. 3.02.153–3.02.200 Reserved
Division 5. Electrical Code*
Sec. 3.02.201 Adopted
The city adopts by reference the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition as the electrical code of the city (this
“code”), governing the construction and maintenance of buildings in the city. The amendments to the various
sections adopting the code and the amendments thereto are as set out in exhibit A to Ordinance 17/002. A copy of
this code and the approved amendments, shall be kept on file at all times in the office of the city secretary for
reference and inspection during regular city business hours. The building inspector of the city shall also be
furnished a copy of each code with a true and correct copy of the ordinance adopting this code, for his use and
reference. (Ordinance 17/002 adopted 2/7/17)
Secs. 3.02.202–3.02.250 Reserved
Division 6. Mechanical Code*
Sec. 3.02.251 Adopted
The city adopts by reference the International Mechanical Code, 2014 edition as the mechanical code of the city
(this “code”), governing the construction and maintenance of buildings in the city. The amendments to the various
sections adopting the code and the amendments thereto are as set out in exhibit A to Ordinance 17/002. A copy of
this code and the approved amendments, shall be kept on file at all times in the office of the city secretary for
reference and inspection during regular city business hours. The building inspector of the city shall also be
furnished a copy of each code with a true and correct copy of the ordinance adopting this code, for his use and
reference. (Ordinance 17/002 adopted 2/7/17)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/385
Sec. 3.02.252 Interpretation
Any requirements considered necessary for the safety, strength or stability of any existing or proposed building or
structure, or for the safety or health of the occupants thereof, which varies from the provisions of the 2009
International Mechanical Code, or any amendments, specifications or revisions thereto, shall be interpreted and
determined by the building official, subject to the right of appeal contained in any of such codes, if any. (Ordinance
10/39, sec. 2, adopted 11/2/10)
Secs. 3.02.253–3.02.300 Reserved
Division 7. Plumbing Code*
Sec. 3.02.301 Adopted
The city adopts by reference the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition as the plumbing code of the city (this
“code”), governing the construction and maintenance of buildings in the city. The amendments to the various
sections adopting the code and the amendments thereto are as set out in exhibit A to Ordinance 17/002. A copy of
this code and the approved amendments, shall be kept on file at all times in the office of the city secretary for
reference and inspection during regular city business hours. The building inspector of the city shall also be
furnished a copy of each code with a true and correct copy of the ordinance adopting this code, for his use and
reference. (Ordinance 17/002 adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 3.02.302 Interpretation
Any requirements considered necessary for the safety, strength or stability of any existing or proposed building or
structure, or for the safety or health of the occupants thereof, which varies from the provisions of the International
Plumbing Code, or any amendments, specifications or revisions thereto, shall be interpreted and determined by the
community development director, subject to the right of appeal contained in any of such codes, if any. (1996 Code,
sec. 3.1202)
Secs. 3.02.303–3.02.350 Reserved
Division 8. Fuel Gas Code
Sec. 3.02.351 Adopted
The city adopts by reference the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition as the fuel gas code of the city (this
“code”), governing the construction and maintenance of buildings in the city. The amendments to the various
sections adopting the code and the amendments thereto are as set out in exhibit A to Ordinance 17/002. A copy of
this code and the approved amendments, shall be kept on file at all times in the office of the city secretary for
reference and inspection during regular city business hours. The building inspector of the city shall also be
furnished a copy of each code with a true and correct copy of the ordinance adopting this code, for his use and
reference. (Ordinance 17/002 adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 3.02.352 Interpretation
Any requirements considered necessary for the safety, strength or stability of any existing or proposed building or
structure, or for the safety or health of the occupants thereof, which varies from the provisions of the 2009
International Fuel Gas Code, or any amendments, specifications or revisions thereto, shall be interpreted and
determined by the community development director, subject to the right of appeal contained in any of such codes, if
any. (Ordinance 10/39, sec. 3, adopted 11/2/10)
Secs. 3.02.353–3.02.400 Reserved
Division 9. Existing Building Code
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/385
Sec. 3.02.401 Adopted
The city adopts by reference the International Existing Building Code, 2015 edition as the existing building code of
the city (this “code”), governing the construction and maintenance of buildings in the city. The amendments to the
various sections adopting the code and the amendments thereto are as set out in exhibit A to Ordinance 17/002. A
copy of this code and the approved amendments, shall be kept on file at all times in the office of the city secretary
for reference and inspection during regular city business hours. The building inspector of the city shall also be
furnished a copy of each code with a true and correct copy of the ordinance adopting this code, for his use and
reference. (Ordinance 17/002 adopted 2/7/17)
ARTICLE 3.03 ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS AND PREMISES*
Sec. 3.03.001 Nuisances defined; abatement required; building and standards commission appointed
(a) Any building, fence, shed, awning or any property constructed or erected of any kind, or any part thereof,
which is liable to fall down and/or endanger persons or property, or is a fire hazard, or is a dangerous structure,
which is located within this city, or whenever any property shall, from age, neglect or faulty construction, become
dangerous or dilapidated or unsightly, the same shall be a public nuisance, and upon complaint being made to the
community development director, such public nuisances shall be abated, as hereinafter provided.
(b) All buildings or structures or premises which:
(1) Are structurally unsafe;
(2) Do not provide adequate ingress and egress;
(3) Constitute a fire hazard;
(4) Are otherwise dangerous to human life; or
(5) In relation to the use of other existing property constitute a hazard to safety, health or public
welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance or dilapidation or obsolescence, or abandonment;
are declared to be dangerous structures and the same shall be a public nuisance, and upon complaint being made to
the community development director, such nuisance shall be abated, repaired, rehabilitated, demolished or removed
in accordance with the procedure specified in this article.
(c) All yards or premises surrounding any building on which any of the following items, namely trash, cans,
bottles, boxes, debris, refuse, junk or other unused personal property, is permitted to accumulate and which tend to:
(1) Block ingress or egress to the premises;
(2) Block passage through the premises;
(3) Pollute the atmosphere;
(4) Are dangerous to the health and welfare of the community;
(5) Create a fire hazard; and/or
(6) Are dilapidated or unsightly;
the same shall be a public nuisance, and upon complaint being made to the community development director , such
nuisance shall be abated by rehabilitation, removal, demolition, or repair in accordance with the procedures
specified below.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.201; Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/385
(d) The provisions of subchapter C, chapter 54, Texas Local Government Code, are hereby adopted for the city.
The provisions of this article shall be applied in accordance with the requirements of subchapter C. The zoning
board of adjustment of the city is hereby appointed as the building and standards commission for the city to hear
and determine cases concerning alleged violations of this article. The provisions of section 54.033 of the Texas
Local Government Code shall apply to the zoning board of adjustment while sitting as a building and standards
commission under this article. (Ordinance 14/018 adopted 7/1/14)
Sec. 3.03.002 Procedures
(a) Any resident of the city or any employee of the city who observes any public nuisance defined in section
3.03.001 hereof may make a complaint about such nuisance to the community development director of the city.
(b) The community development director or his representative shall observe and examine every building,
structure, premises, or portion thereof upon which such complaint has been made, and if it be found to be a public
nuisance as defined in this article, the community development director shall give the owner or occupant of such
premises, building or structure written notice stating the defects and objections and the violations of this article
upon which complaint has been made. Such notice shall be sent to the owner or occupant by delivering such notice
in person or sending such notice by registered or certified mail, and such notice shall require the owner or occupant
to commence the required demolition, improvement or repairs or the removal of such debris, building or portion
thereof or structure within three (3) days from the date such notice is delivered to the owner or occupant of said
premises or deposited in the mail to him. Such notice shall also require that all work to eliminate the violation shall
be completed within thirty (30) days from the date of such notice unless otherwise stipulated by the community
development director. If the community development director finds that such structure or portion thereof is
dangerous to the life or health of the person or persons occupying the same, the community development director
may require that such structure, building or premises be vacated until the required changes, repairs, demolition or
improvements are completed, inspected, and approved by the community development director.
(c) In case the owner or occupant shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the notice of the community
development director to repair, rehabilitate or demolish the building, structure, or portion thereof, or to rehabilitate
the premises described in such notice, or appeal therefrom within five (5) days, the community development
director may file a complaint with the city court charging the owner or occupant of such structure or premises with
a violation of this article or other applicable parts of this code.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.202; Ordinance adopting Code)
(d) The community development director may notify the board of adjustment of the complaint and the fact that
the owner or occupant has failed, neglected or refused to comply with the notice from the community development
director. The board may, after notice to the owner or occupant of such building, structure or premises, hold a public
hearing and order the community development director to proceed to carry out the work specified in such notice in
order that such building or structure or premises may be repaired, rehabilitated, demolished or changed to comply
with the terms of this article. The board shall set the time for such public hearing and give written notice by
delivering such notice in person, by certified mail with return receipt requested, or by delivery by the United States
Postal Service using signature confirmation service, to the record owners of the affected property, and each holder
of a recorded lien against the affected property, as shown by the records in the office of the county clerk if the
address of the lien holder can be ascertained from the deed of trust establishing the lien or other applicable
instruments on file in the office of the county clerk, and to all unknown owners, by posting a copy of the notice on
the front door of each improvement situated on the affected property or as close to the front door as practicable.
The notice must be posted and either personally delivered or mailed on or before the tenth day before the date of
the hearing before the board and must state the date, time, and place of the hearing. In addition, the notice must be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city on one occasion on or before the tenth day before the
date fixed for the hearing. The board shall also file notice of the proceeding in the official public records of real
property in the county. Such notice must contain the name and address of the owner of the affected property, a legal
description of the affected property, and a description of the proceeding. The filing of the notice is binding on
subsequent grantees, lien holders, or other transferees of an interest in the property who acquire such interest after
the filing of the notice and constitutes notice of the proceeding on any subsequent recipient of any interest in the
property who acquires such interest after the filing of the notice. The city shall exercise due diligence to determine
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/385
the identity and address of a property owner, lien holder, or registered agent to whom the city is required to give
notice. Due diligence is established by search of the records listed in section 54.035 of the Texas Local Government
Code. If a notice is mailed and the notice is returned by the United States Postal Service marked as “refused” or
“unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered delivered.
(e) Upon a public hearing of the complaint, the board may order the community development director to proceed
with the work specified in such notice or may grant additional time for the owner or occupant of such building,
structure or premises to carry out the terms of such notice, or may render such other order which may seem
necessary and proper after a hearing thereon. The board may order the repair, within a fixed period, of buildings
found to be in violation of this article; may declare a building substandard in accordance with the provisions of
subchapter C; may order, in an appropriate case, the immediate removal of persons or property found on private
property, enter on private property to secure the removal if it is determined that conditions exists on the property
that constitute a violation of this article, and order action to be taken as necessary to remedy, alleviate, or remove
any substandard building found to exist; may issue orders or directives to any peace officer of the state, including
the chief of police or his designee, to enforce and carry out the lawful orders or directives of the board; and may
determine the amount and duration of a civil penalty to be imposed on the owner of the property. A majority vote of
the members of the board voting on a matter is necessary to take any action under this article and under subchapter
C. The order is enforceable in the same manner as provided in sections 214.001(k), (m), (n), and (o), of the Texas
Local Government Code.
(f) If the owner or occupant of the building, structure or premises on which a complaint has been filed shall
appear before the board, no further notice or order of the board made at such hearing shall be required to be
furnished to the owner or occupant thereof. In the event the owner and/or occupant of said building or premises
fails to appear at the public hearing before the board, the board may order the community development director to
comply with the work specified in the notice in order to bring the building, structure or premises into compliance
with the terms of this article, and levy the costs of such work as a tax against the premises, which shall be
immediately due, and in that event a copy of the order of the board made at such hearing shall be delivered to the
owner or occupant of said premises in person or by a letter to the last known address by certified or registered mail,
return receipt requested, and by publication of a copy of such order, at least one time, in the publication designated
as the official publication of the city.
(g) Upon the expiration of 30 days after a copy of the order of the board has been delivered to the owner or
occupant of said premises in person or sent by letter to his last known address by certified or registered mail and by
publication of a copy of such order as required above, the community development director shall proceed to carry
out the work called for by order of the board and the cost of such work shall be levied as a tax against the premises
and the owner and/or occupant thereof, which shall be and become immediately due thereon.
(h) In the event the owner or occupant of the premises shall fail or refuse to discharge the expense incurred and
correct any violation of this article within 30 days after receiving notice to pay such expense or within 30 days after
such notice is published, the city may bring an action in any court having jurisdiction to recover the expenses
which were assessed against the owner or occupant of such premises by the board.
Sec. 3.03.003 Appeals
Any owner, lien holder, or mortgagee of record jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board may
present a petition to a district court, duly verified, setting forth that the decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and
specifying the grounds of the illegality. The petition must be presented to the court within 30 calendar days after the
date a copy of the final decision of the board is personally delivered, mailed by first class mail with certified return
receipt requested, or delivered by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation service, to all
persons to whom notice is required to be sent. The board shall deliver or mail that copy promptly after the decision
becomes final. In addition, an abbreviated copy of the order shall be published one time in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city within ten calendar days after the date of the delivery or mailing of the copy as provided by
this section, including the street address or legal description of the property; the date of the hearing, a brief
statement indicating the results of the order, and instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be
obtained. On presentation of the petition, the court may allow a writ of certiorari directed to the board to review the
decision of the board and shall prescribe in the writ the time, which may not be less than ten days, within which a
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/385
return on the writ must be made and served on the relator or the relator's attorney. The board may not be required to
return the original papers acted on by it. It is sufficient for the board to return certified or sworn copies of the
papers or parts of the papers as may be called for by the writ. The return must concisely set forth other facts as may
be pertinent and material to show the grounds for the decision appealed from and shall be verified. The district
court's review shall be a de novo review. The court may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify the
decision of the board brought up for review. Costs may not be allowed against the board. If the decision of the
board is affirmed, or not substantially reversed but only modified, the district court shall allow to the city all
attorney's fees and other costs and expenses incurred by it in defense of the board's order and shall enter a judgment
for those items, which may be entered against the property owners as well as all persons found to be in occupation
of the property subject to the proceedings before the board.
(Ordinance 14/018 adopted 7/1/14)
ARTICLE 3.04 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR USE AND OCCUPANCY*
Sec. 3.04.001 Scope
This article applies to each building and premises located in the city, as that term is defined herein. This article is
limited in its application to those properties specified. (1996 Code, sec. 3.901)
Sec. 3.04.002 Definitions
Accessory structure. A structure, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building, and which is attached
thereto or located on the same premises.
Building. A combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed, having a roof to form a structure affording
shelter for persons, animals, or property. The word “building” shall be construed, when used herein, as though
followed by the words “or part or parts thereof” unless the context clearly requires a different meaning.
Building code. The current building code of the city.
Dwelling. A building occupied exclusively for residential uses.
Dwelling premises. The land, dwelling units and auxiliary buildings thereon used or intended to be used in
connection with a dwelling.
Dwelling unit. One (1) or more rooms with living, cooking, sanitary, and sleeping facilities therein arranged which
is occupied exclusively for residential uses.
Faulty weather protection. Shall include but not be limited to the following:
(1) Deteriorated, crumbling, or loose plaster or masonry.
(2) Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, foundations, or floors, including
broken windows or doors.
(3) Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings, including lack of paint, or
weathering due to lack of paint or other approved protective covering.
(4) Broken, rotted, split, or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof coverings.
Garbage. The animal, vegetable, and mineral wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and
consumption of food.
Grade. The natural surface of the ground, or surface ground after completion of any change in contour.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/385
Hazard. A building or premises is unsafe or constitutes a health, accident, or fire hazard if it does not comply with
the minimum standards set forth in the current adopted editions of the building code, mechanical code, plumbing
code, fire code, and electrical code and their corresponding amendments and local ordinances.
Nonresidential structure. A structure or a part of a structure which is used for other than residential purposes and,
where applicable, the premises on which such structure is situated.
Occupant. Any person over one (1) year of age who occupies a dwelling unit and who is living, sleeping, cooking,
or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
Open space area. An area on a lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projections.
Operator. Any person who has charge, care, or control of a multiple residence or rooming house in which dwelling
units or rooming units are let or offered for occupancy.
Owner. The owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in
possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, or other person, firm, or corporation in control of a
building.
Person. The owner, occupant, mortgagee, or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee,
lessee, agent, or any other person, firm, or corporation directly or indirectly in control of a building or part thereof.
Premises. A lot, plot, or parcel of land, including the buildings or structures thereon.
Rubbish. All combustible and noncombustible waste, except garbage.
Structure. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially
built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.902; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.04.003 Applicability
(a) Every portion of a building or premises, residential or nonresidential, occupied or unoccupied, shall comply
with the provisions of this article, irrespective of when such building shall have been constructed, altered, or
repaired, and irrespective of any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of the
building or premises, for the construction or repair of the building, or for the installation or repair of equipment or
facilities prior to the effective date of this article. This article establishes minimum standards for the initial and
continued use and occupancy of all buildings and does not replace or modify standards otherwise established for
the construction, repair, alteration, or use of the building, equipment, or facilities. No person who owns, operates,
or occupies a building or controls the letting of a dwelling, commercial property, rooming house, hotel, or motel, or
other rental unit, including the premises and buildings appurtenant thereto, may occupy, or allow anyone to occupy,
any part of same as a tenant unless it meets the standards for occupancy provided herein.
(b) It shall be unlawful and an offense for any operator, occupant, or owner of any premises, building, dwelling,
or structure to cause, suffer, permit, or allow to exist any unsanitary condition or nuisance condition, as defined in
this article, on or in any such premises, building, dwelling, or structure.
(c) The building official shall have the authority to make or cause to be made surveys in any area of the city to
determine the general conditions of structures, the extent of deterioration, lack of facilities, maintenance, unsafe
and unsanitary conditions, land use, and other relevant factors necessary to implement the purpose of this article,
and to order any dwelling, premises, building, or structure vacated as unfit for human habitation or use under
section 3.04.006.
(d) Nothing in this article shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the city, or its officers,
relative to the removal or demolition of any buildings which are deemed to be dangerous, unsafe, or unsanitary.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/385
(1996 Code, sec. 3.903)
Sec. 3.04.004 Exterior property areas
(a) All premises shall be kept free from organic and inorganic material that might become a health, accident, or
fire hazard as defined herein. All premises, improved and unimproved, shall be kept clean at all times as required
by article 6.05 of this code. Containers of adequate size with tightfitting covers shall be provided for the temporary
storage of garbage and rubbish. Materials of an inflammable nature shall be safely stored as provided in the fire
code or removed from the premises.
(b) Exterior property areas shall be kept cut or mowed to prevent weeds, brush, or other plant growth becoming a
health or fire hazard. Weeds, brush, and other plant growth shall be cut or mowed on all exterior property areas
whenever such weeds, brush, or other plant growth is allowed to grow to an extent determined to be in violation of
article 6.05 of this code. All sidewalks, driveways, alleys, and entrances used for ingress and egress shall be free
from weeds, brush, overhanging, or protruding limbs of trees and other plant growth. Any limbs of trees that have
become rotted or decayed to the point of being dangerous to persons shall be removed.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.904)
Sec. 3.04.005 Structural requirements
(a) Requirements herein shall pertain to both accessory and primary structures. All dwelling premises, buildings,
and structures that possess either severely cracked, rotten, defective, or deteriorating foundations, supports, walls,
arches, stairs, or other portions which could fall and cause personal injury and/or property damage are considered
to be structurally unsafe by the public works director and are in violation of the provisions of this section.
Accessory structures and fences shall be kept structurally safe, free from health, fire and accident hazards, and in
good repair, or shall be removed from the premises.
(b) The foundation and walls of every structure shall be structurally sound and shall be maintained in good
repair. Foundations and walls shall be considered to be in good repair and structurally sound if found free from
damage or defects and capable of bearing imposed loads as required by the building code.
(c) The stairs, porches, landings, gutters, awnings, railings, cornices and similar decorative features affixed to the
interior of every structure shall be kept in good repair and structurally sound. Stairs and porches shall be considered
to be in good repair and structurally sound when found to be free of holes, cracks, and must be capable of
supporting imposed loads. Properly balustraded railings shall be provided when there is clear danger of accidental
injury and must be capable of bearing imposed loads.
(d) All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe,
sound, and in good repair.
(e) Supporting structural members of every structure shall be structurally sound and capable of bearing the load
safely. Supporting structural members shall be considered to be structurally sound if such members are capable of
bearing imposed loads safely and if there is no evidence of deterioration or distortion.
(f) The interior of every structure shall be maintained free from rubbish and garbage and other refuse. Disposal
of garbage by garbage disposal units shall be in accordance with all applicable regulations of the city. Materials of
an inflammable nature shall be stored to comply with the fire code or removed from the premises.
(g) The exterior of every building shall be maintained in such a manner so as to prevent the deterioration of the
weather protection.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.905)
Sec. 3.04.006 Enforcement
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/385
(a) Any resident of the city or any employee of the city who observes any violation of the terms of this article
may make a complaint about such violation to the community development department of the city.
(b) The building official or his representative shall observe and examine every building, structure, premises, or
portion thereof upon which such complaint has been made, and if it be found to be a violation as defined in this
article, the building official or his representative shall give the owner of such premises, building, or structure
written notice stating the defects and objections and the violations of this article upon which complaint has been
made. Such notice shall be sent to the property owner by delivering such notice in person or sending such notice by
registered or certified mail, and such notice shall require the owner or occupant to commence the required
rehabilitation, repair, demolition, or removal of said dwelling premises, building, or structure within twenty (20)
days from the date such notice is delivered to the owner of said premises or deposited in the mail to him. Such
notice also shall require that all work to eliminate the violation shall be completed within sixty (60) days from the
date of such notice unless otherwise stipulated by the building official.
(c) If the building official finds that said building is dangerous to the life or health of the person or persons
occupying the same, the public works director may require that such dwelling premises, building, or structure be
vacated until the required changes, repairs, demolition, or improvements are completed, subject to the inspection
and approval of the city community development department. Any vacant building open at the doors and windows,
if unguarded, shall be deemed dangerous to human life and a violation within the meaning of these provisions.
(d) Any dwelling premises, building, or structure having any of the defects listed below is deemed unfit for
human habitation or use and shall be so placarded:
(1) The structure lacks the proper functional facilities adequate to protect the health and safety of the
occupants or the public if it fails to meet the conditions outlined in the current adopted editions of the
building code, mechanical code, plumbing code, fire code, or electrical code and all corresponding
amendments and city ordinances.
(2) The structure is damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, or unsafe if it contains either severely
cracked, rotten, defective, or deteriorating foundations, supports, walls, arches, stairs, or other portions
which could fall and cause personal injury and/or property damage.
(e) No person shall deface or remove the placard from any structure which has been designated as unfit for
human habitation until written approval is secured from the public works director.
(f) Whenever a notice or order has been issued for any infraction of this article, the building official may file a
copy of such notice or order in the office of the county clerk to be filed in the deed records. Such recording shall
constitute sufficient notice of the impending action to any subsequent purchaser, transferee, grantee, mortgagee, or
lessee of the property affected.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.906; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.04.007 Liability of city employees
No officer, agent, or employee of the city shall be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article. Any suit
brought against any officer, agent, or employee of the city as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his duties under this article shall be defended by the city attorney until the final determination of the
proceedings therein. (1996 Code, sec. 3.907; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.04.008 Prior violations
This article shall not affect violations of any other ordinance, code, or regulation of the city existing prior to the
effective date of this article, and such violation shall be governed and shall continue to be punishable to the full
extent of the law under the provisions of those ordinances, codes, or regulations in effect at the time the violation
was committed. (1996 Code, sec. 3.908)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/385
Sec. 3.04.009 Appeals
(a) Appeals to the board of adjustment can be taken by any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the
building official that a dwelling premises, building, or structure be repaired, rehabilitated, or vacated. Such appeal
shall be taken within twenty (20) days after the decision has been rendered by the building official by filing in the
city manager's office a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The building official shall cause all
documents constituting the records upon which the action was appealed from to be forwarded to the board of
adjustment.
(b) The board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing on all appeals made to it, and written notice of the date,
time, and place of such public hearing shall be sent to the applicant. A hearing must be held within thirty (30) days
by the board of adjustment after the receipt of an appeal as described above. Notice shall also be given by
publishing the same in the official publication of the city at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing,
which notice shall state the time and place of such hearing.
(c) At a public hearing relative to any appeal, any interested party may appear in person, by his agent, or by his
attorney. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to establish the necessary facts to the satisfaction of the
board of adjustment that the decision and order of the building official should be set aside or qualified.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.909)
Sec. 3.04.010 Noncompliance with notice; action by city council
(a) In case the owner or occupant shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with the notice of the public works
director to repair, rehabilitate, or demolish the building, structure, or portion thereof or to rehabilitate the premises
described in such notice, or appeal therefrom within twenty (20) days, the building official shall notify the city
council of the complaint and the fact that the owner has failed, neglected, or refused to comply with the notice from
the building official.
(b) The city council shall hold a public hearing prior to ordering the building official to proceed with carrying out
the work to eliminate the violation. The city council shall set the time for such public hearing and give written
notice by delivering such notice in person or by certified mail of such public hearing to the last known address of
the owner of said dwelling premises, building, or structure at least ten (10) days before the date of such hearing.
(c) After the owner of the dwelling premises, building, or structure on which a complaint has been filed shall
appear before the city council, no further notice or order of the city council made at such hearing shall be required
to be furnished to the owner or occupant thereof. In the event the owner fails to appear at the public hearing before
the city council, a copy of the order of the city council made at such hearing shall be delivered to the owner of said
dwelling premises, building, or structure in person or by a letter to the last known address by certified or registered
mail.
(d) Following the public hearing, the city council may:
(1) Grant additional time for the owner to eliminate the violation;
(2) Dismiss the case;
(3) File a complaint with the municipal court charging the owner of said premises with a violation of
this section or other parts of this code; or
(4) Order the demolition of the dwelling premises, building, or structure and levy the cost of such
work as a lien against the property on which the building was located. The lien may not be enforced by
forced sale of the property and is extinguished if the property owner reimburses the city for the expenses
of demolition.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.910)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/385
ARTICLE 3.05 MOVING OF BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND MOBILE HOMES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.05.001 Definition
The word “article” shall apply to this article 3.05, unless otherwise noted. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1711)
Sec. 3.05.002 Penalty
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provisions of this article, or failing to observe any provisions hereof,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined as provided for in the general penalty
provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code, and each day that violation of this article continues shall be
considered a separate offense. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1715)
Sec. 3.05.003 Powers and duties of building official
In addition to the powers and duties prescribed in this article, the building official is required to:
(1) Administer and enforce all provisions of this article;
(2) Keep a record of all permits issued or revoked;
(3) Adopt such rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article with respect to the form of
application for permits, the investigation of the applicants and other matters incidental to his powers
which may be necessary for the proper administration and enforcement of this article.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.1714)
Sec. 3.05.004 General requirements
(a) The house mover shall notify the utility companies at least three (3) days prior to the moving of the building.
(b) The house mover shall notify, in writing, the fire department on the date of the moving, and such notification
shall contain the time the building is to be on the streets or highways.
(c) The house mover shall notify, in writing, the chief of police, or his designate, twenty-four (24) hours prior to
the moving of the building, and the time shall be approved by the chief of police, or his designate, and the mover
shall be responsible for the arrangement and the furnishing of two (2) flagmen as paid escorts and necessary “No
Parking” signs as recommended by the chief of police.
(d) The mover shall travel with the building as designated in line (6) [sic]. The building shall not be left at
night/daytime on any highway, street, or alley in the city. There shall be attached to each corner of such building a
red light lantern visible at least three hundred (300) feet along such highway, street, or alley.
(e) The mover shall make arrangements for all charges for services required. Also, he shall notify the water and
sewer, gas, and electrical power departments wherever these utilities are located on the site to be vacated, and these
services must be disconnected before any work is begun to remove the structure. All taxes must be paid before
removal.
(f) The mover shall not cross any property line with such structure after it has been loaded for moving. (This
includes the towing trucks and/or other equipment used for same.) This shall not commence before 8:00 p.m. and
shall not be moved after 2:00 a.m. which follows the 12:00 a.m. (midnight) after 8:00 p.m. starting time.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.1707)
Sec. 3.05.005 Temporary or mobile homes
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/385
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a temporary or mobile home as defined within this section shall
not be subject to the requirements and provisions of this article, except as specifically set forth in this section.
(1) A temporary or mobile home, as used within this section, is defined to be a structure designed to
be a living quarters equipped and used for sleeping and eating purposes and which may be moved from
one location to another over a public highway or roadway by being pulled behind a motor vehicle.
(2) (A) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to move upon the public
streets or highways any mobile home or temporary home exceeding thirteen feet six inches (13'6")
in height while loaded, fourteen feet (14') in width, and ninety-five feet (95') in total length of the
mobile home and the motor vehicle pulling or towing same, without first securing a permit from
the city as provided above.
(B) Exception: Any person, firm, or corporation moving any mobile home or temporary home
on a state or federal highway, if having secured and possessing a valid state permit for movement
of said mobile or temporary home, shall be exempt from securing a city permit for the movement
of said mobile/temporary home, but such mobile home shall not be permitted to remain in the city
for more than twenty-four (24) hours, and it shall never be permanently placed, stored, used, or
maintained in this city.
(3) The movement of any mobile/temporary home exceeding any of the above-cited dimensions shall
not be permitted, except, however, the city may permit any structure that comes under the subsection (2)
exception. The city reserves the right to designate the date, time and route the mobile or temporary
home is to be moved.
(4) The fee for the issuance of a permit for the moving of a mobile or temporary home within the city
limits shall be as established by resolution of the city council.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.1708)
Sec. 3.05.006 Issuance of building permits for vacated lot
Until all requirements in this article are in compliance, no building permit shall be issued for any type of structure
on lot(s) that have been vacated under this article. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1710)
Sec. 3.05.007 Exceptions
A building or structure may be moved through the city from outside the city limits if the destination site is outside
the city, pursuant to a state department of transportation permit, or if the move is over a state or federal highway.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.1712)
Secs. 3.05.008–3.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 3.05.031 Required
No person shall own, operate, or engage in the business of moving buildings or structures along, across, or over any
public street, alley, highway, or other public place in the city without obtaining a permit to engage in such business
from the building official. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1701)
Sec. 3.05.032 Application; route; notice to affected residents
An applicant desiring to engage in the business of moving buildings and structures along, across, or over a public
street in the city shall file with the building official a written application upon a form provided for that purpose,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/385
which must be signed by the applicant or his authorized agent. Such application for a moving permit shall among
other things include the following:
(1) No house, building, or structure shall be moved or prepared to be moved from one location to
another within the city, to a point outside the city, or from a point outside the city, unless such person,
firm, or corporation secures a moving permit and complies with each and every requirement of this
article.
(2) Such application for a moving permit shall be dated and give the name of the property owner
involved and his address; the name, address, and location of the property from which such house,
building, or structure is to be moved; the name of the house mover who is to conduct the job; and the
name and address of the bonding and/or insurance company which will issue the surety bond(s) or
liability insurance called for by this article.
(3) The mover and a member of the community development department of the city will conduct a
survey of the proposed route. If the proposed route is approved, then mover will be given forms to
provide to all residents involved. The forms will be furnished by the city. Each form (three copies) shall
contain pertinent information of the house mover (name, address, phone number, etc.). Also, it shall
contain the name, address, phone number, and other information that will show potential damage that
may occur. The resident's signature will be required on the supplied form. If the resident refuses to sign,
the mover will make note of this on the form. The mover shall return one (1) copy to the building
official, and one (1) copy to the resident, and will retain one (1) copy for the mover's records.
(4) The proposed route, including the time, date, and other information in connection therewith, shall
be approved by the building official, chief of police, and fire marshal. Appropriate officers of Dallas
Power and Light Company, Southwestern Bell Telephone Company, and Park Cities Cable TV also shall
be notified in writing if any of their lines along the approved route are seventeen feet, six inches (17'6")
or lower. The mover shall be liable for any utility damage or other cost.
(5) Any house, building, or structure to be moved shall be controlled in width by the narrowest street
width (measured across from back of curb to back of curb) on the route it is to be moved on. The ridge
height shall not exceed seventeen feet, six inches (17'6") from ridge line to paving grade. The height on
each side of the structure shall not exceed fourteen feet, six inches (14'6"). The house length shall be
controlled by whether the mover can negotiate a turn without damaging property beyond the back of the
curb.
(6) During pre-route examination, if the city building official finds that any tree or other vegetation is
to be mutilated or damaged, the mover shall trim and dress up such tree or vegetation to city and
affected property owner specifications. This will be submitted on the proper form. The mover shall be
required, at his expense, to trim all tree limbs and/or other vegetation that extends out over the highway,
street, or alley, up to a height as described in subsection (5) above. If such tree limb or vegetation is
between the curbline and said property line, then the mover shall cut same back to the trunk and it shall
be dressed up. If such tree limb/vegetation is growing from behind the property line, then the mover
shall cut back to the property line only and dress same up.
(7) The mover shall submit to the building official a letter from the City of Dallas or Town of
Highland Park stating that they will accept such structure to be moved through their city.
(8) A valid architect's plans and specifications of the building to be moved into or within the city
containing a verification of the wiring and plumbing used therein by a licensed electrician and plumbing
contractor who will certify that the plumbing and wiring conform to the respective codes of the city, and
a true and accurate plot plan showing the proposed location of all buildings or structures to be moved in
or within the city, so that it may be determined that each and every condition of the building code and
zoning ordinance has been complied with.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.1702)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/385
Sec. 3.05.033 Bond
Each applicant for a permit under this article shall furnish a surety bond by a surety company acceptable to the city
made in favor of the city for the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) executed by the house moving company
and by an approved surety corporation having a permit to do business in this state, conditioned that the applicant
will pay all damages and costs that may occur to any public or private property on account of moving the house,
building, or structure involved in such application, and further conditioned that the applicant will indemnify and
hold the city free and harmless against all liabilities, claims, judgments, costs, or expenses which may in any wise
arise or accrue against the city because of the granting of such permit. Such bond will expire three (3) months after
the building official has certified to the completion of such move, but the bonding company shall continue to be
liable to any person, firm, or corporation who has been damaged during the course of such move. (1996 Code, sec.
3.1703)
Sec. 3.05.034 Insurance; deposit
(a) Insurance requirements. No license authorizing the moving of buildings or structures on the streets of the city
shall be issued unless the following requirements are met:
(1) The mover/applicant shall procure and keep in full force and effect a policy of public liability and
property damage insurance issued by a casualty insurance company authorized to do business in the
state and in the standard form approved by the board of insurance commissioners of the state, with the
insured provisions of the policy including the city as an insured, and the coverage provision insuring the
public from any loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason of the moving of a
building or structure by the mover/applicant and preparing and cleaning up the property before and after
the house has been removed and providing that the amount of recovery shall be in limits of not less than
the following sums:
(A) Personal injury: $300,000.00 per accident and $100,000.00 per person.
(B) Property damages: $50,000.00.
Such policy shall remain in full force and effect until the moving of the house or structure
has been fully carried out and all obligations of the applicant and mover have been fully
complied with.
(b) Deposit; damage claims.
(1) Each applicant for a moving permit shall deposit with the building official cash in the amount of
two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) to guarantee that the house, building, or structure which
is moved from one location to another within the city or from a point outside the city to a point within
the city is completed so as to comply with all of the building and zoning ordinances of the city within a
reasonable time not to exceed the period of three (3) months from the granting of said application,
which deposit shall be forfeited unless the building official certifies to the fact that such building which
has been moved complied with all such building and zoning requirements within such period of time
allowed by this section.
(2) When a claim is made to the city for damages by a resident, the mover shall have the right to
appoint an appraiser to determine the extent of damages to the complainant's property. At the same time,
the city will appoint an appraiser to also appraise the same damage. The resident also has a right to
appoint his own appraiser. The mover shall be required to pay all appraiser fees and damages within five
(5) days after submittal of the findings or the city will automatically deduct appraiser fees and damages
from the cash deposit posted by the mover.
(3) Damages will include the following, but not limited to: public or private sidewalks, leadwalks,
sodding, bushes, trees, curb and gutter, driveway approaches, public streets, private driveways, fences,
or any other appurtenances that are permitted by building, zoning, or other codes of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/385
(1996 Code, sec. 3.1704)
Sec. 3.05.035 Permit fee; escort fee
(a) The applicant shall pay a fee to the building official for the moving permit.
(b) The applicant shall pay a fee for each city employee and vehicle that is needed to escort a house out of or to
another location in the city. There shall be a minimum of four (4) hours, plus one (1) hour of travel time, inclusive,
before and after the structure movement. If the employee has to return at another time or date, the movers shall also
pay for additional escort and/or travel time as deemed necessary by the building official.
(c) All fees shall be established and shall be paid to the building official at the time of application for a moving
permit. If escort personnel have to return, all new escort fees will be paid before the house, building, or structure is
moved.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.1705)
Sec. 3.05.036 Issuance
When such application has been made and filed, and the bonds, liability insurance, deposit, and fees required by
this article have been deposited with the building official, he may issue a moving permit, which shall be subject to
such conditions and requirements as may be necessary to protect the public and private property and the public
welfare in connection with the prescribed route to be taken in moving such house, building, or structure. Said
permit shall also specify the route to be used in moving such house, building, or structure, including the place
where such house, building, or structure is to be moved from; the place to which such house, building, or structure
is to be moved and the complete route designated for such moving; and the date and time of day when such moving
is to be carried out. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1706)
Sec. 3.05.037 Denial or revocation
If the building official shall refuse to issue or renew a building mover's permit for any of the following reasons:
(1) The making of any false statement as to a material fact in an application for a permit or in a
hearing concerning the permit;
(2) The failure of the permit holder to obtain the bond, insurance, and cash deposit required by this
article; or
(3) Failure of the permit holder to maintain the bond, insurance, and cash deposit as required by this
article;
then written notice of revocation shall be sent by the building official to the permit holder by certified mail, return
receipt requested, setting forth the reason for and the effective date of the refusal to issue or revocation of the
permit.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.1709)
Sec. 3.05.038 Appeals
If the building official refuses to approve issuance of an original permit or revokes the permit issued to the permit
holder, this act is final, subject to the permit holder's right within ten (10) days after receipt of written appeal with
the city council, which appeal may be heard and determined at any legally constituted meeting of the city council.
The council, after hearing such appeal, shall render a decision either upholding, reversing, or modifying the action
appealed from. The decision of the city council is final as to the administrative remedies of the city. (1996 Code,
sec. 3.1713)
ARTICLE 3.06 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/385
Sec. 3.06.001 Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and methods
(a) Statutory authorization. The legislature of the state has, in section 16.315 [of the Texas Water Code],
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
(b) Findings of fact.
(1) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life
and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
(2) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause
an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses
vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed
or otherwise protected from flood damage.
(c) Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed
to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken
at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone
and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(d) Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following
methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause
excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or
which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.401)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/385
Sec. 3.06.002 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
Alluvial fan flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at
the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the
fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM)
with a one percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map
(FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A
usually is refined into zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood
protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development. Any man-made change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage
of equipment or materials.
Elevated building. A non-basement building: (i) built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO,
AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or, in the case of a building in zone V1-30, VE, or V, to
have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor, elevated above the ground level
by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water; and (ii) adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the
base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, “elevated building” also includes a
building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of zone V1-30, VE, or V, “elevated building” also includes a
building otherwise meeting the definition of “elevated building,” even though the lower area is enclosed by means
of breakaway walls, if the breakaway walls met the standards of section 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.
Existing construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date.
“Existing construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/385
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas
from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management
Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
Flood insurance study. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report
contains flood profiles, and the water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway
map.
Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and
expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a
system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized floodmodifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodplain or floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
definition of flooding).
Floodplain management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing
flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain
management regulations.
Floodplain management regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
Floodway (regulatory floodway). The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must
be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height.
Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in
close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading
and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term
storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Historic structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/385
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
(A) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(B) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound
engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
Levee system. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as
closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is
not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.
Manufactured home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is
designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
“manufactured home” does not include a recreational vehicle.
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map
are referenced.
New construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, “new
construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/385
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on
a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings,
piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as
well as a manufactured home.
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before “start of construction” of the
improvement. This includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair
work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official
and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure.
Variance. A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this article when specific enforcement would result
in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise
prohibited by this article. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation
is provided.
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other
datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.402)
Sec. 3.06.003 General provisions
(a) Lands to which this article applies. This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the city. (1996 Code, sec. 3.403)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/385
(b) Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood Insurance
Study for Dallas County, Texas,” dated July 7, 2014, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood
boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and FBFM) and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this article. (Ordinance 15/024 adopted 11/17/15)
(c) Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with
the provisions of this article.
(d) Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full
compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations.
(e) Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant,
or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(f) Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(g) Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions,
greater floods can and will occur, and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article
does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free
from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.403)
Sec. 3.06.004 Administration
(a) Designation of floodplain administrator. The building and zoning administrator is hereby appointed the
floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of
44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
(b) Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain
administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
article.
(2) Review permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites, including the placement
of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this
article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained
from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/385
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions), the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, which is
[the state commission on environmental quality], prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse,
and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(7) Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse
is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 3.06.003(b), the
floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
section 3.06.005.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require
that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be
permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
point within the community.
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, and AH on
the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one
foot, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA
(conditional letter of map revision).
(c) Permit procedures.
(1) Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms
furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing
the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed
structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation
to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
(A) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
and substantially improved structures;
(B) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be
floodproofed;
(C) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of this article;
(D) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development;
(E) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with this article.
(2) Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all
of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
(A) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/385
(B) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on the individual owner;
(C) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(D) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(E) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(F) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems;
(G) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the
floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(H) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(I) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use;
(J) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
(d) Variance procedures.
(1) The board of adjustment shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the
requirements of this article.
(2) The board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in
any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this article.
(3) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the board may appeal such decision in the
courts of competent jurisdiction.
(4) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall
report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(5) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on
the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the
procedures set forth in the remainder of this article.
(6) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot
of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in this article have been fully considered. As
the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
(7) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the board may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives
of this article.
(8) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during
the base flood discharge would result.
(9) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/385
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
(10) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(A) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(B) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(i) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(ii) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship
to the applicant; and
(iii) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances,
cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or articles.
(C) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure
will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and
that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
(11) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and
for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(A) The criteria outlined in this article are met; and
(B) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.404)
Sec. 3.06.005 Flood hazard reduction standards
(a) General standards. In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required for all new
construction and substantial improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices
that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to
flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/385
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
(b) Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as
set forth herein, the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation.
A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the
floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed herein [has been met].
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to or above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be
designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or
architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction,
and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards
of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained
by the floodplain administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas below the
lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(A) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM
or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the
purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to,
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable
state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones
A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: (i) outside of a manufactured home park
or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a
flood be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/385
is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(C) Require that manufactured homes being placed or substantially improved on sites in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the
community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of this subsection be elevated so that
either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade
and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
(5) Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH,
and AE on the community's FIRM either:
(A) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(B) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(C) Meet the permit requirements hereof, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
“manufactured homes” in subsection (4) above. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if
it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
(c) Standards for subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions,
shall be consistent with this article.
(2) All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions, shall meet the development permit requirements hereof.
(3) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed
development, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater
than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to this article.
(4) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions,
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(5) All subdivision proposals, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions,
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(d) Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard
established herein are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with
base flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow;
therefore, the following provisions apply:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/385
(A) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at
least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if
no depth number is specified); or
(B) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base
flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water
and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads of effects of buoyancy.
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain
administrator that the standards of this article are satisfied.
(4) Require within zone AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.405)
ARTICLE 3.07 STORMWATER DISCHARGE FROM CONSTRUCTION SITES
Sec. 3.07.001 State rules adopted
The rules and regulations set forth in Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) General Permit No.
TXR150000 relating to construction sites that discharge stormwater associated with construction activity located in
the state and adopted by the state commission on environmental quality and effective March 5, 2008, are hereby
adopted by the city and incorporated herein by reference thereto as if set forth in full herein, and shall govern and
regulate stormwater discharges associated with construction activity within the city.
Sec. 3.07.002 Definitions
Unless the context indicates otherwise, words and phrases contained in this article shall be as set forth in TPDES
General Permit No. TXR150000. In addition, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings
as used in this article:
TCEQ. The state commission on environmental quality, including all of its departments and divisions, or its
successor agency.
TPDES General Permit No. TXR150000. That general permit to discharge wastes under the provisions of section
402 of the Clean Water Act and chapter 26 of the Texas Water Code, TCEQ Docket No. 2007-1588-WQ, issued
February 15, 2008, and effective March 5, 2008.
Sec. 3.07.003 Stormwater pollution prevention plan required
No person shall commence construction activities on land located within the city that may result in disturbing an
area equal to or greater than one (1) acre, or less than one (1) acre as part of a larger common plan of development
of land, prior to preparing and obtaining approval of a stormwater prevention plan in compliance with part III of
TPDES General Permit No. TXR150000 or obtaining a waiver of such requirement from TCEQ.
Sec. 3.07.004 Post-construction stormwater management requirements
(a) New development and redevelopment projects that disturb an area greater than or equal to one acre of land,
including projects less than one acre that are part of a larger common plan of development or sale, and discharge
stormwater into the city's municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), shall implement structural and/or nonstructural
best management practices (BMP) to minimize impacts to water quality.
(Ordinance 10/25 adopted 7/20/10)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/385
(b) The integrated Stormwater Management Criteria Manual for Site Development and Construction (iSWM),
promulgated by the NCTCOG and as may be amended from time to time, a true and complete copy of which is
incorporated herein by reference, is hereby adopted as the city's official program for addressing stormwater and
drainage issues associated with new construction, site development and redevelopment. A true and complete copy
of the manual shall be kept on file and available at all times during regular business hours in the offices of the city
secretary and director of public works. The BMP published in such manual or by the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) guidance documents may be utilized to comply with this section. (Ordinance 11/17 adopted 9/6/11)
(c) The owner of the construction site described in subsection (a) of this section shall submit a post-construction
stormwater management plan that incorporates the BMP to minimize water quality impacts prior to issuance of any
permits.
(d) All BMP shall be submitted to the city manager or his duly authorized representative for review and approval
for construction sites on property located within the jurisdiction of the city prior to the utilization of the proposed
BMP.
Sec. 3.07.005 Operation and maintenance of post-construction best management practices
(a) The owner of the construction site described in section 3.07.004 shall operate and maintain, and shall be
solely responsible for the operation and maintenance of, the structural and/or non-structural BMP on the owner's
construction site as the BMP were designed and approved.
(b) The city manager or such other city employee designated by the city manager shall have the authority to
require the issuance of a performance bond, payable to the city, if it is deemed necessary to achieve compliance
with this article.
(c) The city manager, or other city employee designated by the city manager, shall have the authority to require
the owner or operator of a construction site, development, or redevelopment to provide proof that the owner has
obtained financial assurances sufficient to operate and maintain the structural and/or non-structural BMP
previously approved by the city manager for the length of time that the structural and/or non-structural BMP will
be utilized at the construction site.
Sec. 3.07.006 Notice of violation
(a) The city manager, or other city employee designated by the city manager, shall have the authority to serve a
written notice of violation upon any person who is found to have violated, or who continues to violate, any
provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder.
(b) Not later than seven (7) days after the issuance of a notice of violation served pursuant to subsection (a) of
this section, the person served with the notice of violation shall submit to the city authority issuing the notice of
violation an explanation of the circumstances that resulted in the described violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention of reoccurrence of the described violation, which explanation shall include specific
actions to be taken by the alleged violator.
(c) If the recipient of a notice of violation denies that any violation of this article has occurred or contends that
no corrective action is necessary, such person shall submit to the city authority that issued the notice of violation a
written explanation of the basis of any such denial or contention not later than seven (7) days following issuance of
the notice of violation.
(d) Submission of a written plan or explanation as provided in subsection (b) of this section shall not be a
defense to any alleged liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
(e) Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to take any action, including emergency action or
any other enforcement action, prior to issuing a notice of violation.
Sec. 3.07.007 Stop work order
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/385
(a) The city manager, or other city employee designated by the city manager, shall have the authority to issue a
stop work order to the owner and/or operator of a construction site upon finding that the owner or operator has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, which stop work order shall be posted at the
construction site.
(b) Unless written exception is made by the city manager, a stop work order issued pursuant to subsection (a) of
this section shall prohibit any further construction activity and shall bar any further inspection or approval by the
city associated with a building permit, grading permit, subdivision plat approval, site development plan approval,
or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy at the
construction site, new development, or redevelopment.
(c) The issuance of a stop work order pursuant to this section shall not preclude nor serve as a prerequisite for
taking any other action against the recipient of the stop work order.
(d) A stop work order issued pursuant to this section may be rescinded only by the city manager, or other city
employee designated by the city manager, provided that the owner or operator of the construction site to which the
stop work order applies has:
(1) Paid a reinspection fee to the city in accordance with the current master fee resolution of the city;
(2) Provided written documentation indicating that all violations set forth in the stop work order have
been corrected; and
(3) Received from the city, following reinspection, written acknowledgement that all violations have
in fact been corrected.
Sec. 3.07.008 Penalty; additional remedies
(a) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this article shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense, and each and
every day such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(b) The city may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the
violation of this article. Nothing in this article shall preclude the city from seeking any and all injunctive or other
relief allowed by state law even if a criminal complaint has been filed based on the same incident or event.
Sec. 3.07.009 Applicability of stricter regulations
In the event stricter rules or regulations are set forth elsewhere in this code or are otherwise promulgated by the
TCEQ or the United States Environmental Protection Agency regarding the same subject matter affected by this
article, then the more stringent regulations shall apply.
Sec. 3.07.010 Conflicting regulations
In the event any other provision of this code relating to stormwater pollution or discharge from a construction site
irreconcilably conflicts with the provisions of this article, the provisions of this article shall be controlling.
(Ordinance 10/25 adopted 7/20/10)
ARTICLE 3.08 TREE PRESERVATION
Sec. 3.08.001 Purpose
The terms and provisions of this article are intended to accomplish the following public purposes:
(1) Encourage site planning and landscape planning which furthers the preservation of trees and
natural areas, and facilitate site design and construction which contribute to the long-term viability of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/385
existing trees.
(2) Preserve the natural ecological environmental and aesthetic qualities of the city.
(3) Protect and increase the value of residential and commercial properties within the city.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.401)
Sec. 3.08.002 Definitions
Administrative official. The city administrative official or his designee.
Buildable area. That portion of a building site exclusive of the required yard areas on which a structure or building
improvements may be erected and including the actual structure, driveway, parking lot, pool, deck, patio and other
construction as shown on the site plan.
Designated tree. A tree or tree trunk and root system that has a caliper at a point twelve inches (12") above the base
of six inches (6") or greater, and that is listed in either section 3.08.006 or 3.08.009.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.402)
Sec. 3.08.003 Penalties
(a) Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision or requirement of this article shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed the maximum
amount provided in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(b) A monetary civil penalty set by the master fee resolution, based on the diameter of the tree(s) removed or
damaged, which shall be assessed and paid to the city.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.407)
Sec. 3.08.004 Applicability
The terms and provisions of this article shall apply to all persons engaged in a construction project when
demolition of the primary residence structure has been approved by the city. (1996 Code, sec. 12.403)
Sec. 3.08.005 Required trees
(a) Requirements. A person subject to this article who is engaged in a construction project in the city shall insure
that at the completion of construction and final inspection by the administrative official there are at least two (2)
designated trees (see sections 3.08.006 and 3.08.009) remaining on the real property, whether they are preexisting
trees or newly planted trees. In the event a total of two (2) designated trees cannot be planted on the real property,
the owner will have the following options:
(1) The owner may plant one (1) designated tree on the real property and one (1) designated tree
within the adjacent city parkway, with approval of the administrative official or his/her designee, who
shall determine if the parkway can accommodate the tree due to parkway size and existing tree
locations; or
(2) The owner shall have the option of contributing funds to the city reforestation and landscape fund
in an amount equal to the balance of tree caliper inches necessary to satisfy the requirements of this
article. Contributions will be based on the then-current market value of a six-inch caliper, containergrown,
nursery stock live oak tree.
(b) Exception. On single-family attached (SF-A) lots less than fifty feet (50') in width, only one (1) designated
tree shall be required to be left remaining on the lot at the completion of construction, whether a preexisting tree or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/385
a newly planted tree.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.404)
Sec. 3.08.006 Designated trees; planting location; time of planting
(a) Designated trees. The following are designated trees:
(1) American elm.
(2) Ash.
(3) Bald cypress.
(4) Bur oak.
(5) Cedar elm.
(6) Chinese pistachio.
(7) Chinquapin oak.
(8) Lace bark elm.
(9) Live oak.
(10) Magnolia.
(11) Pecan.
(12) Pond cypress.
(13) Red oak.
(14) Redbud.
(15) Sweet gum.
(b) Location for planting trees. Replacement trees required by this article shall be placed on the lot or parcel
where the construction has occurred. They may not be planted in utility easements or rights-of-way, nor shall they
be placed in an area such that the mature canopy of the tree will interfere with overhead utility lines. No trees shall
be planted within ten feet (10') of a fire hydrant or within visibility sight triangles.
(c) Time of planting. Replacement trees shall be planted prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or
project release.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.405)
Sec. 3.08.007 Tree protection during construction
A major purpose of this article is to protect all designated trees which are not removed and to allow approved
construction to occur. The following procedures shall apply to all types of construction projects which involve
development around designated trees. The following procedures are deemed appropriate in the situations noted;
however, unique circumstances may allow modifications if deemed necessary by the administrative official.
(1) Prohibited activities. The following activities shall be prohibited within the limits of the drip line
of any designated tree that is subject to the requirements of this article:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/385
(A) Materials storage. No materials intended for use in construction or waste materials
accumulated due to excavation or demolition shall be placed within three feet (3') of the trunk of
any designated tree.
(B) Equipment cleaning and disposal of liquids. No equipment may be cleaned or other liquids
deposited within the limits of the drip line of a designated tree. This includes, but is not limited to,
paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar or other materials.
(C) Attachments to trees. No signs, wires or other attachments, other than those of a protective
nature, shall be attached to any tree.
(D) Vehicular or equipment traffic. No vehicular and construction equipment traffic or parking
is allowed within three feet (3') of the trunk of a designated tree.
(2) Mulching and pruning. The procedures listed below shall be followed prior to construction:
(A) Protective mulching. All designated trees shall have a minimum of four inches (4") of
mulch placed from the base of the tree to the designated tree's drip line to reduce soil compaction.
(B) Pruning. If a low-hanging limb is broken during the course of construction, the remaining
portion of the limb may be cut. The limb shall be cut either flush to the trunk on or at the next joint
of the limb. The wound shall then be sealed with pruning paint. In no instance shall pruning
involve a portion of the trunk or thirty percent (30%) of the entire canopy without the
administrative official's prior approval.
(3) Improvements within critical root zone. Design constraints often dictate that designated trees
slated for preservation have some encroachment on their critical root zone. The following are the
minimum design criteria allowed within the critical root zone of a designated tree. Development
exceeding the criteria would put the designated tree at risk, and therefore it will no longer be considered
a preserved designated tree. In such case, replacement trees shall also be required.
(A) Grade changes. In the event that grade changes must be made around a designated tree or
group of designated trees, the following shall be implemented in order to maintain oxygen and
water exchange within the designated tree's critical root zone:
(i) A minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of the critical root zone must be preserved at
natural grade with natural ground cover or landscaping for the tree to be considered a
preserved designated tree.
(ii) No cut or fill greater than two inches (2") shall be located closer to the tree trunk than
one-half (1/2) of the radius of the critical root zone radius distance.
(iii) Decrease grade: Provide retaining walls outside the drip line to mitigate cuts.
(B) Boring of utilities. The administrative official may permit boring under designated trees in
certain circumstances. The minimum length of the bore shall be the width of the tree's canopy and
shall be at a minimum depth of twenty-four inches (24").
(C) Trenching. Irrigation systems shall be designed to avoid trenching across the critical root
zone of any designated tree. Bore or air spade may be an acceptable alternative.
(D) Paving. A maximum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the critical root zone of a designated
tree may be covered with impervious paving. The pavement and the cut and fill for the pavement
is to not exceed one-half (1/2) of the critical root zone radius distance.
(4) Other requirements.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/385
(A) Tree protection fences shall be installed prior to the commencement of any site preparation
work (clearing, grubbing or grading).
(B) Fences shall be located at least three feet (3') from the base of the trunk of the designated
tree to prevent:
(i) Soil compaction in the critical root zone resulting from vehicular traffic or storage of
equipment or materials.
(ii) Critical root zone disturbances due to grade changes greater than two inches (2") cut or
fill, or boring which was not authorized by the administrative official.
(iii) Wounds to the trunk, limbs or exposed roots by mechanical equipment.
(iv) Other activities detrimental to trees such as chemical storage, cement truck cleaning,
and fires.
Fence material shall consist of 4-foot-high orange safety fence which is staked in a manner
to support the fencing during the duration of construction.
(C) All grading within critical root zones of designated trees shall be performed by hand or
small equipment to minimize damage.
(D) Trees most heavily impacted by construction activities should be watered deeply once a
week during periods of hot and dry weather. Tree crowns should be sprayed with water
periodically to reduce dust accumulation on the leaves.
(E) Trenching for landscape irrigation shall be located as far from the existing tree drip line as
possible and performed by hand or air spade.
(F) Pruning to provide clearance for structures, vehicular traffic and equipment shall take place
before construction begins.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.406)
Sec. 3.08.008 Non-approved replacement species
The following is a list of trees which will not be considered as replacement trees during tree mitigation:
(1) Arborvitae.
(2) Arizona ash.
(3) Bois d'arc.
(4) Catalpa.
(5) Chinaberry.
(6) Cottonwood.
(7) Ginkgo.
(8) Hackberry.
(9) Mimosa.
(10) Mulberry.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/385
(11) Palms.
(12) Willow.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.408)
Sec. 3.08.009 Approved trees for planting in parkways
The tree species designated in section 1.10.034 have been approved for parkway plantings. (Ordinance adopting
Code)
Sec. 3.08.010 Planting guide
(a) Before digging, please call 1-800-DIG-TESS to identify the location of any underground utilities.
(b) Dig a hole twice as wide as and slightly shallower than the root ball. Roughen the sides and bottom of the
hole with a pick or shovel so that roots can penetrate the soil.
(c) With a potted tree, gently remove the tree from the container. Lay the tree on its side with the container end
near the planting hole. Hit the bottom and sides of the container until the root ball is loosened. If roots are growing
in a circular pattern around the root ball, slice through the roots on a couple of sides of the root ball. With trees
wrapped in burlap, remove the string or wire that holds the burlap to the root crown. It is unnecessary to completely
remove the burlap. Plastic wraps must be completely removed. Gently separate circling roots on the root ball.
Shorten exceptionally long roots, and guide the shortened roots downward and outward. Root tips die quickly when
exposed to light and air, so don't waste time.
(d) Place the root ball in the hole. Leave the top of the root ball (where the roots end and the trunk begins) 1/2
inch to 1 inch above the surrounding soil, making sure not to cover it unless roots are exposed. For bare root plants,
make a mound of soil in the middle of the hole and spread plant roots out evenly over the mound. Do not set trees
too deep. As you add soil to fill in around the tree, lightly tamp the soil to collapse air pockets, or add water to help
settle the soil. Form a temporary water basin around the base of the tree to encourage water penetration, and water
thoroughly after planting. A tree with a dry root ball cannot absorb water; if the root ball is extremely dry, allow
water to trickle into the soil by placing the hose at the trunk of the tree.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/385
(e) Mulch around the tree. A 3-foot-diameter circle of mulch 4" deep is common.
(f) Depending on the size of the tree and the site conditions, staking may be beneficial. Staking supports the tree
until the roots are well established to properly anchor it. Staking should allow for some movement of the tree. After
trees are established, remove all support wires. If these are not removed they can girdle the tree, cutting into the
trunk and eventually killing the tree.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.410)
ARTICLE 3.09 SIGNS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.09.001 Objectives and purpose
The principal objectives and purpose of this article of the Code of Ordinances are to:
(1) Provide a reasonable system for the control of signs;
(2) Encourage signs which are well designed and pleasing in appearance;
(3) Encourage a desirable urban character compatible with the general environment of the city, which
has a minimum of overhead clutter;
(4) Enhance the economic value of the community through location and design of signs;
(5) Provide for signs the principal purpose of which will be to furnish information necessary for
business and commerce;
(6) Reduce possible traffic and safety hazards through good signing; and
(7) Provide for proper sign area and height with relation to viewing distance and other circumstances.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.201)
Sec. 3.09.002 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this
article are defined as follows:
Address sign. A sign denoting the street address number and/or name of the owner of property.
Alterations. Any change in copy, content, color, size, shape, position, location, construction, or supporting
structure.
Area of sign. The area included within the outer dimensions of a sign, including those portions of the frame or
support structure which (i) border or adjoin the face of the sign, or (ii) are of a size, dimension or configuration
which is intended to attract attention or are in excess of that necessary to support the sign. In the case of a multiplefaced
sign, each face shall be deemed to be a separate sign for the purposes of determining sign area, i.e., each face
is entitled to the allowable sign area. If a sign is placed on a wall or other surface, or if letters or other portions of
the sign are supported individually, without any border, the area shall be computed by enclosing the entire sign
within sets of parallel lines. The portion of the sign represented by a logo shall be calculated by enclosing the logo
in geometrical figures from which the total area may be calculated.
Awning. A projecting overhang of a rigid frame but otherwise composed of flexible canvas, nylon or similar
material.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/385
Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
Building identification sign. A sign displaying the name and/or address of a building, which sign is located on the
same site as the building.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.202)
Building official. That person charged with the administration of the building codes of the city. (Ordinance adopting
Code)
Business identification sign. A sign displaying the name of the business to which it pertains and/or the names or
description of the products or services sold or offered by such business at the site on which the business and sign
are located.
City manager. The chief administrative officer of the city.
Construction sign. A sign stating the names of the general contractor and, if desired, those individuals or businesses
directly connected with a construction project. For the purposes of construction signs, a “general contractor” shall
be an individual, firm, corporation, or other entity that has lawfully obtained a building permit for new
construction, remodeling, repair, or an addition to a residence or business.
Face, sign face, or face of a sign. Any plane or other side of a sign which is painted or stained or lighted or has
lettering or is illustrated, separately or in combination, to attract attention. In the case of a side other than a plane,
the area thereof shall be computed as including only the minimum single display surface which is visible from any
one position from which persons might usually view the same.
Garage sale or estate sale signs. Signs advertising the sale by the homeowner of items of personal property and
containing only the words “Garage Sale” or “Estate Sale.”
Glass frontage. That total area of the front and side of a building:
(1) Facing or abutting a public street or courtyard or parking area;
(2) Utilized by a particular business; and
(3) Consisting of windows, show windows or other glass-covered space, through which the interior of
the building is visible.
Grade. The level of the public sidewalk at the closest distance to the sign, or ground level at the wall to which a
sign may be attached, whichever is higher.
Ground sign. A sign which is supported by one or more uprights, braces, pedestals or other solid foundation in or
upon the ground. It may be a two (2) face sign, and shall also include signs sometimes referred to as “post signs” or
“monument signs” or “pole signs.”
Illuminated sign or lighted sign. Are terms which may be used interchangeably, and shall refer to any sign which
has a source of light, either internal or external, for the purpose of illuminating such sign.
Lost pet sign. A sign indicating the loss of a pet, giving a description thereof and the address and phone number of
the owner.
Marquee or projecting overhang. A permanent roof-like extension from a portion of the building below the roof
line composed of rigid material.
Political sign. A temporary sign indicating the name and/or picture of an individual seeking election or
appointment to a public office, or relating to a forthcoming public election or referendum, or pertaining to the
advocating by persons, groups, or parties of political views or policies.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/385
Projecting sign. A sign which projects from and is supported by a wall of a building, with the display surface of the
sign in a plane other than a plane parallel to the wall.
Real estate sign (such as a “For Sale,” “For Lease,” “For Rent” Sign). A sign indicating that the premises on
which the sign is located, or any portion thereof, are for sale, for lease, or for rent, and containing any of the
following information: a description of the premises offered for sale, lease, or rent; special facilities or
appurtenances; and the name, address, and telephone number of the owner, broker, or other person offering the
same for sale, lease, or rent. The sign may include information with respect to the availability of special financing
and the status of the sale of the subject property, such as “sold” or “contract pending.”
Roof sign. A sign located upon and above the roof of any building.
Security protection sign. A sign indicating that the premises are protected by a security alarm system.
Shopping center. Any identifiable area or group of buildings or stores commonly referred to as “shopping centers”
with one or more retail businesses having their principal or main entrance off and adjacent to parking areas or
parking facilities, and shall include any area so designated by the building official, or any pedestrian arcade,
courtyard, promenade, or mall, whether covered by a roof or not, within or between any structures or buildings,
upon which the principal or main entrance to one or more retail business therein are located.
Sign. Any writing, name, number, figure, character, outline, emblem, graphic, window etching, stained or painted
glass, mark, logo, mural, symbol, spectacle, display, delineation, announcement, advertising, billboard, signboard,
flag, banner, pennant, bunting, device, appliance, structure erected for the purposes of supporting a sign, or any
other thing of similar nature designed to attract attention outdoors, in or on any face or wall, window, or store front
of any building, or on any pole or other form of support or structure, and shall include all parts, portions, units, and
materials composing the same, together with the frame, background, and support or anchorage thereof. The
following shall not be deemed to be included within the definition of “sign”:
(1) Signs of a duly constituted governmental body, including, but not limited to, traffic or similar
regulatory devices, other devices required by law, and warnings at railroad crossings;
(2) Signs required to be maintained by law or governmental order, rule, or regulation, provided that
the total surface area of all such signs on any one lot or parcel does not exceed ten (10) square feet or as
required by state law;
(3) Signs placed by a public utility for the safety, welfare, or convenience of the public, such as signs
identifying high voltage, public telephone, or underground cable;
(4) Signs upon a vehicle, provided that any such vehicle with signs thereon is not conspicuously
parked or left standing for advertising purposes so as to constitute a device or other type of sign
pursuant to the definition of a sign;
(5) Signs not more than two (2) in number and noticing or soliciting the sale, lease, or hire of a
vehicle to which such signs are attached if such signs are nine inches (9") by twelve inches (12") or less;
(6) Signs located inside a building or structure, provided the sign is not so located as to be visible and
readable without intentional and deliberate effort from outside the building or structure;
(7) Barber poles of the traditional type and design not exceeding three feet (3') in height (vertical
portion of the pole) and not erected so as to extend more than twelve inches (12") from the front of the
building to which it is attached;
(8) Noncommercial decorations in a residential zone commemorating a generally recognized seasonal
event or occasion, for periods not to exceed thirty (30) days;
(9) Commemorative or historical markers which have been approved by the city council.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/385
Site. All of that contiguous ground area legally assembled into or as part of one building or business location, or
one residence.
Urban design and development committee. That advisory committee appointed from time to time by the city
council.
Wall sign. A sign which is affixed to (or painted on) an exterior wall of any building or structure with the display
surface of the sign in a plane parallel to the plane of said wall.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.202)
Sec. 3.09.003 Nonconforming signs
Signs not in violation of any ordinance of the city at the time of the erection of same, which were intended to be
and which are permanent from the consideration of their location, material, design and type of construction, and
which do not constitute a hazard to public safety or a nuisance, but which do not conform to the requirements of
this article, may be maintained and may be replaced or re-erected with a “no cost” permit, if destroyed by fire,
vandalism, windstorm or other natural forces or events beyond the control of the owner. If any such sign is (i)
dismantled, (ii) removed, or (iii) destroyed other than by fire, vandalism, windstorm, or other natural forces or
events beyond the control of the owner, it shall not be replaced, re-erected or rebuilt without a permit. (1996 Code,
sec. 12.210)
Sec. 3.09.004 Maintenance
All signs shall be maintained so as to be structurally safe, clean, and in a good state of maintenance and repair.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.211)
Sec. 3.09.005 Inspections
The building official shall inspect, at such times as he deems necessary, signs regulated by this article for the
purpose of ascertaining whether the same is secure or insecure, whether it still serves a useful purpose, and whether
it is in need of removal or repair. (1996 Code, sec. 12.226)
Sec. 3.09.006 Removal or repair of dangerous or unlawful signs
(a) Any sign or any part thereof which was not erected and is not maintained in accordance with the design and
construction requirements contained or referred to in this article, unless exempted from such requirements, or any
sign or any part thereof which is liable to fall down and/or endanger persons or property, or is a fire hazard, or is a
dangerous structure which is located within this city, or any sign or part thereof which, from age, neglect or faulty
construction, becomes dangerous or dilapidated, shall be deemed to be a public nuisance, and upon complaint being
made to the building official, such public nuisance shall be abated, as hereinafter provided.
(b) All signs or parts thereof or related structures which:
(1) Are not maintained or were not erected in accordance with the design and construction
requirements of this article;
(2) Are structurally unsafe;
(3) Constitute a fire hazard;
(4) Are otherwise dangerous to human life; or
(5) Separately or in relation to the use of other existing property constitute a hazard to safety, health
or general public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance or dilapidation or obsolescence, or
abandonment;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/385
are declared to be dangerous structures, and the same shall be a public nuisance, and upon complaint being made to
the building official shall be abated, repaired, rehabilitated, demolished or removed in accordance with the
procedure specified in this section, which shall be in addition to any other procedures or remedies available to the
city for enforcement of the provisions of this article.
(c) Any resident of the city, or any employee of the city who observes any public nuisance defined in this section,
may make a complaint about such nuisance to the building official of the city.
(d) The building official or his representative shall observe and examine every sign or portion thereof upon
which such complaint has been made, and if found to be a public nuisance as defined in this section, the building
official shall give the owner and occupant of the premises where such sign is located written notices stating the
defects and objections and the violations with respect to which such complaint has been made. Such notices shall
be sent to the owner and occupant by delivering such notice in person or sending such notice by registered or
certified mail to the occupant at the premises and to the address of the owner according to the tax rolls of the city,
and shall require the owner and/or occupant to commence the required removal or improvement or repairs within
three (3) days from the date such notice is delivered or deposited in the mail. Such notice shall also require that all
work to eliminate the violation shall be completed within thirty (30) days from the date of such notice unless
otherwise stipulated by the building official.
(e) In case the owner and/or occupant shall fail, neglect or refuse to (i) comply with said notice [and] to take the
action described in such notice, or (ii) appeal therefrom within five (5) days, the building official may file a
complaint with the city court charging the owner and/or occupant of such structure or premises with a violation of
this section.
(f) The building official may, in the alternative, notify the board of adjustment of the city of the complaint and
the fact that the owner and/or occupant has failed, neglected or refused to comply with the requirements set forth in
said notice. The board of adjustment shall, after notice to the owner or occupant of the premises where the sign is
erected, hold a public hearing for the purpose of determining that the nuisance should be abated. The board of
adjustment shall set the time for such public hearing, and give written notice by delivering same in person or by
mailing notice by registered or certified mail to the addresses referred to above of the owner and occupant,
respectively, of said premises at least (10) days before the date of such hearing, and the board of adjustment will
give such other and further notice of such hearing that may be required by the laws of the state.
(g) At the conclusion of the hearing referred to, the board of adjustment may order the building official to
proceed with the work or other action specified in such notice, or may grant additional time for the owner or
occupant of the premises to effect the repairs or take such other action as may be specified in such notice or may
render such other order which may seem necessary and proper. In the event the building official is directed to
repair, dismantle or remove any sign from the premises, the cost of such work shall be paid by the owner and/or
occupant of said property, and if not paid shall be levied as a tax against said property, which shall become
immediately due. In the event that the owner and occupant are not one and the same person or party and both have
been properly notified hereunder, such persons or parties shall be jointly and severally liable for the costs referred
to.
(h) If the owner or occupant of the premises as to which a complaint has been filed shall appear before the board
of adjustment, no further notice or order of the board of adjustment made at such hearing shall be required to be
furnished to said owner or occupant. In the event the owner and/or occupant of said premises fails to appear at said
public hearing, the board of adjustment may order the building official to proceed with the work or other action
specified in the notice, and levy the cost of such work as a tax against the premises as indicated, and in that event a
copy of the order of the board of adjustment shall be delivered to the owner or occupant of said premises in person
or by certified mail or registered mail to the occupant at the premises and to the owner according to the tax rolls of
the city, and by publication of a copy of such order, at least one time, in the publication which is designated as the
official publication of the city.
(i) Upon the expiration of thirty (30) days after a copy of the order of the board of adjustment has been delivered
or mailed and published as required above, the building official shall proceed to carry out the work called for by the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/385
order of the board of adjustment, and the cost of such work shall be levied as a tax against the premises and the
owner and/or occupant thereof, which shall be and become immediately due.
(j) In the event that both the owner and the occupant of the premises shall fail or refuse to discharge the expense
incurred in correcting the violation of this section within thirty (30) days after receiving notice to pay such amount,
or within thirty (30) days after such notice is published, whichever is later, the city may bring an action in any court
having jurisdiction to recover the expenses and costs which were assessed against the owner or occupant of such
premises by the board of adjustment.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.227)
Sec. 3.09.007 Applicability of other ordinances
Compliance with other portions of the Code of Ordinances of the city with respect to electrical permits or building
permits or other matters shall be required. (1996 Code, sec. 12.256)
Sec. 3.09.008 Appeals and variances
(a) The board of adjustment of the city (created pursuant to the city's zoning ordinance) may hear and decide
appeals which allege error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the building official in
connection with the refusal to grant a permit required by this article, the revocation of a permit granted under the
provisions of this article or a decision involving any substantive or material interpretation of a provision of this
article. The decision of the board of adjustment with regard to such appeal shall be final.
(b) The board of adjustment shall act as a quasi-judicial body and, following notice in writing to all property
owners within two hundred (200) feet of property on which a sign is proposed to be erected, may vary any or all
terms or provisions of this article with respect to on-premises signs only when said board has made a specific
finding from evidence presented that strict compliance with the provisions of this article will result in a substantial
financial hardship or inequity to the applicant without sufficient corresponding benefit to the city and its citizens in
accomplishing the objectives of this article. In no event shall such authority to permit a variance include permitting
a sign which is an unlawful sign under section 3.09.009, nor permitting a commercial sign in a residential zone
other than as permitted by this article, nor permitting a sign which is unsafe, nor waiving any of the permit
requirements of this article. Notwithstanding the above, the board of adjustment shall not have authority to permit
the reconstruction of a nonconforming sign other than in accordance with, or waive or vary any of the provisions
of, section 3.09.003 herein.
(c) Any appeal or request for variance or special exception brought under this section will be accompanied by a
fee to be set by resolution of the city council. In any of the above cases, if the board of adjustment grants the relief
requested by the applicant, it may, in specific cases, impose appropriate and reasonable conditions on the granting
of such application.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.257)
Sec. 3.09.009 Unlawful signs; flags; temporary signs for special events
(a) Posting on public places.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to post, suspend, print, stick, stamp, tack, or otherwise affix, or
cause the same to be done, any notice, placard, bill, card, poster, sticker, banner, sign, advertising, or
other device calculated to attract the attention of the public to, over, or upon any street right-of-way
(including the parkway except for address signs), public sidewalk, curb (except house numbers), lamp
post, hydrant, tree, electric light pole, telephone pole, or telegraph pole, or upon any fixture of the alarm
systems, telephone systems or similar or related systems involving governmental or public service of the
city, or upon any public building or utility. (This subsection is not applicable to public convenience,
safety and regulatory signs erected by the city.)
(1996 Code, sec. 12.212)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/385
(2) Provided however, as part of a program of a nonprofit organization, approved by the city council
to preserve the public safety and welfare, American flags may be temporarily displayed in a residential
district in the part of the street right-of-way known as the “parkway” only with the permission, and at
the request, of the abutting residential property owner, from 12:00 noon the day before to 12:00 noon
the day after the following national holidays: Memorial Day (last Monday of May), Flag Day (June
14th), Independence Day (July 4th), Labor Day (first Monday in September), and Veterans' Day
(November 11th). Such flags shall not exceed 3' by 5' in area, shall be mounted on 10' poles inserted
into metal or plastic sleeves placed in the parkway, and shall be uniformly flown on the residential
parkways. Flags may be displayed in city parks only with permission of, and for the time and at the
locations specified by, the director of parks or his designee. (Ordinance 14/015 adopted 6/17/14
(b) Posting on private premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to post, print, stick, stamp, tack, or otherwise
affix, or cause the same to be done, any notice, placard, bill, card, poster, sticker, banner, sign, advertising, or other
device calculated to attract the attention of the public over or on private land, or to, at, from, or upon any post,
fence, wall, building, structure, or any part of any building or structure located in or upon any private premises or
property within the city, unless the written consent of the owner, agent, or occupant has first been obtained.
(c) Moving signs and flags. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or install any sign which, in whole or in
part, moves, rotates, flashes, reflects, blinks, or appears to do any of the foregoing, or which simulates motion in
any manner, except that flags representing a governmental body or entity, or an institution, not exceeding three (3)
in number, and which flags shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet each, may be allowed for each street floor
business, residence or institution. Such flags shall not be less than twelve feet (12') above grade in nonresidential
zones, shall not exceed the height of the roof line of the principal structure located on the site and shall be mounted
or supported in a manner approved by the building official to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the general
public in accordance with the standards of construction set forth in section 3.09.021, where applicable, and in a
manner that they shall not encroach over or onto any public right-of-way. Flags identifying a building or a business
or denoting a purely commercial message or constituting mere advertising shall not be allowed. For the purposes of
this article, moving signs shall be considered but not limited to the following: banners, pennants, flags, captive
balloons, market quotations, time or temperature recording devices, clocks, signs which are constructed of or faced
with scotch-lite or similar material, signs which change color, and signs where the intensity of lighting changes, or
appears to change, including flashers and blinkers. Notwithstanding the above, flags flown or displayed on property
owned or occupied by bodies or entities of the city, the county, the state or the United States government, or
universities, or any public school located in the city, shall not exceed one hundred and fifty (150) square feet.
(d) Prohibited support. A sign shall not be supported in whole or in part from any public utility installation or
any tree on private premises.
(e) Exposed electric appurtenances. No exposed, visible electrical conduits, raceways, circuit breakers or other
exposed electrical appurtenances shall be allowed, except as may be required by applicable law.
(f) Prohibited construction signs. Construction signs, as defined herein, or any other signs which may identify a
contractor, subcontractor or other party connected with the project, in addition to any other restrictions concerning
such signs, shall not be permitted on or near the construction site when attached to, painted or erected on temporary
buildings or trailers used for offices or storage, on fences, or on dumpsters, unless such signs are for the purpose of
constituting the allowable construction sign permitted by this article and otherwise comply with the provisions of
this article.
(g) Signs with movable type. Signs with movable or changeable type shall not be allowed except for theaters as
provided for in section 3.09.153.
(h) Temporary signs for special events. Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, signs, bunting, flags,
banners and other decorations, which would otherwise be in violation of this article, may be permitted on a
temporary basis for seasonal events, special occasions or local civic or community projects, subject to the approval
of the building official, for such periods as he may designate.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/385
(i) Off-premises signs (billboards and other off-premises signs). Signs identifying, advertising or directing the
public to a business, merchandise, service, institution, residential area, entertainment or commercial activity which
is located, sold, rented, based, produced, manufactured, furnished or taking place at a location other than on the
property or site where the sign is located shall not be allowed.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.212)
Sec. 3.09.010 Wall signs
Subject to the further provisions of this article concerning permissible area of the sign or type of lighting, wall
signs shall be permitted as follows:
(1) Signs painted on the wall of a building.
(2) Signs composed solely of individual letters, provided that no portion thereof shall extend more
than eight inches (8") from the wall or building or structure to which it is attached where the sign is
eight feet (8') or more above grade, or more than three inches (3") from such wall where the sign is less
than eight feet (8') above grade.
(3) Signs other than those painted on a wall or composed solely of individual letters, provided that
such signs:
(A) If internally illuminated, shall be constructed of metal with a matte finish, including all
faces, sides, backs and frames, with individually incised letters backed with plexiglass, and shall
not extend more than six inches (6") from the wall to which it is attached.
(B) If not internally illuminated, shall be constructed of wood, metal with a matte finish, or
fiberglass with a matte finish, and shall not extend more than three inches (3") from the wall to
which it is attached.
(4) Wall signs less than eight feet (8') above the grade shall not be illuminated.
(5) Wall signs shall be placed on a wall parallel to the facing or abutting street.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.213)
Sec. 3.09.011 Ground signs
Ground signs are allowed under the provisions of this article subject to restrictions as set forth under particular
sections or subsections hereof. In addition, ground signs, if internally lighted, shall be constructed of metal with a
matte finish, including all sides, faces, backs and frames thereof, with individually licensed [incised] letters backed
with plexiglass. Ground signs other than those internally lighted shall be constructed of wood, metal with a matte
finish, fiberglass with a matte finish, stone, concrete, or brick. (1996 Code, sec. 12.214)
Sec. 3.09.012 Projecting signs
(a) Projecting signs indicating the location of emergency medical facilities, public off-street parking or other
similar public services in nonresidential zones are allowed, but shall not project from the wall of the building or
structure to which they are attached more than twenty inches (20"), and shall not exceed six feet (6') in height.
Projecting signs of this type less than twelve feet (12') above grade shall be prohibited. Permitted projecting signs
may project over public sidewalks.
(b) Projecting signs may be utilized as business identification signs in nonresidential zones provided that such
signs:
(1) Do not exceed eight (8) square feet in area and four (4) inches in thickness;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/385
(2) Are erected at least nine (9) feet above grade;
(3) Project no more than four (4) feet from the building or one-third (1/3) the width of the sidewalk,
whichever is less;
(4) Shall be pinned at least six (6) inches away from the wall;
(5) Are mounted with connectors which are an integral part and in keeping with the overall design of
the sign;
(6) Shall not be internally illuminated;
(7) Are erected so that the structural elements shall not be exposed unless the same are an integral part
and in keeping with the overall design and theme of the sign; and
(8) Are mounted or erected at the midpoint of the street frontage of the business and/or the side wall
of such business if it abuts a public street other than the one faced by the principal entrance of the
business.
Only one projecting sign per ground floor business shall be allowed except for an additional sign on an abutting
street as referred to; provided, however, a secondary projecting sign not exceeding three (3) square feet in area and
erected between eight (8) and eleven (11) feet above grade and otherwise mounted as set forth above shall be
allowed. Projecting signs may be constructed of metal, wood or fiberglass with a matte finish. Principal projecting
signs allowed under this subsection shall be in lieu of any other permanent type sign for a particular business,
except for wall signs permitted under subsections (C) and (D) of section 3.09.144(3) hereof. A business, therefore,
may not have both a principal projecting sign and a wall sign.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.215)
Sec. 3.09.013 Signs on marquees, projecting overhangs and awnings
No portion of a marquee, projecting overhang or awning (all sometimes hereinafter referred to as “projecting
extensions”), if used as a sign, or as the supporting structure of a sign, and no sign affixed thereto, shall extend
beyond a vertical plane with a one-foot (1') setback from the curb, and no vertical fascia, valance or other frontfacing
portion of a projecting extension shall exceed eighteen (18) inches in height. The permitted building or
business identification sign for the site or any portions thereof may be painted or stitched on the projecting
extension if an awning, or painted on or affixed as individual letters to the projecting extension if a marquee or
projecting overhang, but only on that portion parallel (or generally so depending on the configuration of the
projecting extension) to the wall of the building. No letters, numbers or logos or any part of a sign may extend
above or below the vertical portion of the projecting extension except insofar as they may conform to and be a part
of the configuration or curvature of the projecting extension. No wood, paper, clock, or temporary signs shall be
hung or attached to a projecting extension. Notwithstanding the above, if a projecting extension does not extend
beyond four (4) feet from the wall of the building, the portion thereof perpendicular to the wall may be used for a
secondary business identification sign not exceeding three (3) square feet in area. Awning signs shall meet the
structural requirements of section 3.09.021 of this article. Fabric used on awnings shall be opaque and treated to be
fire resistant. If lighting is provided within the awning, the graphics portion (lettering, logos and/or numbering)
may be incised with translucent fabric. This provision will permit only the graphic portion of the awning sign to be
illuminated. Existing nonconforming awning signs, if structurally sound, may be refaced/refabricated provided the
new material meets all of the above requirements and the graphics do not exceed eighteen (18) inches in height.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.216)
Sec. 3.09.014 Signs projecting above buildings
(a) Signs shall not be erected or installed on the roof of any building, and shall not extend above the roof of the
building to which it is attached, except:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/385
(1) When it is attached to the side of a penthouse and does not extend above the roof of the
penthouse; or
(2) When it is attached to a parapet wall and does not extend above the top of the parapet wall nor
more than three feet (3') above the roof level.
(b) The roof of a marquee, arcade, awning, or projecting overhang shall not be considered the roof of the
building for purposes of this section.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.217)
Sec. 3.09.015 Construction signs
(a) Persons shall not erect, install, maintain or use any construction sign on a premises unless the required
building permits for new construction or remodeling have been obtained from the city and said sign conforms with
section 3.09.104 and/or 3.09.146 of this article.
(b) Construction signs may be erected and maintained only during periods of actual construction and shall be
removed prior to final inspection.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.223)
Sec. 3.09.016 Signs on vacant land
Signs shall not be placed upon any vacant lot on which business is not being conducted or on unimproved property,
except signs dealing exclusively with the sale or lease of such property subject to any and all of the regulations
applicable thereto and further subject to the following restrictions:
(1) Such signs shall not be lighted or illuminated; and
(2) Such signs shall be located less than five feet (5') from the property line.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.219)
Sec. 3.09.017 Content
The language and other representations on all signs within the city, except as otherwise provided in this article,
shall be limited to the identification (i.e., name and address) of the building on the property on which the sign is
placed, or, if a business identification sign, the name of the business and a brief indication of the nature of the
business done or service rendered or type and/or name of merchandise sold upon such premises. Such signs shall
not contain any references to price. Established marks or logos may be included as part of a business identification
sign. (1996 Code, sec. 12.218)
Sec. 3.09.018 Colors
Signs shall be limited to not more than three (3) colors. For the purpose of this section, “sign” shall include the
lighting or illumination, and, in the case of a sign placed on a building surface without any border and with its
background the same color as the building surface, the color of the building surface shall not be considered as a
color of the sign. Shades or blendings of color shall each constitute a separate color. Also, for the purposes of this
section, black and white shall not be considered colors. (1996 Code, sec. 12.220)
Sec. 3.09.019 Lighting generally
Any perimeter or flood lighting or other external lighting, whether used for illumination or advertisement, which
illuminates private land (whether built upon or not), buildings, signs, or structures shall be limited to white light
and permitted only when such lighting is installed on private property and when hooded or shielded so that direct
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/385
beams therefrom do not fall upon public streets, alleys, highways, or other private property. Sodium vapor or other
colored exterior lights or lighting are not permitted. (1996 Code, sec. 12.221)
Sec. 3.09.020 Intensity of lighting; additional restrictions on lighting
(a) Interference with operation of vehicles. Signs shall not be permitted which, by virtue of the intensity,
direction, or color of its lighting or illumination, shall interfere with the proper operation of or cause confusion to
the operator of a motor vehicle on the public streets.
(b) Intensity of lighting. Signs which are lighted or illuminated to an intensity in excess of that of a public
streetlight (1000 watts) shall not be constructed or maintained within two hundred feet (200') of and facing property
in a residential zone. Intensities of illumination in all cases shall be approved by the electrical inspector of the city
and shall not exceed the intensity referred to or that according to the following table, whichever is the lesser:
MAXIMUM ILLUMINATION INTENSITY LEVEL
Type of
Illumination
Located within 200
feet and visible
from a residential
zone
Located within
200-500 feet and
visible from a
residential zone
Located beyond 500
feet of a residential
zone
Direct, internal or
backlighted
90 foot-lamberts 150 foot-lamberts 250 foot-lamberts
Indirect or reflected
sign
10 footcandles 25 footcandles 50 footcandles
(c) Signs to be turned off at night. Illuminated signs, except for building identification signs, within four hundred
feet (400') of a residential zone and visible from such zone shall be turned off at the close of business each day or
not later than 12:00 p.m. each night, whichever is later. Illuminated building identification signs within such
distance from a residential zone and visible therefrom shall be turned off at 12:00 p.m.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.222)
Sec. 3.09.021 Design and construction requirements
(a) Generally. All signs shall be designed and constructed so as not to require any external bracing, cables, stays
or guy wires for support or to prevent swaying or sagging and shall comply with the wind pressure and load
requirements specified herein or as otherwise called for by the city engineer or the building code of the city. All
references to the building code are as to the most current edition adopted by the city.
(b) Design requirements. Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind and seismic
forces as specified in this subsection. All bracing systems for ground signs shall be designed and constructed to
transfer lateral forces to the foundations. For signs on buildings, the dead and lateral loads shall be transmitted
through the structural frame of the building to the ground in such manner as not to overstress any of the elements
thereof. The overturning moment produced from lateral forces shall in no case exceed two-thirds (2/3) dead load
resisting moment. Uplift due to overturning shall be adequately resisted by proper anchorage. Weight of earth
superimposed over footings may be used in determining the dead load resisting moment. Such earth shall be
carefully placed and thoroughly compacted.
(1) Wind loads. Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind forces of
not less than thirty (30) pounds per square foot of area.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/385
(2) Seismic loads. Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist seismic forces
as specified in the building code.
(3) Combined loads. Wind and seismic loads need not be combined in the design of signs or sign
structures; only that loading producing the larger stresses need be used. Vertical design loads, except
roof live loads, shall be assumed to be acting simultaneously with the wind or seismic loads.
(4) Allowable stresses. The design of wood, concrete, steel, or aluminum members shall conform to
the requirements of the building code. Loads, both vertical and horizontal, exerted on the soil shall not
produce stresses exceeding those specified in the building code. The working stresses of wire rope and
its fastenings shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the ultimate strength of the rope or
fasteners. Working stresses for wind or seismic loads combined with dead loads may be increased as
specified in the building code.
(c) Construction requirements. The supports for all signs or sign structures shall be placed in or upon private
property and shall be securely built, constructed, and erected in conformance with the requirements of this section.
(1) Materials. All permanent signs shall be constructed of wood, metal or fiberglass unless otherwise
specified in this article. Materials of construction for signs and sign structures shall be of the quality and
grade as specified for buildings in the building code, as adopted, unless otherwise called for in this
article. In all signs and sign structures, the materials and details of construction shall, in the absence of
specified requirements, conform with the following: Structural steel shall be of such quality as to
conform with building code standards. Secondary members in contact with or directly supporting the
display surface may be formed of light gauge steel, provided such members are designed in accordance
with the specifications of the design of light gauge steel as specified in the building code standards and
in addition shall be galvanized. Secondary members, when formed integrally with the display surface,
shall be not less than no. 24 gauge in thickness. When not formed integrally with the display surface, the
minimum thickness of the secondary members shall be no. 12 gauge. The minimum thickness of hotrolled
steel members furnishing structural support for signs shall be one-fourth inch (1/4"), except that,
if galvanized, such members shall be not less than one-eighth inch (1/8") thick. Steel pipes shall be of
such quality as to conform with the building code standards. Steel members may be connected with one
(1) galvanized bolt, provided the connection is adequate to transfer the stresses in the members.
(2) Restrictions on combustible materials. Ground, wall, and projecting signs shall be constructed of
material heretofore specified in this article, and signs on projecting overhangs and marquees shall be
constructed of noncombustible materials. No combustible materials shall be used in the construction of
illuminated signs, except as approved by the building official.
(3) Anchorage.
(A) Members supporting unbraced signs shall be so proportioned that the bearing loads imposed
on the soil in either horizontal or vertical direction shall not exceed the safe values. Braced ground
signs shall be anchored to resist the specified wind or seismic load acting in any direction.
Anchors and supports shall be designed for safe bearing loads on the soil and for an effective
resistance to pull-out amounting to a force of twenty-five percent (25%) greater than the required
resistance to overturning. Anchors and supports shall penetrate to a depth below ground greater
than that of the frost line.
(B) Signs attached to masonry, concrete, or steel shall be safely and securely fastened thereto by
means of metal anchors, bolts, or approved expansion screws of sufficient size and anchorage to
support safely the loads applied.
(C) No wooden blocks or plugs or anchors with wood used in connection with screws or nails
shall be considered proper anchorage, except in the case of signs attached to wood framing.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/385
(D) No anchor or support of any sign shall be connected to, or supported by, an unbraced wall
unless such wall is designed in accordance with the requirements for parapet walls specified for
seismic zones in the building code.
(4) Approved fiberglass. The building official shall require that sufficient technical data be submitted
to substantiate the proposed use of any fiberglass material and, if it is determined that the evidence
submitted is satisfactory for the use intended, he may approve its use.
(d) Clearance requirements generally. Signs shall conform to the clearance requirements of this subsection.
(1) Clearance from high voltage power lines, telephone cables and light standards. Signs shall be
located not less than six feet (6') horizontally or twelve feet (12') vertically from overhead electrical
conductors which are energized in excess of 750 volts. The term “overhead conductors” as used in this
subsection means any electrical conductor, either bare or insulated, installed above the ground, except
such conductors as are enclosed in iron pipe or other material covering of equal strength. No sign shall
be erected nearer than six feet (6') to any telephone cable, power line or any streetlight standard.
(2) Clearance from fire escapes, exits, or standpipes. No sign or sign structure shall be erected in such
a manner that any portion of its surface or supports will interfere in any way with the free use of any fire
escape, exit, or standpipe.
(3) Obstruction of openings. No sign shall obstruct any openings to such an extent that light or
ventilation is reduced to a point below required by this section. Signs erected within five feet (5') of an
exterior wall in which there are openings within the area of the sign shall be constructed of
noncombustible material or approved plastics.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.224; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.09.022 Obstruction of door, window or fire escape; attachment to standpipe or fire escape
No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window,
or fire escape. No sign of any kind shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape. (1996 Code, sec. 12.225)
Sec. 3.09.023 Special signs for specific properties
(a) For purposes of this section, a “special sign” shall mean a sign whose purpose and design is to promote the
general architectural, historic, cultural, or scenic character of a building, lot or tract of land, based on its unique
function or location in relation to surrounding properties.
(b) The urban design and development advisory committee (UDADAC) may consider a request for a special
exception to this article, when submitted by the owner or owners of a building, lot or tract of land, to install a
special sign.
(c) The location, construction and dimensions of a special sign shall be determined by the city council ordinance
authorizing such special sign. Except as provided in such ordinance, a special sign shall be required to follow the
provisions of this article.
(d) A sign permit shall be required before a special sign may be installed on a building, lot or tract of land.
(e) A request for special sign approval must include details of visual representation, lettering, illumination,
sound, size, height, placement, movement, location proposed for the sign, and any other details the city may
require. UDADAC shall conduct a design review of the proposed sign before forwarding its approval and
recommended conditions to the city council for action.
(f) The proposed special sign must meet the following minimum requirements:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/385
(1) The sign must be unique to the specific location of the building, lot or tract and compatible with
the general architectural, historic, cultural, or scenic character and visual quality of the building, the
district, or neighborhood center in which it is located;
(2) The total area of the faces of the proposed sign, plus the total combined area of all existing signs
on the building, lot or tract, must not exceed the total area of all signs allowed under this article;
(3) A special sign may not be contrary to the public interest and must serve to create a sense of place;
and
(4) Only one special sign may be allowed on a building, lot or tract of land.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.260)
Secs. 3.09.024–3.09.060 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 3.09.061 Required
It shall be unlawful to erect, re-erect, construct, alter, or maintain any sign except as provided by this article and
pursuant to a required permit for the same issued by the building official. Except as hereinafter provided, a permit
shall be required for each sign. In addition, electrical permits shall be obtained for lighted or illuminated signs, and
building permits shall be obtained for sign structures. A permit for alteration of a sign which involves only a
change in copy, content or color and which does not involve any change in any part of the structure or lighting of
the sign itself shall not be denied on the basis that the sign is otherwise nonconforming, if such sign was erected in
accordance with applicable city ordinances. (1996 Code, sec. 12.203)
Sec. 3.09.062 Exemptions
The following shall be subject to all other requirements of this article even though a permit shall not be required
therefor:
(1) Maintenance and repairs to existing signs for which a valid permit was obtained if required at the
time of the initial installation;
(2) Repainting without the alteration of existing signs for which a valid permit was obtained if
required at the time of the initial installation;
(3) Signs for public safety and convenience or those required for the enforcement of private property
rights, such as “Entrance,” “Parking,” “No Trespassing,” or “No Parking,” provided not more than one
(1) such sign is maintained on each street, courtyard, or alley frontage on each site area and provided
such signs do not exceed 150 square inches in area in any residential zone or four (4) square feet in any
nonresidential zone;
(4) Public notice signs, such as notices to remove weeds;
(5) Flags as permitted by section 3.09.009(c);
(6) Political signs;
(7) Garage sale or estate sale signs;
(8) Lost pet signs;
(9) Real estate signs;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/385
(10) Address and security protection signs;
(11) Certain temporary window signs pursuant to section 3.09.149;
(12) Construction signs;
(13) Changes in copy or content of theater signs and off-premises signs which were not constructed in
violation of any ordinance;
(14) A temporary sign shall be permitted for a Christmas tree lot during the same period the lot is
permitted by the city. Such sign:
(A) Shall be on-premises only;
(B) Shall be placed only on the private property where the lot is permitted;
(C) Shall not be exceed eight (8) square feet in area; and
(D) Shall be subject to all other restrictions of this chapter and chapter 14.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.204)
Sec. 3.09.063 Application
Applications for sign permits shall be made in writing upon forms furnished by the building official. Such
applications shall contain the location by street and number of the proposed sign structure, as well as the name and
address of the owner and the person or business erecting the sign. Plans and specifications showing all pertinent
sign information shall be submitted with the permit application. In addition, if the erection of the sign involves
electrical wiring or connections, the electrical inspector of the city shall examine the plans and specifications for
compliance with the city's electrical code, and shall approve or disapprove prior to final approval or disapproval by
the building official. The application shall include a provision whereby the owner of the property on which the sign
is to be located consents to its erection and agrees to remove the sign and supporting structure in the event the
business so identified or whose products or services are thus described has ceased or discontinued use of the
building for a period of ninety days or more, and said owner shall sign the application. The plans and specifications
shall include the following:
(1) Two copies of a scaled drawing showing the complete elevation of the building on which the sign
is to be placed; such drawing shall include all exterior dimensions of the structure. Superimposed on this
drawing shall be the proposed sign drawn to scale showing the dimensions, type and size of lettering
and all colors to be used. The drawing shall be drawn to the following scale or as approved by the
building official:
(A) 1/4" equals 1'0" for structures up to forty feet (40') in height.
(B) 1/8" equals 1'0" for structures which exceed forty feet (40') in height.
(2) A separate drawing to a scale of 1/2" equals 1'0" of the proposed sign. This drawing shall also
contain all dimensions, size, and color of lettering.
(3) Color photographs shall be submitted showing the facade of the building on which the sign is to
be placed, together with all existing signs on the building.
(4) The drawing for all signs which are to be illuminated shall show the location of electrical outlets,
conduits, and lighting sources. The plan shall also indicate the intensity of illumination, which shall not
exceed the maximum specified herein, and the building official shall require certification thereof by a
lighting consultant or an electrical engineer.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/385
(5) The drawing shall indicate the method of fastening the sign to the building.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.205)
Sec. 3.09.064 Issuance; revocation
The building official, before granting a permit for the erection, construction, reconstruction, repair, or alteration of
any sign, will determine that the proposed sign conforms to all applicable laws and regulations, including, without
limitation, those with respect to design, construction, location and materials. Any such permit may at any time be
revoked should any of the provisions of this article be violated. (1996 Code, sec. 12.206)
Sec. 3.09.065 Effect
The granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of the provisions
of any law or regulation of the city. (1996 Code, sec. 12.207)
Sec. 3.09.066 Correction of errors; stopping of work
The granting of a permit shall not prevent the building official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in
the work or from preventing further work being done thereunder when such work is in violation of the provisions
of any regulation or law of the city. (1996 Code, sec. 12.208)
Sec. 3.09.067 Fees
(a) Permit fee. A sign permit shall not become valid until the applicant has paid to the city the appropriate fee.
There shall be no fee for alterations involving only change in copy, content or color. Valuation shall mean the total
cost of the sign or the value thereof if cost was not arrived at by transaction between independent parties.
(b) Exemptions from permit fee. A fee shall not be required for signs for which a permit is not required or for
graphics, murals, etchings, or stained or painted glass that does not have a name, mark, logo, symbol or commercial
identification attached or associated therewith.
(c) Investigation fee when work done without permit. Whenever a sign for which a permit is required has been
installed, replaced, or altered without first having obtained a permit, a special investigation consisting of inspection
of the site, communication with the owner of the property or business and review of necessary records shall be
made before a permit may be issued for such work. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be
collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The payment of such investigation fee shall not
exempt any person from compliance with all the other provisions of this chapter and chapter 14 nor from any
penalty prescribed by law.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.209)
Secs. 3.09.068–3.09.100 Reserved
Division 3. Signs in Residential Zones
Sec. 3.09.101 Generally
The regulations set forth in this division shall apply specifically to residential zones and to property utilized for
residential purposes. Only those types of signs referred to in this division may be utilized in residential zones or on
property utilized for residential purposes, except for signs referred to in section 3.09.062 hereof. (1996 Code, sec.
12.228)
Sec. 3.09.102 Real estate signs
Real estate signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area, provided that riders or additional plates not exceeding
two (2) in number and two hundred forty (240) square inches in area in the aggregate may be attached. Such
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/385
temporary signs shall be erected or constructed so that no portion thereof exceeds a height of four feet (4') from the
ground. In addition, a temporary “Open” sign, not to exceed two (2) square feet in area, may be used on the
property for a maximum of eight hours per day when the dwelling is open for public inspection. Real estate signs
must be removed not later than ten (10) days after the transaction pursuant to which the property is sold or leased is
closed. (1996 Code, sec. 12.229)
Sec. 3.09.103 Building identification signs
Building identification signs shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area. (1996 Code, sec. 12.230)
Sec. 3.09.104 Construction signs
Persons shall not erect, install, maintain or use any construction sign on nonresidential premises unless the required
building permits for new construction or remodeling have been obtained from the city and said sign conforms with
section 3.09.146 of this article. Construction signs shall not be permitted in residential zones. (1996 Code, sec.
12.231)
Sec. 3.09.105 Lighted signs
Lighted or illuminated signs are not permitted except for institutional signs. (1996 Code, sec. 12.232)
Sec. 3.09.106 Number of signs permitted
Only one sign of any type shall be permitted on any site, except for security protection signs, address signs,
permitted flags, and political signs. The aggregate area of all temporary signs, excluding the area of authorized
address signs and political signs, permitted on a lot in a residential zone shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.233)
Sec. 3.09.107 Signs inside buildings
Signs inside a residential structure, or any other building of the type intended to be covered by this article, attached
to any window or opening with the sign copy visible from the outside or otherwise so located so as to be visible
and readable without intentional and deliberate effort from outside the building or structure, shall be considered
part of the allowable sign area permitted. (1996 Code, sec. 12.234)
Sec. 3.09.108 Location, type and height of signs
Signs allowed pursuant to this division may be either ground signs or wall signs. Signs, other than address signs
and real estate signs, shall not be located less than ten feet (10') from the property line; provided, however, if an
established setback exists, and such setback is less than ten feet (10'), a sign may be placed in front of the structure
with the setback but not more than three feet (3') from such structure and not nearer the property line than the
structure. No portion of a wall sign shall be higher than eight feet (8') above grade or ground level at the wall,
whichever is higher, and no portion of a ground sign shall be higher than four feet (4') above grade or ground level
where the sign is located. Real estate signs may be located anywhere on the premises but not on the parkway or
other public property. (1996 Code, sec. 12.235)
Sec. 3.09.109 Security protection and address signs
Security protection signs shall not exceed seventy-two (72) square inches in area. Address signs shall not exceed
seventy-two (72) square inches in area and may be located anywhere on the property including the parkway. If in
the form of a separate ground sign, address signs shall not exceed a height of two feet (2'). Address signs may be
hung from or attached to a lamp post on private property, in which case the height limitation referred to would not
apply. In addition, a sign indicating the street address shall be placed at the rear of the property as required by city
ordinance. (1996 Code, sec. 12.236)
Sec. 3.09.110 Political signs
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/385
Political signs, not exceeding thirty-six (36) square feet in area or eight feet (8') in height, shall be permitted on a
residential lot, subject to the setback requirements of section 3.09.108. Such signs shall not be illuminated. Such
signs shall not have any moving parts. Such signs shall not require a permit or be subject to a fee. (1996 Code, sec.
12.237)
Sec. 3.09.111 Garage sale, estate sale and lost pet signs
Garage sale, estate sale, and lost pet signs not to exceed two (2) square feet in area, respectively, shall be permitted.
Garage and estate sale signs shall be permitted for the period during which any such sale is actually occurring; and
lost pet signs shall be permitted for the period, not to exceed ten (10) days, during which such pet remains lost.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.238)
Sec. 3.09.112 Institutional signs; scoreboards
Signs relating to schools, churches, hospitals, universities or similar institutions (and individual buildings
comprising these institutions) may be (i) wall signs limited to twenty (20) square feet in area, or (ii) ground signs
limited to fifty (50) square feet in area and four (4) feet in height. Scoreboards on school or university athletic
fields shall require a permit, shall not exceed thirty feet in height or four hundred (400) square feet in area, shall
face and be illuminated only in the direction of the athletic field, and shall be constructed and illuminated in
accordance with applicable provisions of this article and applicable provisions of the building code of the city. A
portable scoreboard may be used to score sports activities for children in public parks, on school grounds, and at
YMCA facilities provided such scoreboard can be transported and set up by a single person, is lighted only by its
internal battery, is illuminated only in the direction of the athletic field, does not exceed three feet in height plus
wheels and stand or four feet in width or seven inches in depth, and does not contain any part which moves, rotates,
flashes, reflects, blinks, or appears to do any of the foregoing or which simulates motion in any manner. A permit
shall be required for any portable sign of this nature, provided that no fee shall be required for such permit. (1996
Code, sec. 12.239)
Sec. 3.09.113 Parking facilities
Parking lots or structures located in any residential zone which has parking as an added use shall be permitted one
wall sign or one ground sign on each street upon which an entrance exists. Each sign shall conform to all the
requirements and restrictions with respect to building identification signs contained in section 3.09.103. Such sign
may have only the word “Park” or “Parking” and the name of the parking facility owner or operator, validation
information, and other messages required by law. (1996 Code, sec. 12.253(a))
Secs. 3.09.114–3.09.140 Reserved
Division 4. Signs in Nonresidential Zones
Sec. 3.09.141 Generally
The regulations set forth in this division shall apply specifically to any nonresidential zone, including commercial
and planned development zones. Only the types of signs referred to herein may be erected in such zones, except for
signs referred to in section 3.09.062 hereof. (1996 Code, sec. 12.240)
Sec. 3.09.142 Real estate signs
Real estate signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area, provided that riders or additional plates not exceeding
two (2) in number and two hundred and forty (240) square inches in area in the aggregate may be attached. Such
signs shall be erected or constructed so that no portion thereof exceeds a height of four (4) feet from the ground. In
addition, a temporary “Open” sign, not to exceed two (2) square feet in area, may be used for a maximum of eight
hours per day when the dwelling is open. Real estate signs must be removed not later than ten (10) days after the
transaction pursuant to which the property is sold or leased is closed. There shall be allowed only one real estate
sign per site. If the property to be sold or leased includes a building with glass frontage, one real estate sign not to
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/385
exceed six (6) square feet in area may be placed behind each thirty feet (30') of length of glass frontage, such sign
or signs to be in lieu of any other real estate signs on the site. (1996 Code, sec. 12.241)
Sec. 3.09.143 Street frontage, types and allowable location
(a) For the purposes of determining allowable sign location and size, a building shall be considered as facing
(fronting) or abutting, as the case may be, one street only.
(b) For the purposes of determining allowable sign location and size, a building or business shall be considered
as fronting on the street upon which the main entrance or address of such building or business is located, unless
such business shall be located within a courtyard or facing a parking area with its main public entrance fronting on
the courtyard or parking area, in which case the business shall be considered as fronting on such courtyard or
parking area. “Street frontage” shall mean the length of the wall of the building facing the street upon which it
fronts.
(c) Business and building identification signs, except for shopping center signs (section 3.09.148) and
institutional signs (section 3.09.150), shall be wall signs, provided that projecting signs may be utilized as business
signs when erected in accordance with and subject to the requirements of section 3.09.012. All other type signs
allowed by section 3.09.141 of this article may be either wall or ground signs.
(d) Wall signs shall be located as specified herein. Ground signs shall be located in nonresidential zones in the
same manner as provided for in residential zones pursuant to section 3.09.108, except for institutional signs and
shopping center signs, as provided for in sections 3.09.150 and 3.09.148, respectively.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.242)
Sec. 3.09.144 Business identification signs
Business identification signs shall comply with each and all of the following regulations:
(1) Ground floor businesses. Business identification signs shall be limited to those businesses having
ground floor street frontage, except as provided in subsection (4) hereof.
(2) Location. Business identification signs shall be limited to those portions of a building within
which such business is located, and sides of a building fronting a public street or private property under
the same ownership, which is contiguous with a public street. Such signs shall not face or abut alleys or
private property owned by others.
(3) Number and area.
(A) Except as specifically permitted herein, not more than one business identification sign shall
be permitted on a permitted side or wall of a building as to any one business located therein. Signs
located on the side of the building where its main entrance or address is located shall not exceed
two (2) square feet in area for each one foot of first story street linear frontage that such business
occupies or utilizes within a building; provided that, if such sign is one other than a sign composed
solely of individual letters, the permitted area shall be seventy-five percent (75%) of such square
footage, and in no event shall any sign exceed one hundred and twenty-five (125) square feet. A
parking area, owned by or used exclusively for or by the business requesting a sign permit, which
is located immediately and entirely underneath a second floor occupied by such business, shall be
considered part of the building and ground floor occupancy for purposes of determining the extent
of street frontage. Businesses having their main entrance or address on or abutting a parking area
shall be permitted signs as if the parking area were a street.
(B) Permitted signs located on a side of the building other than where its main entrance or
address is located shall not exceed two (2) square feet for each one linear foot of first story street
frontage that such business occupies within a building; provided that, if the sign is other than one
composed solely of individual letters, the permitted area shall be seventy-five percent (75%) of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/385
such square footage, but in no event shall a sign authorized under this subsection exceed thirty
(30) square feet in area.
(C) An additional business identification sign relating to the same business shall be permitted
for each fifty feet (50') or portion thereof of street frontage of such business for the purpose of
listing the business name, address, operating hours, and other business locations. Such signs shall
not exceed five (5) square feet in area.
(D) An additional business identification sign relating to the same business shall be permitted
adjacent to an entrance to the business if such entrance is other than on a wall or side of the
building permitted in subsection (2) of this section and provided such additional sign abuts an
alley, street, or other public right-of-way and is below a height of eight (8) feet above grade and
further provided such additional sign shall not be lighted or illuminated when facing a residential
zone, whether or not such residential zone is located across an alley, parking lot, or other such
visually open area from said additional sign. Such signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in
area.
(E) A business located on a corner of two (2) public streets and having a public entrance located
at such corner so that such public entrance directly faces neither street shall be permitted one
business identification sign at and parallel to such entrance in lieu of one business identification
sign located on a street frontage.
(4) Business located on other than ground floor. A business located above or below the ground floor
of any building shall be permitted one business identification sign at each ground floor entrance to such
business not to exceed a maximum of six (6) square feet, which sign shall be shared equally by all such
businesses desiring signage.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.243)
Sec. 3.09.145 Building identification signs
Building identification signs shall be subject to each and all of the following regulations:
(1) Location.
(A) Building identification signs shall not be permitted below eight (8) feet in height above
grade except for one sign not to exceed five (5) square feet in area adjacent to any public entrance
to such building which entrance is for access to more than one business, office, or use, and which
sign shall have identical text as other permitted building identification signs on the same building.
(B) Building identification signs shall be permitted only on the sides of building directly
fronting or abutting a public street. Such signs shall not face or abut alleys or private property,
except such property located within the boundary of the same parcel or property upon which such
sign is located and abutting a public street.
(2) Number and area. The total building identification sign area on any street side of any building
shall not exceed two percent (2%) of the vertical exterior wall area of such frontage, excluding
penthouse walls where such sign is to be located; provided that, if such sign is other than one composed
solely of individual letters, the permitted area shall be seventy-five percent (75%) of two percent (2%)
of such exterior wall. Not more than one building identification sign shall be permitted on any one wall,
side, or frontage of any building, and not more than two (2) building identification signs shall be
permitted for each building.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.244)
Sec. 3.09.146 Construction signs
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/385
Construction signs shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area or eight (8) feet in height from the ground. Not
more than one (1) such sign shall be permitted on any one site. All reference to parties involved in the construction
shall be on a single sign. Signs on dumpsters identifying the dumpster company and the necessary phone numbers
shall not exceed five (5) square feet in area each on two opposite sides of the dumpster. Signs on construction
fences identifying the fence company shall not exceed one-half (1/2) square foot in area, and shall be placed on the
construction fence in the rear yard of the property. (1996 Code, sec. 12.245)
Sec. 3.09.147 Lighted signs
Lighted or illuminated signs shall not be permitted except for building and business identification signs. Outside
exposed neon or other gas-filled luminous tube signs shall not be permitted. Hanging exposed neon tubing signs as
business identification signs will be permitted on the inside of glass show windows provided that the size of such
signs, including all outlines and delineations, shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the glass frontage
where they occur. Such signs shall be a debit against the area allowed for business identification signs and may be
allowed as an additional sign. Such signs located within a distance of five feet (5') from the window shall be subject
to the provisions of section 3.09.020. (1996 Code, sec. 12.246)
Sec. 3.09.148 Shopping center signs
One ground or wall sign naming the shopping center and/or containing its address shall be permitted if approved by
the building official as qualifying as a shopping center sign, as defined in this article, and if complying with the
provisions of this section. Such sign shall be permitted for the street on which the shopping center fronts and shall
not exceed thirty (30) square feet in area, forty-two inches (42") in height if a ground sign, or be located less than
twenty-five feet (25') above grade if a wall sign. Any such ground sign shall not extend over or on public property.
In addition, a ground or wall sign not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area may be located at the principal
entrance to the shopping center containing a directory of the businesses located within the shopping center. If a
ground sign, such sign shall not exceed forty-two inches (42") in height, and if a wall sign shall not be located less
than eight feet (8') or more than twenty feet (20') above grade. (1996 Code, sec. 12.247)
Sec. 3.09.149 Signs inside buildings
Signs, including neon signs, located inside a building or structure and not otherwise excluded from the definition of
a sign shall not obstruct more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the view or light through an opening of a building
or comprise more than twenty-five (25) percent of the glass frontage. The area of any such sign shall be calculated
in the same manner as provided for other signs in this article. Temporary window signs shall not require a permit
and shall not be included as part of the allowable sign area subject to and limited by the following:
(1) Where merchandise is physically displayed behind shop windows or otherwise in view of the
public from the street, the price of each separate item of such merchandise may be indicated in letters or
numbers not exceeding three-fourth inch (3/4") in height attached or in near proximity to the displayed
item.
(2) Where goods, services, rentals, or sales are not on physical display to the public, information
concerning such goods, services, rentals, or sales may be indicated by temporary signs, the total
aggregate area of which does not exceed ten (10) percent of the glass frontage of the business, and
provided that the total of all signs of all types inside buildings or on windows or glass frontage does not
exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the glass frontage area.
(3) When a store or business is being closed or relocated, “Closing Out Sale” or similar signs may be
displayed from inside the building facing each street on which the building fronts or abuts provided the
aggregate area of such signs does not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the area permitted for a
business identification sign pursuant to section 3.09.144, letters or numbers do not exceed twelve inches
(12") in height, and prices are not advertised. A permit for such signs shall be obtained, and any such
signs shall not be maintained for more than thirty (30) days in any consecutive 180-day period. When a
business has been relocated, a sign giving the new address of the business may be displayed inside the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/385
building for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days utilizing not more than ten (10) percent of glass the
front area.
(4) Announcements such as but not limited to available parking, acceptability of credit cards, trade
association memberships, and the like, with letters or numbers not exceeding three-fourth inch (3/4") in
height, may be displayed. Such announcements shall be limited to a total of one hundred fifty (150)
square inches facing each street on which the building fronts or abuts.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.248)
Sec. 3.09.150 Institutional signs; scoreboards
Signs relating to schools, churches, hospitals, universities or similar institutions (and individual buildings
comprising these institutions) may be (i) wall signs limited to twenty (20) square feet in area or (ii) ground signs
limited to fifty (50) square feet in area and four feet (4') in height. Scoreboards on school or university athletic
fields shall require a permit and shall be subject to the same limitations and requirements set forth in section
3.09.112 of this article. (1996 Code, sec. 12.249)
Sec. 3.09.151 Political signs
Political signs, not exceeding thirty-six (36) square feet in area or eight feet (8') in height, shall be permitted,
subject to the setback requirements of section 3.09.108. Such signs shall not be illuminated. Such signs shall not
have any moving parts. Such signs shall not require a permit or be subject to a fee. (1996 Code, sec. 12.250)
Sec. 3.09.152 Signs on construction barricades
In addition to permitted construction signs, one sign, not larger than one square foot in area, may be placed on or
adjacent to the gateway through the construction barricade stating the name and telephone number of the person to
be contacted in case of an emergency. When a business remains open while remodeling its premises, and a
construction fence is required, one sign may be placed on the construction fence adjacent to the entrance to the
business. Such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area, and such sign may state only the name of the
business and the fact that it is open for business while remodeling. One construction sign may be placed on the
construction barricade on each street on which the property fronts or abuts. Each sign shall not exceed the
limitations set forth in section 3.09.146 and shall be in lieu of any other construction signs. (1996 Code, sec.
12.251)
Sec. 3.09.153 Theaters
(a) Theaters shall be allowed signs on permanent, fixed marquees. Such signs shall not exceed 10% of the front
elevation of the theater and in no case shall such sign exceed 120 square feet in area.
(b) For the purposes of a theater, a product or service sign may include the name of the production, the names of
the people associated with the production (such as stars, producer, director, etc.), the type of performance (such as
premiere, reserved seat, etc.), the duration of the production and the time of the performances.
(c) If a production is not in progress, a product or service sign may include the name of the next production and
the date such production shall be open to the public. Such sign shall not be installed or maintained more than thirty
(30) days prior to the date when such production shall be open to the public.
(d) For the purposes of this section, the term “theater” shall include multiple theaters contained in the same
building or structure being operated as a single business. In such circumstances, the multiple theaters shall be
deemed to be only one “theater.”
(1996 Code, sec. 12.252)
Sec. 3.09.154 Parking facilities
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/385
A parking facility in a nonresidential zone shall be permitted not more than one ground, wall sign or projecting sign
(pursuant to section 3.09.012(a)) adjacent to any street upon which an entrance exists. Such sign shall not exceed
twenty (20) square feet of area on each face and shall not be higher than twenty feet (20') above grade if a wall sign
or forty-two inches (42") in height if a ground sign. Such sign may have only the word “Park” or “Parking” and the
name of the parking facility owner or operator validation information, and other messages required by law. (1996
Code, sec. 12.253(b))
Sec. 3.09.155 Signs on projecting overhangs and awnings
Signs or information on projecting overhangs and awnings allowed pursuant to the provisions of section 3.09.013
shall be permitted in nonresidential zones in addition to the other types of signs allowed under this division, but
shall be included as part of the permissible area for a sign or signs with respect to either permissible area on a side
of a building or total sign area allowed on a site. Signs on projecting overhangs and awnings shall not, however, be
counted as additional signs with respect to the number of signs allowed if they are limited to name of business and
address, and the letters or numbers thereof do not exceed seven inches (7") in height. (1996 Code, sec. 12.254)
Sec. 3.09.156 Service stations
Business identification signs for gasoline service stations shall be limited to three (3) wall signs, each of which
shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area and which may be located, respectively, on the sides and front of
any portion of the facility comprising the particular service station, including any structure or covered area separate
from the main office or building. Any such area or structure which is an extension from the main building shall be
considered as an awning or marquee for purposes of maximum size of letters and prohibition of extension of signs
above and below marquees or awnings. In addition, one price sign shall be permitted for any one service station.
Lettering will be allowed on both sign faces, and no such sign shall exceed eight (8) square feet in area. Sign
placement shall be such that the sign shall be located within a line (vertical plane) established by the roofed
building area, but not on public property. (1996 Code, sec. 12.255)
Secs. 3.09.157–3.09.190 Reserved
Division 5. Special Sign Districts
Sec. 3.09.191 Authorized; establishment
The urban design and development committee may consider a recommendation for a special exception to this
article when submitted by the owner or owners of a particular, clearly defined, and identifiable commercial or retail
area, such as a shopping center, to provide signage for such area as part of an overall graphics program. Such
request shall be accompanied by a plan which shall provide such details and specifications as the committee may
reasonably require, including information with respect to ownership of the land, and proposed lighting, type,
location, and size of signs. The area for which the graphics program is proposed shall not contain noncontiguous
tracts. If, in the opinion of the urban design and development committee, such graphics program will result in the
signage appearance of the area being beneficial to the public health, safety and general welfare and in the interest of
the city, said committee shall recommend to the city council that a special sign district be established for such area
permitting signs and other graphics in accordance with the plan or program submitted to the committee. After
notice and public hearing, the city council may by ordinance create such a district. (1996 Code, sec. 12.258)
Sec. 3.09.192 List of districts
(a) A special sign district applicable to the University Campus (UC-1) zoning district was established.
(b) A special sign district applicable to the Plaza at the University Park was established.
(c) A special sign district applicable to Park Cities Plaza, a commercial or retail area/shopping center located at
northeast corner of Airline Road and Mockingbird, was established.
(d) A special sign district applicable to Highland Park High School was established.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/385
(e) A special sign district applicable to the University Campus (UC-1) and University Campus (UC-2) was
established.
(f) A special sign district applicable to the Fidelity Bank was established.
(g) A special sign district applicable to the Preston Center Plaza was established.
(h) A special sign district applicable to the Highland Park Presbyterian Church was established.
(i) A special sign district applicable to the Park Cities Baptist Church was established.
(1996 Code, sec. 12.259)
(j) A special sign district applicable to the Highland Park High School was established. (Ordinance 14/006
adopted 3/4/14)
(k) A special sign district applicable to the Park Cities Family YMCA was established. (Ordinance 16/013
adopted 7/5/16)
ARTICLE 3.10 SATELLITE ANTENNAS
Sec. 3.10.001 Definition
Satellite antenna. Any parabolic or dish antenna used to receive television signals from satellite broadcast systems.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.2101)
Sec. 3.10.002 Standards
Satellite antennas shall have the same setback requirements as an accessory structure in the zoning district in which
they are installed. Satellite antennas shall be installed at ground level with a maximum dish diameter of seven (7)
feet. Satellite dish antennas shall be totally screened from view from adjoining properties by a solid fence or wall.
All such antennas shall be constructed of wire mesh and painted with nonreflective coating. (1996 Code, sec.
3.2102)
Sec. 3.10.003 Exceptions
(a) Public or educational facilities. Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the installation and
maintenance of satellite antennas necessary for the operation of public or educational facilities for the protection of
health, safety and welfare of the community and the enhancement of the educational facilities. Plans for such
satellite antennas shall be reviewed and approved by the public works director.
(b) Antennas less than 24 inches in diameter. Satellite dish antennas with a diameter less than twenty-four (24)
inches shall be constructed with a neutral colored solid material and may be installed above ground level provided
they are not generally visible from the street.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.2103)
ARTICLE 3.11 IRRIGATION SYSTEMS*
Sec. 3.11.001 Definitions
The following words and terms, when used in this article, have the following meanings, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
Air gap. A complete physical separation between the free-flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline
and an open or non-pressure-receiving vessel.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/385
Atmospheric vacuum breaker. An assembly containing an air inlet valve, a check seat, and an air inlet port. The
flow of water into the body causes the air inlet valve to close the air inlet port. When the flow of water stops the air
inlet valve falls and forms a check against backsiphonage. At the same time, it opens the air inlet port allowing air
to enter and satisfy the vacuum. Also known as an atmospheric vacuum breaker backsiphonage prevention
assembly.
Backflow prevention. The mechanical prevention of reverse flow, or backsiphonage, of nonpotable water from an
irrigation system into the potable water source.
Backflow prevention assembly. Any assembly used to prevent backflow into a potable water system. The type of
assembly used is based on the existing or potential degree of health hazard and backflow condition.
Completion of irrigation system installation. When the landscape irrigation system has been installed, all minimum
standards met, all tests performed, and the irrigator is satisfied that the system is operating correctly.
Consulting. The act of providing advice, guidance, review or recommendations related to landscape irrigation
systems.
Cross-connection. An actual or potential connection between a potable water source and an irrigation system that
may contain contaminates or pollutants or any source of water that has been treated to a lesser degree in the
treatment process.
Design. The act of determining the various elements of a landscape irrigation system that will include, but not be
limited to, elements such as collecting site-specific information, defining the scope of the project, defining plant
watering needs, selecting and laying out emission devices, locating system components, conducting hydraulics
calculations, identifying any local regulatory requirements, or scheduling irrigation work at a site. Completion of
the various components will result in an irrigation plan.
Design pressure. The pressure that is required for an emission device to operate properly. Design pressure is
calculated by adding the operating pressure necessary at an emission device to the total of all pressure losses
accumulated from an emission device to the water source.
Double check valve. An assembly that is composed of two independently acting, approved check valves, including
tightly closed resilient seated shut-off valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located
resilient seated test cocks. Also known as a double check valve backflow prevention assembly.
Emission device. Any device that is contained within an irrigation system and that is used to apply water. Common
emission devices in an irrigation system include, but are not limited to, spray and rotary sprinkler heads, and drip
irrigation emitters.
Employed. Engaged or hired to provide consulting services or perform any activity relating to the sale, design,
installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service to irrigation systems. A person is employed if that person is
in an employer-employee relationship as defined by Internal Revenue Code, 26 United States Code Service, section
3212(d), based on the behavioral control, financial control, and the type of relationship involved in performing
employment-related tasks.
Head-to-head spacing. The spacing of spray or rotary heads equal to the manufacturer's published radius of the
head.
Health hazard. A cross-connection or potential cross-connection with an irrigation system that involves any
substance that may, if introduced into the potable water supply, cause death or illness, spread disease, or have a
high probability of causing such effects.
Hydraulics. The science of dynamic and static water; the mathematical computation of determining pressure losses
and pressure requirements of an irrigation system.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/385
Inspector. A licensed plumbing inspector, water district operator, other governmental entity, or irrigation inspector
who inspects irrigation systems and performs other enforcement duties for a municipality or water district as an
employee or as a contractor.
Installer. A person who actually connects an irrigation system to a private or public raw or potable water supply
system or any water supply, who is licensed according to title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 30 (relating
to occupational licenses and registrations).
Irrigation inspector. A person who inspects irrigation systems and performs other enforcement duties for a
municipality or water district as an employee or as a contractor and is required to be licensed under title 30, Texas
Administrative Code, chapter 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations).
Irrigation plan. A scaled drawing of a landscape irrigation system which lists required information and the scope of
the project, and represents the changes made in the installation of the irrigation system.
Irrigation services. Selling, designing, installing, maintaining, altering, repairing, servicing, permitting, providing
consulting services regarding, or connecting an irrigation system to a water supply.
Irrigation system. An assembly of component parts that is permanently installed for the controlled distribution and
conservation of water to irrigate any type of landscape vegetation in any location, and/or to reduce dust or control
erosion. This term does not include a system that is used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by Texas
Agricultural Code, section 251.002.
Irrigation technician. A person who works under the supervision of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter,
repair, service or supervise installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system in or to a
private or public raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is required to be licensed under
title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations).
Irrigation zone. A subdivision of an irrigation system with a matched precipitation rate based on plant material type
(such as turf, shrubs, or trees), microclimate factors (such as sun/shade ratio), topographic features (such as slope)
and soil conditions (such as sand, loam, clay, or combination), or for hydrological control.
Irrigator. A person who sells, designs, offers consultations regarding, installs, maintains, alters, repairs, services or
supervises the installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system to a private or public
raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is required to be licensed under title 30, Texas
Administrative Code, chapter 30.
Irrigator-in-charge. The irrigator responsible for all irrigation work performed by an exempt business owner,
including but not limited to obtaining permits, developing design plans, supervising the work of other irrigators or
irrigation technicians, and installing, selling, maintaining, altering, repairing, or servicing a landscape irrigation
system.
Landscape irrigation. The science of applying the necessary amount of water to promote or sustain healthy growth
of plant material or turf.
License. An occupational license that is issued by the state commission on environmental quality under title 30,
Texas Administrative Code, chapter 30, to an individual, that authorizes the individual to engage in an activity that
is covered by title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 30.
Mainline. A pipe within an irrigation system that delivers water from the water source to the individual zone
valves.
Maintenance checklist. A document made available to the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative that
contains information regarding the operation and maintenance of the irrigation system, including but not limited to
checking and repairing the irrigation system, setting the automatic controller, checking the rain or moisture sensor,
cleaning filters, pruning grass and plants away from irrigation emitters, using and operating the irrigation system,
the precipitation rates of each irrigation zone within the system, any water conservation measures currently in
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/385
effect from the water purveyor, the name of the water purveyor, a suggested seasonal or monthly watering schedule
based on current evapotranspiration data for the geographic region, and the minimum water requirements for the
plant material in each zone based on the soil type and plant material where the system is installed.
Major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service. Any activity that involves opening to the atmosphere the
irrigation mainline at any point prior to the discharge side of any irrigation zone control valve. This includes, but is
not limited to, repairing or connecting into a main supply pipe, replacing a zone control valve, or repairing a zone
control valve in a manner that opens the system to the atmosphere.
Master valve. A remote control valve located after the backflow prevention device that controls the flow of water to
the irrigation system mainline.
Matched precipitation rate. The condition in which all sprinkler heads within an irrigation zone apply water at the
same rate.
New installation. An irrigation system installed at a location where one did not previously exist.
Pass-through contract. A written contract between a contractor or builder and a licensed irrigator or exempt
business owner to perform part or all of the irrigation services relating to an irrigation system.
Potable water. Water that is suitable for human consumption.
Pressure vacuum breaker. An assembly containing an independently operating internally loaded check valve and an
independently operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. Also known as a
pressure vacuum breaker backsiphonage prevention assembly.
Reclaimed water. Domestic or municipal wastewater which has been treated to a quality suitable for beneficial use,
such as landscape irrigation.
Records of landscape irrigation activities. The irrigation plans, contracts, warranty information, invoices, copies of
permits, and other documents that relate to the installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of a landscape
irrigation system.
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. An assembly containing two independently acting
approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating mechanically independent pressure differential relief
valve located between the two check valves and below the first check valve.
Static water pressure. The pressure of water when it is not moving.
Supervision. The on-the-job oversight and direction by a licensed irrigator who is fulfilling his or her professional
responsibility to the client and/or employer in compliance with local or state requirements. Also, a licensed installer
working under the direction of a licensed irrigator or, beginning January 1, 2009, an irrigation technician who is
working under the direction of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair or service an irrigation system.
Water conservation. The design, installation, service, and operation of an irrigation system in a manner that
prevents the waste of water, promotes the most efficient use of water, and applies the least amount of water that is
required to maintain healthy individual plant material or turf, reduce dust, and control erosion.
Zone flow. A measurement, in gallons per minute or gallons per hour, of the actual flow of water through a zone
valve, calculated by individually opening each zone valve and obtaining a valid reading after the pressure has
stabilized. For design purposes, the zone flow is the total flow of all nozzles in the zone at a specific pressure.
Zone valve. An automatic valve that controls a single zone of a landscape irrigation system.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.2201)
Sec. 3.11.002 Penalty; additional remedies
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/385
(a) The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this article as may be required by
governing law. Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply
therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, is subject to suit for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for
criminal violations. Any violation of this article is declared to be a nuisance.
(b) Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not exceeding
$2,000.00 for each offense. Each day that a provision of this article is violated shall be deemed a separate offense.
The city shall enforce the provisions of this article and to seek remedies as allowed by law, including but not
limited to the following:
(1) Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates this article or to require specific conduct
that is necessary for compliance with this article; and
(2) Other available relief.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.2219; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.11.003 Enforcement generally; unsafe equipment
(a) Enforcement.
(1) The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this code.
For such purposes he shall have the powers of a law enforcement officer.
(2) The building official shall have the power to render interpretations of this code and to adopt and
enforce rules and regulations supplemental to this code as he may deem necessary in order to clarify the
application of the provisions of this code. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in
conformity with the intent and purpose of this code.
(3) Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this code, the building official
may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing
such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop until authorized by the building official
to proceed with the work.
(4) The building official or his authorized representative shall have the authority to disconnect the
water service to any equipment regulated by this code, where necessary to eliminate an immediate
hazard to life or health.
(5) No person shall make connections to a water service where a disconnection order has been issued
until the building official authorizes the reconnection and use of said equipment.
(b) Unsafe equipment. Any equipment regulated by this code which is unsafe or which constitutes a health
hazard or is otherwise dangerous to human life shall be declared a public nuisance and shall be abated as prescribed
in article 3.03 of the Code of Ordinances.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.2215)
Sec. 3.11.004 Duties of city irrigation inspectors
A licensed irrigation inspector or licensed plumbing inspector shall enforce the codes and ordinances of the city,
and shall be responsible for:
(1) Verifying that the appropriate permits have been obtained for an irrigation system and that the
irrigator and installer or irrigation technician, if applicable, are licensed;
(2) Inspecting the irrigation system;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/385
(3) Determining that the irrigation system complies with the requirements of this article;
(4) Determining that the appropriate backflow prevention device was installed and tested, and test
results provided to the city;
(5) Investigating complaints related to irrigation system installation, maintenance, alteration;
(6) Maintaining records according to this article.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.2216)
Sec. 3.11.005 Applicability of state law
Any item not covered by this article and required by law shall be governed by the Texas Occupations Code, the
Texas Water Code, title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code, and any other applicable state statute or state
commission on environmental quality rule. (1996 Code, sec. 3.2217)
Sec. 3.11.006 Installer's license
(a) Required. Any person who connects an irrigation system to the water supply within the city must hold a valid
license, as defined by title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 30, and required by chapter 1903 of the Texas
Occupations Code, or as defined by chapter 365, title 22 of the Texas Administrative Code and required by chapter
1301 of the Texas Occupations Code.
(b) Exemptions. A property owner is not required to be licensed, in accordance with Texas Occupations Code,
title 12, section 1903.002(c)(1), if he or she is performing irrigation work in a building or on premises owned or
occupied by the person as the person's home. A home or property owner who installs an irrigation system must
meet the standards contained in title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 344, regarding spacing, water
pressure, spraying water over impervious materials, rain or moisture shut-off devices or other technology, backflow
prevention and isolation valves. The city may, at any point, adopt more stringent requirements for a home or
property owner who installs an irrigation system. See Texas Occupations Code section 1903.002 for other
exemptions to the licensing requirement.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.2202)
Sec. 3.11.007 Permit required; application
(a) Required. Any person installing, altering, or replacing an irrigation system within the city is required to
obtain a permit from the city for each separate premises on which a system will be located. Any plan approved for a
permit must be in compliance with the requirements of this article.
(b) Application. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form
furnished by the community development department for that purpose. Every such application shall:
(1) Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made;
(2) Be fully completed;
(3) Be signed by a registered licensee or his authorized agent; and
(4) Be accompanied by the permit fee required by the master fee resolution.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.2203)
Sec. 3.11.008 Permit fees
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/385
The city council may create a schedule of fees for obtaining and renewing an irrigation permit. These fees will be
in amounts sufficient to cover the city's costs in issuing and renewing the permits, including but not limited to staff
time and other overhead costs. (1996 Code, sec. 3.2218)
Sec. 3.11.009 Backflow prevention methods and devices
(a) Any irrigation system that is connected to the potable water supply must be connected through a backflow
prevention method approved by the state commission on environmental quality (TCEQ). The backflow prevention
device must comply with the International Plumbing Code and must be certified by the American Society of
Sanitary Engineers (ASSE); or the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University
of Southern California; or the International Code Council - Evaluation Service (ICC-ES); or the International
Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials - Research and Testing (IAPMO R&T); or any other certifying
agency that has equivalent capabilities for both the laboratory and field evaluation of backflow prevention
assemblies.
(b) If conditions that present a health hazard exist, one of the following methods must be used to prevent
backflow:
(1) An air gap may be used if:
(A) There is an unobstructed physical separation; and
(B) The distance from the lowest point of the water supply outlet to the flood rim of the fixture
or assembly into which the outlet discharges is at least one inch or twice the diameter of the water
supply outlet, whichever is greater.
(2) Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies may be used if:
(A) The device is installed at a minimum of 12 inches above ground in a location that will
ensure that the assembly will not be submerged; and
(B) Drainage is provided for any water that may be discharged through the assembly relief
valve.
(3) Pressure vacuum breakers may be used if:
(A) No backpressure condition will occur; and
(B) The device is installed at a minimum of 12 inches above any downstream piping and the
highest downstream opening. Pop-up sprinklers are measured from the retracted position from the
top of the sprinkler.
(4) Atmospheric vacuum breakers may be used if:
(A) No backpressure will be present;
(B) There are no shut-off valves downstream from the atmospheric vacuum breaker;
(C) The device is installed at a minimum of six inches above any downstream piping and the
highest downstream opening. Pop-up sprinklers are measured from the retracted position from the
top of the sprinkler;
(D) There is no continuous pressure on the supply side of the atmospheric vacuum breaker for
more than 12 hours in any 24-hour period; and
(E) A separate atmospheric vacuum breaker is installed on the discharge side of each irrigation
control valve, between the valve and all the emission devices that the valve controls.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/385
(c) Backflow prevention devices used in applications designated as health hazards must be tested upon
installation and annually thereafter.
(d) If there are no conditions that present a health hazard, double check valve backflow prevention assemblies
may be used to prevent backflow if the device is tested upon installation and test cocks are used for testing only.
(e) If a double check valve is installed below ground:
(1) Test cocks must be plugged, except when the double check valve is being tested;
(2) Test cock plugs must be threaded, watertight, and made of nonferrous material;
(3) A Y-type strainer is installed on the inlet side of the double check valve;
(4) There must be a clearance between any fill material and the bottom of the double check valve to
allow space for testing and repair; and
(5) There must be space on the side of the double check valve to test and repair the double check
valve.
(f) If an existing irrigation system without a backflow prevention assembly requires major maintenance,
alteration, repair, or service, the system must be connected to the potable water supply through an approved,
properly installed backflow prevention method before any major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service is
performed.
(g) If an irrigation system is connected to a potable water supply through a double check valve, pressure vacuum
breaker, or reduced pressure principle backflow assembly and includes an automatic master valve on the system,
the automatic master valve must be installed on the discharge side of the backflow prevention assembly.
(h) The irrigator shall ensure the backflow prevention device is tested by a licensed backflow prevention
assembly tester prior to being placed in service and the test results provided to the local water purveyor and the
irrigation system's owner or owner's representative within ten business days of testing of the backflow prevention
device.
(i) The backflow prevention assembly must be accessible from a public right-of-way without having to pass
through a gate, door or other structure that would prevent access for testing. If necessary, the fence may be offset to
accommodate this requirement. The double check assembly shall be installed on private property in a precast
concrete or plastic vault with a removable lid. The vault shall be of sufficient size to allow the testing and/or repair
and replacement of the assembly without having to remove the entire vault. Six (6) inches of pea gravel shall be
placed beneath but not within one (1) inch of the double check assembly in the entire vault area.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.2204)
Sec. 3.11.010 Specific backflow prevention requirements; premises with on-site sewage facility
(a) Before any chemical is added to an irrigation system connected to the potable water supply, the irrigation
system must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or air gap.
(b) Connection of any additional water source to an irrigation system that is connected to the potable water
supply can only be done if the irrigation system is connected to the potable water supply through a reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or an air gap.
(c) Irrigation system components with chemical additives induced by aspiration, injection, or emission system
connected to any potable water supply must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow device.
(d) If an irrigation system is designed or installed on a property that is served by an on-site sewage facility, as
defined in title 30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 285, then:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/385
(1) All irrigation piping and valves must meet the separation distances from the on-site sewage
facilities system as required for a private water line in title 30, Texas Administrative Code, section
285.91(10);
(2) Any connections using a private or public potable water source that is not the city's potable water
system must be connected to the water source through a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
assembly as defined in title 30, Texas Administrative Code, section 344.50; and
(3) Any water from the irrigation system that is applied to the surface of the area utilized by the onsite
sewage facility system must be controlled on a separate irrigation zone or zones so as to allow
complete control of any irrigation to that area so that there will not be excess water that would prevent
the on-site sewage facilities system from operating effectively.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.2205)
Sec. 3.11.011 Water conservation; operation during freezing temperatures
(a) All irrigation systems shall be designed, installed, maintained, altered, repaired, serviced, and operated in a
manner that will promote water conservation as defined in section 3.11.001.
(b) It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person owning or operating a lawn sprinkler system within the
city, including a person in charge of premises belonging to an organization, to cause, suffer, or permit the operation
and engagement of such a system when the outside air temperature on the premises is at or below freezing (32°F or
0°C) or to permit water to spray or run off from said system to freeze onto any street, alley, or sidewalk of the city.
The creation of such a dangerous condition is hereby determined and declared to be a nuisance per se and is subject
to redress and abatement by the city, and subject to a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars for each offense.
(Ordinance 10/19 adopted 6/15/10)
Sec. 3.11.012 Irrigation plan
(a) An irrigator shall prepare an irrigation plan for each site where a new irrigation system will be installed. A
paper or electronic copy of the irrigation plan must be on the job site at all times during the installation of the
irrigation system. A drawing showing the actual installation of the system is due to each irrigation system owner
after all new irrigation system installations. During the installation of the irrigation system, variances from the
original plan may be authorized by the licensed irrigator if the variance from the plan does not:
(1) Diminish the operational integrity of the irrigation system;
(2) Violate any requirements of this article; and
(3) Go unnoted in red on the irrigation plan.
(b) The irrigation plan must include complete coverage of the area to be irrigated. If a system does not provide
complete coverage of the area to be irrigated, it must be noted on the irrigation plan.
(c) All irrigation plans used for construction must be drawn to scale. The plan must include, at a minimum, the
following information:
(1) The irrigator's seal, signature, and date of signing;
(2) All major physical features and the boundaries of the areas to be watered;
(3) A north arrow;
(4) A legend;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/385
(5) The zone flow measurement for each zone;
(6) Location and type of each:
(A) Controller; and
(B) Sensor (for example, but not limited to, rain, moisture, wind, flow, or freeze);
(7) Location, type, and size of each:
(A) Water source, such as but not limited to a water meter and point(s) of connection;
(B) Backflow prevention device;
(C) Water emission device, including but not limited to spray heads, rotary sprinkler heads,
quick-couplers, bubblers, drip, or micro-sprays;
(D) Valve, including but not limited to zone valves, master valves, and isolation valves;
(E) Pressure regulation component; and
(F) Mainline and lateral piping;
(8) The scale used; and
(9) The design pressure.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.2207)
Sec. 3.11.013 Design and installation requirements
(a) Component performance limitations. No irrigation design or installation shall require the use of any
component, including the water meter, in a way which exceeds the manufacturer's published performance
limitations for the component.
(b) Emission devices.
(1) The maximum spacing between emission devices must not exceed the manufacturer's published
radius or spacing of the device(s). The radius or spacing is determined by referring to the manufacturer's
published specifications for a specific emission device at a specific operating pressure.
(2) New irrigation systems shall not utilize above-ground spray emission devices in landscapes that
are less than 48 inches not including the impervious surfaces in either length or width and which contain
impervious pedestrian or vehicular traffic surfaces along two or more perimeters. If pop-up sprays or
rotary sprinkler heads are used in a new irrigation system, the sprinkler heads must direct flow away
from any adjacent surface and shall not be installed closer than four inches from a hardscape, such as,
but not limited to, a building foundation, fence, concrete, asphalt, pavers, or stones set with mortar.
(3) Narrow paved walkways, jogging paths, golf cart paths or other small areas located in cemeteries,
parks, golf courses or other public areas may be exempted from this requirement if the runoff drains into
a landscaped area.
(c) Water pressure. Emission devices must be installed to operate at the minimum and not above the maximum
sprinkler head pressure as published by the manufacturer for the nozzle and head spacing that is used. Methods to
achieve the water pressure requirements include, but are not limited to, flow control valves, a pressure regulator, or
pressure compensating spray heads.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/385
(d) Piping. Piping in irrigation systems must be designed and installed so that the flow of water in the pipe will
not exceed a velocity of five feet per second for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe.
(e) Irrigation zones. Irrigation systems shall have separate zones based on plant material type, microclimate
factors, topographic features, soil conditions, and hydrological requirements.
(f) Matched precipitation rate. Zones must be designed and installed so that all of the emission devices in that
zone irrigate at the same precipitation rate.
(g) Spraying over impervious materials. Irrigation systems shall not spray water over surfaces made of concrete,
asphalt, brick, wood, stones set with mortar, or any other impervious material, such as, but not limited to, walls,
fences, sidewalks, streets, etc.
(h) Master valve. When provided, a master valve shall be installed on the discharge side of the backflow
prevention device on all new installations.
(i) PVC pipe primer solvent. All new irrigation systems that are installed using PVC pipe and fittings shall be
primed with a colored primer prior to applying the PVC cement in accordance with the International Plumbing
Code (section 605).
(j) Rain, freeze or moisture shut-off devices or other technology. All new automatically controlled irrigation
systems must include sensors or other technology designed to inhibit or interrupt operation of the irrigation system
during periods of moisture, freeze or rainfall. Rain, freeze or moisture shut-off technology must be installed
according to the manufacturer's published recommendations. Repairs to existing automatic irrigation systems that
require replacement of an existing controller must include a sensor or other technology designed to inhibit or
interrupt operation of the irrigation system during periods of moisture or rainfall.
(k) Isolation valve. All new irrigation systems must include an isolation valve between the water meter and the
backflow prevention device.
(l) Depth coverage of piping. Piping in all irrigation systems must be installed according to the manufacturer's
published specifications for depth coverage of piping.
(1) If the manufacturer has not published specifications for depth coverage of piping, the piping must
be installed to provide minimum depth coverage of six inches of select backfill, between the top of the
pipe and the natural grade of the topsoil. All portions of the irrigation system that fail to meet this
standard must be noted on the irrigation plan. If the area being irrigated has rock at a depth of six inches
or less, select backfill may be mounded over the pipe. Mounding must be noted on the irrigation plan
and discussed with the irrigation system owner or owner's representative to address any safety issues.
(2) If a utility, man-made structure, or roots create an unavoidable obstacle which makes the six-inch
depth coverage requirement impractical, the piping shall be installed to provide a minimum of two
inches of select backfill between the top of the pipe and the natural grade of the topsoil.
(3) All trenches and holes created during installation of an irrigation system must be backfilled and
compacted to the original grade.
(m) Electrical wiring.
(1) Underground electrical wiring used to connect an automatic controller to any electrical component
of the irrigation system must be listed by Underwriters' Laboratories as acceptable for burial
underground.
(2) Electrical wiring that connects any electrical components of an irrigation system must be sized
according to the manufacturer's recommendation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/385
(3) Electrical wire splices which may be exposed to moisture must be waterproof as certified by the
wire splice manufacturer.
(4) Underground electrical wiring that connects an automatic controller to any electrical component
of the irrigation system must be buried with a minimum of six inches of select backfill.
(n) Connection of domestic water usage prohibited. Water contained within the piping of an irrigation system is
deemed to be nonpotable. No drinking or domestic water usage, such as, but not limited to, filling swimming pools
or, [sic] shall be connected to an irrigation system.
(o) Supervision of installation. Beginning January 1, 2010, either a licensed irrigator or a licensed irrigation
technician shall be on-site at all times while the landscape irrigation system is being installed. When an irrigator is
not on-site, the irrigator shall be responsible for ensuring that a licensed irrigation technician is on-site to supervise
the installation of the irrigation system.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.2208)
Sec. 3.11.014 Responsibilities of installer upon completion of installation
Upon completion of the irrigation system, the irrigator or irrigation technician who provided supervision for the onsite
installation shall be required to complete four items:
(1) A final walk-through with the irrigation system's owner or the owner's representative to explain
the operation of the system;
(2) The maintenance checklist, on which the irrigator or irrigation technician shall obtain the
signature of the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative and sign, date, and seal the checklist.
If the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative is unwilling or unable to sign the maintenance
checklist, the irrigator shall note the time and date of the refusal on the irrigation system's owner's or
owner's representative's signature line. The irrigation system owner or owner's representative will be
given the original maintenance checklist and a duplicate copy of the maintenance checklist shall be
maintained by the irrigator. The items on the maintenance checklist shall include but are not limited to:
(A) The manufacturer's manual for the automatic controller, if the system is automatic;
(B) A seasonal (spring, summer, fall, winter) watering schedule based on either current/real time
evapotranspiration or monthly historical reference evapotranspiration (historical ET) data, monthly
effective rainfall estimates, plant landscape coefficient factors, and site factors;
(C) A list of components, such as the nozzle, or pump filters, and other such components that
require maintenance and the recommended frequency for the service; and
(D) The statement, “This irrigation system has been installed in accordance with all applicable
state and local laws, ordinances, rules, regulations or orders. I have tested the system and
determined that it has been installed according to the irrigation plan and is properly adjusted for
the most efficient application of water at this time.”
(3) A permanent sticker which contains the irrigator's name, license number, company name,
telephone number and the dates of the warranty period shall be affixed to each automatic controller
installed by the irrigator or irrigation technician. If the irrigation system is manual, the sticker shall be
affixed to the original maintenance checklist. The information contained on the sticker must be printed
with waterproof ink and include: [sic]
(4) The irrigation plan indicating the actual installation of the system must be provided to the
irrigation system's owner or owner's representative.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.2209)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/385
Sec. 3.11.015 Maintenance, alteration, repair or service
(a) The licensed irrigator is responsible for all work that the irrigator performed during the maintenance,
alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system during the warranty period. The irrigator or business owner is
not responsible for the professional negligence of any other irrigator who subsequently conducts any irrigation
service on the same irrigation system.
(b) All trenches and holes created during the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system
must be returned to the original grade with compacted select backfill.
(c) Colored PVC pipe primer solvent must be used on all pipes and fittings used in the maintenance, alteration,
repair, or service of an irrigation system in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code (section 316) or the
International Plumbing Code (section 605).
(d) When maintenance, alteration, repair or service of an irrigation system involves excavation work at the water
meter or backflow prevention device, an isolation valve shall be installed, if an isolation valve is not present.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.2210)
Sec. 3.11.016 Use of reclaimed water
Reclaimed water may be utilized in landscape irrigation systems if:
(1) There is no direct contact with edible crops, unless the crop is pasteurized before consumption;
(2) The irrigation system does not spray water across property lines that do not belong to the
irrigation system's owner;
(3) The irrigation system is installed using purple components;
(4) The domestic potable water line is connected using an air gap or a reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention device, in accordance with title 30, Texas Administrative Code, section 290.47(i)
(relating to appendices);
(5) A minimum of an eight-inch by eight-inch sign, in English and Spanish, is prominently posted
on/in the area that is being irrigated, that reads, “Reclaimed Water - Do Not Drink” and “Agua De
Recuperacion - No Beber”; and
(6) Backflow prevention on the reclaimed water supply line shall be in accordance with the
regulations of the city's water provider.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.2211)
Sec. 3.11.017 Display of license number and other information by licensees
(a) All vehicles used in the performance of irrigation installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service must
display the irrigator's license number in the form of “LI ____” in a contrasting color of block letters at least two
inches high, on both sides of the vehicle.
(b) All forms of written and electronic advertisements for irrigation services must display the irrigator's license
number in the form of “LI ____.” Any form of advertisement, including business cards, and estimates which
display an entity's or individual's name other than that of the licensed irrigator must also display the name of the
licensed irrigator and the licensed irrigator's license number. Trailers that advertise irrigation services must display
the irrigator's license number.
(c) The name, mailing address, and telephone number of the commission must be prominently displayed on a
legible sign and displayed in plain view for the purpose of addressing complaints where irrigation business is
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/385
primarily conducted and irrigation records [sic]
(1996 Code, sec. 3.2212)
Sec. 3.11.018 Contracts
(a) All contracts to install an irrigation system must be in writing and signed by each party and must specify the
irrigator's name, license number, business address, current business telephone numbers, the date that each party
signed the agreement, the total agreed price, and must contain the statement, “Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), MC-178, P.O. Box 13087, Austin, Texas 78711-3087.
TCEQ's website is: www.tceq.state.tx.us.” All contracts must include the irrigator's seal, signature, and date.
(b) All written estimates, proposals, bids, and invoices relating to the installation or repair of an irrigation
system(s) must include the irrigator's name, license number, business address, current business telephone
number(s), and the statement: “Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
(TCEQ) (MC-178), P.O. Box 13087, Austin, Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ's website is: www.tceq.state.tx.us.”
(c) An individual who agrees by contract to provide irrigation services as defined in title 30, Texas
Administrative Code, section 344.30 (relating to license required) shall hold an irrigator license issued under title
30, Texas Administrative Code, chapter 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations) unless the contract
is a pass-through contract as defined in title 30, Texas Administrative Code, section 344.1(36) (relating to
definitions). If a pass-through contract includes irrigation services, then the irrigation portion of the contract can
only be performed by a licensed irrigator. If an irrigator installs a system pursuant to a pass-through contract, the
irrigator shall still be responsible for providing the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative a copy of the
warranty and all other documents required under this article. A pass-through contract must identify by name and
license number the irrigator that will perform the work and must provide a mechanism for contacting the irrigator
for irrigation.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.2213)
Sec. 3.11.019 Warranties
(a) On all installations of new irrigation systems, an irrigator shall present the irrigation system's owner or
owner's representative with a written warranty covering materials and labor furnished in the new installation of the
irrigation system. The irrigator shall be responsible for adhering to terms of the warranty. If the irrigator's warranty
is less than the manufacturer's warranty for the system components, then the irrigator shall provide the irrigation
system's owner or the owner's representative with applicable information regarding the manufacturer's warranty
period. The warranty must include the irrigator's seal, signature, and date. If the warranty is part of an irrigator's
contract, a separate warranty document is not required.
(b) An irrigator's written warranty on new irrigation systems must specify the irrigator's name, business address,
and business telephone number(s), must contain the signature of the irrigation system's owner or owner's
representative confirming receipt of the warranty and must include the statement: “Irrigation in Texas is regulated
by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), MC-178, P.O. Box 130897, Austin, Texas 78711-
3087. TCEQ's website is: www.tceq.state.tx.us.”
(c) On all maintenance, alterations, repairs, or service to existing irrigation systems, an irrigator shall present the
irrigation system's owner or owner's representative a written document that identifies the materials furnished in the
maintenance, alteration, repair, or service. If a warranty is provided, the irrigator shall abide by the terms. The
warranty document must include the irrigator's name and business contact information.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.2214)
ARTICLE 3.12 DRIVEWAY RAMPS FOR PARKING STRUCTURES
Sec. 3.12.001 Plans and profiles; general standards
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/385
(a) The width of the ramp, radii for all curves, length of the landing area and the percent of slope, the length of
the ramp at the specified slope, and design elevations on both sides of the ramp at all break points (plus along the
center of travel lanes in curves) must be shown on the plan and profile presented to the community development
department with an application for a building permit for a parking structure, either above-ground or underground,
that requires a ramp up or down from the grade of the base of the structure.
(b) All horizontal and vertical curves for ramps shall have adequate sight stopping distance and entrance and exit
points to ensure public safety.
(c) Horizontal alignment that approximates the geometric requirements of circular curves and tangents shall be
used. All vertical curves shall be parabolic, have equal tangents, and a change in curvature that is constant.
(d) The principal control in the design of crest vertical curves is to ensure that stopping sight distance (SSD) is
available throughout the vertical curve.
(e) The principal control in the design of sag vertical curves is to ensure that stopping sight distance (SSD) is
available for headlight illumination throughout the sag vertical curve.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.2301)
Sec. 3.12.002 Criteria for measuring design elements
(a) Design speed (DS) = 5 mph.
(b) Design vehicle (high-profile vehicle) = 80.0" plus 6" clearance.
(c) Design vehicle (minimal under-body clearance) = 5.6".
(d) Stopping sight distance (SSD) object height = 2.0 feet.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.2302)
Sec. 3.12.003 Longitudinal street drainage
The driveway within the right-of-way shall have a minimum elevation change of +0.5 feet. Sidewalks shall meet
slope criteria of the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA). (1996 Code, sec. 3.2303)
Sec. 3.12.004 Landing area
All ramps shall have a landing area with a maximum slope of 8%. The landing area shall have a minimum length of
ten feet (10') measured from the intersection of the ramp and the property side of the sidewalk of the site. No
vertical curve shall be allowed within the landing. (1996 Code, sec. 3.2304)
Sec. 3.12.005 Number of ramps
(a) Parking garages that provide twenty-five (25) or fewer parking spaces shall have, at a minimum, one (1)
access ramp to facilitate two-way traffic.
(b) Parking garages that provide twenty-six (26) or more parking spaces shall have, at a minimum, one (1) access
ramp to facilitate two-way traffic. Sites with parking facilities that provide twenty-six (26) or more parking spaces
may have two (2) or more one-way access ramps in lieu of one (1) two-way access ramp.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.2305)
Sec. 3.12.006 Grades
(a) The maximum slope for the ramp, other than the landing area, shall be 12.0%.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/385
(b) At the top and bottom of the ramps, vertical curves shall be used to provide smooth transitions at all changes
in slope.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.2306)
Sec. 3.12.007 Width
(a) The minimum width for a one-way ramp is fourteen feet (14'), with an additional 1' on each side for side
clearance to the structure, or a total minimum width of sixteen feet (16').
(b) Ramp widths shall be measured from face to face of any side curbs, walls or structures, and shall be the width
of the actual driving surface. On sites providing twenty-six or more parking spaces, ramps less than twenty feet
(20') in width shall be posted for one-way traffic. On sites where a single ramp less than twenty feet (20') wide is
allowed, signage shall be posted warning drives of potential oncoming ramp traffic.
(c) Convex mirrors are required where opposing motorists cannot readily view each other and/or where ramps
are too narrow to permit vehicles to bypass each other.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.2307)
Sec. 3.12.008 Sight lines
All ramps shall have at least ten feet (10') sight triangles through which drivers can see pedestrians in the right-ofway.
The ten feet (10') sight triangles shall be measured from the intersection of the ramp and the property side of
the sidewalk of the site. (1996 Code, sec. 3.2308)
ARTICLE 3.13 HOUSE AND BUILDING NUMBERING
Sec. 3.13.001 Required; specifications; frontage units
(a) It shall be the duty of every owner, agent, and occupant of any house within the city limits to place thereon an
official house number. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1601)
(b) It shall be the duty and responsibility of every owner, agent, or occupant of any house or nonresidential
building within the city limits to post or display the official address numbers assigned to the property within the
required front yard or on the front of such house or building in such a manner as to be legible and plainly visible
from the street in front of the property. Such numbers shall be at least four inches (4") high with a minimum stroke
width of 0.5 inch. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Such numbers shall be:
(1) Composed of an indestructible, bright material that contrasts with its background; or
(2) Painted in a color that contrasts with its background.
(Ordinance 10/22 adopted 7/6/10)
(c) The unit of space for numbering shall be twenty-five feet (25') and an official number shall be reserved for
each twenty-five-foot (25') front on each street.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.1601)
Sec. 3.13.002 Rear numbering
(a) It shall be the duty and responsibility of every owner, agent, or occupant of any house or nonresidential
building within the city limits to post or display the official address numbers assigned to the property in the rear of
such house or building in such a manner as to be legible and plainly visible from the alley in the rear of the
property. Such numbers shall be at least four inches (4") high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch. Address
numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Such numbers shall be:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/385
(1) Composed of an indestructible, bright material that contrasts with its background; or
(2) Painted in a color that contrasts with its background.
(Ordinance 10/22 adopted 7/6/10)
(b) It shall be the duty and responsibility of every owner, agent, or occupant of any property in the city limits to
comply with the provisions and requirements of this section within six (6) months from the date of passing of this
section. Further, it shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner, agent, or occupant of all property to
continuously maintain such number as to be plainly visible and legible from the alley at all times. (1996 Code, sec.
3.1602)
Sec. 3.13.003 Numbering system
(a) Street numbering shall be in conformity and shall correspond with the system of numbering now used in the
Town of Highland Park for streets running east and west and the City of Dallas for streets running north and south.
(b) The base line for the placing of numbers shall be Mockingbird Lane and Hillcrest Avenue. On all streets
running north from Mockingbird Lane the numbering shall begin with 5700 and running north shall be increased by
100 for each block. On streets running west from Hillcrest Avenue the numbering shall begin with 3400 and
running west shall be increased by 100 for each block. On all streets running east from Hillcrest Avenue the
numbering shall begin with 3300 and shall decrease 100 for each block running east.
(c) On all streets running north and south the houses facing east shall bear odd numbers and the houses facing
west shall bear even numbers. On all streets running east and west the houses facing north shall bear odd numbers
and the houses facing south shall bear even numbers.
(d) A residential building that is constructed on a platted lot or tract shall have an official street address
determined by the community development director in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) The street number shall correspond to the numbers assigned to the street adjacent to and abutting
the front of the residential building. The front of the residential building, for the purposes of this
subsection, shall be the portion of the building adjacent to and abutting the required front yard setback
of the lot as required by the zoning regulations of the city; and
(2) The U.S. mail receptacle and main entrance of the building shall be located in the front of the
building.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.1603)
Sec. 3.13.004 Assignment of numbers
It shall be the duty of the community development director to give the proper official number to any person
requesting same and to see that all houses are properly numbered in accordance with this article. (1996 Code, sec.
3.1604; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 3.14 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.14.001–3.14.030 Reserved
Division 2. Sidewalk Construction and Repair
Sec. 3.14.031 Definitions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/385
Defective sidewalk. To require replacement of a “defective sidewalk” as used in this division, the following criteria
must be present:
(1) The sidewalk must be located within the city street right-of-way or easement; and
(2) Have surface spalling with a depth of 1/4 inch or greater which covers 50% or greater of the area
to be replaced; or
(3) Have cross fall that is 1-1/2 inches or greater than the city's sidewalk specifications found in the
city's standard construction details; or
(4) Have a section with missing pieces that create a safety hazard, not chips or cracks that are only
cosmetic in nature; or
(5) Have sections longitudinal that have a dip of 2-3/4 inches or greater; or
(6) Have adjoining sections that have a 1/2 inch or greater difference in levelness; and
(7) A 36-inch minimum clearance for obstructions located in sidewalks (i.e., mailboxes, utility poles,
and fire hydrants) must be provided.
Parkway. The landscaped area in the city right-of-way between the edge of the pedestrian sidewalk and the back of
the curb.
Sidewalk. Includes pedestrian sidewalks and, where permitted or required to be constructed in connection with the
sidewalk, driveways, approaches, and parking areas.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.1401)
Sec. 3.14.032 Purpose
This division is established to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the city and its citizens. The
general intent of this division is to provide straight, uniform pedestrian sidewalks on the city right-of-way with the
maximum amount of parkway. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1402)
Sec. 3.14.033 General requirements; variances; appeals
(a) New pedestrian sidewalks shall be placed in line with existing pedestrian sidewalks on the block or adjacent
blocks. All pedestrian sidewalks shall be a minimum of four (4) feet wide. All sidewalks, curbs, combination curb
and gutter, driveways, approaches and parking areas shall be constructed to the city's standard specifications for
construction.
(b) The public works director or his designee may vary the location of the pedestrian sidewalk if, in his opinion,
construction of a pedestrian sidewalk strictly complying with the requirements of this division would permanently
damage or cause the removal of a tree identified on the parks department approved list of trees, which list is
incorporated herein by reference, or would cause an unsafe condition due to the pedestrian sidewalk's proximity to
a street or to an intersection.
(c) The decision of the public works director or his designee with regard to the placement of a pedestrian
sidewalk may be appealed to the board of adjustment of the city by the property owner affected by such decision.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.1403)
Sec. 3.14.034 Bond
No person, firm or corporation or any of their agents, servants or employees shall construct, reconstruct or repair
any sidewalk, curb, gutter or driveway approach in the city without executing and delivering to the city a bond in
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/385
the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), payable to the city, without executing and delivering to the city a
bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) [sic], payable to the city, with a good and sufficient corporate
surety, authorized to do business in the state, which bond shall be conditioned as follows:
(1) Said bond shall be conditioned that all work shall be done in a good and workmanlike manner,
and that such person, firm or corporation shall faithfully and strictly comply with the specifications and
terms of the building code and such ordinances, resolutions or regulations that may be passed by the
governing body governing and relating to the construction, reconstruction or repair of sidewalks, curbs,
gutters or driveway approaches, and that the city shall be fully indemnified and be held whole and
harmless from any and all costs, expenses or damages, whether real or asserted, on account of injury
done to any person or property in the prosecution of said work, or that may arise out of or be occasioned
by the performance of said work.
(2) Said bond shall be conditioned further that said person, firm, or corporation shall, without
additional costs to the person for whom the work was done, maintain such construction for a period of
one year from the date of such construction, reconstruction, or repair, to the satisfaction of the building
inspector of the city, and shall reconstruct or repair the same to the satisfaction of the building inspector
of the city at any time within one year after completion of the construction, reconstruction, or repair of
such facility, and after ten days' notice from the building inspector to reconstruct or repair the same.
(3) The opinion of the building inspector of the city as to the necessity of such reconstruction or
repair shall be binding on all parties. The bond required by this section shall be enforced for the
purposes required herein for one year after the construction, reconstruction or repair of such facility, and
such bond shall be a continuing obligation against the surety thereon until the entire amount therein
provided shall have been exhausted.
(4) In case the bond herein provided shall be decreased on account of any recovery which may be
obtained, arising out of the violation of any condition of the same, the governing body shall require,
upon notice to it of such fact, an additional bond to be given by any person, firm, or corporation in
accordance with this section in an amount sufficient, when added to the unexhausted amount of the
original bond, to be at all times equal to the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
(5) The city may for itself or for the use and benefit of any person injured or damaged by reason of
any defective construction, reconstruction, or repair of any sidewalk, curb, gutter, or driveway approach,
by any person, firm, or corporation, maintain suit on said bond in any court having jurisdiction thereof,
or suit may be maintained thereon by any person injured or damaged by reason of the failure of any
person, firm, or corporation who shall construct, reconstruct, or repair any sidewalk, curb, gutter, or
driveway approach in the city to observe the conditions of said bond; provided, however, that nothing in
this section shall affect the bond of any person, firm, or corporation now engaged in constructing,
reconstructing, or repairing such facilities which have already been executed in accordance with the
terms of the existing city ordinance, nor shall this be construed to in any manner diminish the liability of
any surety or principal on said bond.
(6) No person, firm, or corporation other than the bona fide holder of such bond shall be permitted to
construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, or replace sidewalks or driveways within the public property in the
city or to take out a permit for the reconstruction, alteration or repair of such facility.
(7) No approval for the reconstruction, alteration, or repair of any sidewalk or driveway on any public
property within the city shall be granted unless the one-year maintenance bond provided herein shall be
in full force and effect at the time of request for such permit and doing of the work.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.1404)
Sec. 3.14.035 Permit required; curb cuts
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/385
(a) No person shall construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, remove or replace any sidewalk or driveway on public
property without first obtaining a permit from the community development department.
(b) In all residential areas, persons shall meet the requirements for such construction and reconstruction or repair
as required in section 3.14.033 of this division and meet other specifications as required in the zoning ordinance.
(c) In commercial and retail areas, in addition to adhering to the requirements of section 3.14.033 of this division
and the zoning ordinance, all requests for curb break-outs shall be approved only after a complete traffic study by
the department of public works of the city. Curb break-outs shall be limited in size, location, number and direction
depending upon the traffic conditions of the street necessitating such curb cuts. The public works director or his
designee shall determine the size, location, number and direction of such curb cuts; however, no person shall be
denied the right to ingress and egress to and from his property, and the decision of the director or his designee may
be appealed by the affected property owner to the board of adjustment of the city.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.1405)
Sec. 3.14.036 Notice to water department required prior to construction
Before any person shall construct any sidewalk or concrete driveway on any street in the city he shall give to the
manager of the waterworks and sewer department notice in writing at least twenty-four (24) hours before such
work of construction is begun, stating where such sidewalk or driveway is to be constructed, and when the work
thereof will be begun, in order that the waterworks department may have ample opportunity to rearrange the water
pipes and to set the meter boxes and other water service accessories where necessary. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1406)
Sec. 3.14.037 Specifications
All persons shall construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, remove, or replace sidewalks or driveways in accordance with
the specifications prescribed by the city. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1407)
Sec. 3.14.038 Supervision of construction
All work in the construction of sidewalks shall be done under the supervision and subject to the direction and
approval of the public works director, whose decisions shall be final. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1408)
Sec. 3.14.039 Contractors to furnish tools, labor and equipment
Contractors, in doing the work of constructing and repairing sidewalks, shall supply themselves with the necessary
labor, tools, and equipment to do all work in a first-class and workmanlike manner. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1409)
Sec. 3.14.040 Materials for sidewalk construction
Except as provided in this division, the only material allowed for pedestrian sidewalks on city right-of-way shall be
brush-finished concrete without any coloring, paint, or similar material. Specifically excluded are exposed
aggregate concrete, brick, and aggregate-filled epoxy. An expansion joint shall be provided between the public
sidewalk and the private driveway. In replacement work, the existing curb return and gutter shall be saw-cut at the
tangent point of the return. Specifications for construction of pedestrian sidewalks shall be approved by the city
engineer; provided, however, that upon application by the Highland Park Independent School District (HPISD) or
Southern Methodist University (SMU), the city council may, by appropriate resolution or license agreement, permit
HPISD or SMU to pave, construct or reconstruct a pedestrian sidewalk in the city right-of-way and adjacent to
HPISD or SMU facilities with brick or brick pavers. In the event such special permission is granted by the city
council to the HPISD or SMU, construction plans and samples of materials shall be furnished to the city engineer
for inspection and approval prior to commencement of construction. In all cases, the contractor shall furnish to the
city engineer, in sufficient time prior to use, whatever samples may be required by the city engineer for making
appropriate tests and/or examinations. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1410)
Sec. 3.14.041 Removal of construction debris
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/385
Immediately upon completion of the work involved, the contractor shall remove all unused materials, dirt, and
debris. He shall see that the street and sidewalk are broom clean and usable by the public. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1411)
Sec. 3.14.042 Duty of abutting property owner to keep in safe condition
It shall be the duty of any property owner or person making special use of any sidewalk or curb for purposes of
ingress and egress, for loading elevators, downspout drains, or any other special use of whatsoever kind or
character, to keep such sidewalk, parkway, curb, or driveway abutting his property in a good and safe condition and
free from any defect and hazard of whatsoever kind and character. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1412)
Sec. 3.14.043 Requirements when making improvements to property
(a) Requirements.
(1) Upon issuance of a building permit for construction, reconstruction or remodel of a building, other
than a permit for repair and/or replacement of a part or component of an existing structure, valued in
excess of $10,000.00, for any work on a structure on the abutting private property, a public walk, if not
existent, shall be constructed by the permit holder on the front of the property and on the side of the
property where it abuts a side street, or when, in the opinion of the public works director, the existing
public walks and driveway approaches abutting the property are in such a state of disrepair as to
constitute a hazard to pedestrian traffic, the permit holder shall construct a new public walk(s) and/or
driveway approach(es). Curb openings for abandoned driveways will be closed by the permit holder and
abutting public walks and driveway approaches, where required, shall be repaired or replaced in
accordance with standard city specifications. For purposes of this chapter, “repair and/or replacement”
shall mean the reconstruction or renewal to original condition of any damaged or deteriorated part or
component of an existing building for the purpose of its maintenance; “remodel” shall mean work which
changes the original size, location or material of a part or component of an existing building. (Ordinance
13/025 adopted 7/16/13)
(2) When repair of public sidewalks on corner lots is required by this section, it shall be the
responsibility of the city to repair or replace existing handicap ramps or, in the absence of such a ramp,
place or cause to be placed handicap ramps which comply with the requirements of the Texas
Accessibility Standards (TAS) and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
(b) Appeals.
(1) In the event the applicant for a building permit desires to appeal the decision of the building
official in refusing to grant a building permit without provision of the improvements required by
subsection (a) above, he shall make a written request for a hearing to the city council within five (5)
days after denial of such permit. Such hearing shall be set at a subsequent city council meeting,
consistent with notice as required under the open meeting statutes of the state. The applicant shall be
delivered a written notice of such hearing in person or by certified mail, detailing the date and hour he
shall appear in person to present his case.
(2) The city council may uphold the denial of the permit, may order the permit to be issued by the
building official, or may render any such other order which may seem proper after conducting the
hearing.
(1996 Code, secs. 3.1413, 3.1414)
Sec. 3.14.044 Liability for defective sidewalk
The abutting property owner or person enjoying the use of any property abutting on a public sidewalk that has
become defective and has resulted in causing damage or injury as a result of such defective condition shall be
primarily liable in damages for any loss or damage sustained as a result of such defective condition. (1996 Code,
sec. 3.1415)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/385
Sec. 3.14.045 Notice to repair
(a) Any sidewalk, parkway, or driveway which has become defective, unsafe, and hazardous is hereby declared a
public nuisance, and it shall be the duty of the owner or owners or persons having custody, care, control, or
occupying property abutting on any street, avenue, public alley, place, square, section, or part thereof, along which
said sidewalk, parkway, or driveway shall lie, to reconstruct or repair the same within ninety (90) days from the
receipt of notice from the code enforcement officer; provided, however, that the community development director
may, upon written application and with good cause shown by the owner, grant extensions of such time for the
completion of such reconstruction or repair.
(b) The form of notice to be issued by the community development director shall be in a form as may be
approved by him, but shall specifically describe the property to be repaired and give the owner a specified time
within which to make such repairs and further notify the owner that failure to make such repairs within thirty (30)
days shall constitute a violation of this division.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.1416; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.14.046 Placement of lanterns during construction
During the construction, the contractor shall see that the necessary red lanterns are placed so that pedestrians or
vehicular traffic shall not be injured in any manner. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1417)
Sec. 3.14.047 Protection of grade and line stakes
All stakes set by the public works director must be protected by the contractor. Grade and line stakes shall be set
every fifty feet (50') or closer as required. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1418)
Sec. 3.14.048 Marking of builder's name and date on sidewalks, curbs and gutters
All sidewalks, curbs, and gutters shall be marked by means of a stamp or die of design acceptable to the public
works director making an impression in the finish with the firm name of the builder and the month and year in
which the work was done. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1419)
Sec. 3.14.049 Restoration of removed or damaged curbs
Whenever any curb is removed or severely damaged as a result of construction on abutting property, it shall be the
duty of the property owner or owners or person having care, custody, control or occupying the abutting property to
restore or construct the proper and necessary curb and gutter according to the standards, plans, and specifications of
the city. Provided, however, that in the event that any driveway approach or gutter required to be replaced under
this section is determined to be part of a capital improvement project (CIP) scheduled in the current following fiscal
year, the owner of the property may, at his discretion, exercise one of the following options:
(1) Pay into an escrow account provided for by the city funds in the amount of the full and complete
costs of all applicable repairs or replacement of driveway approaches and/or curb and gutter. A letter
agreement between the property owner and the city shall set out the terms and conditions of funding and
use of the escrow account, which shall generally be that the funds paid in shall be used in the repair or
replacement of such driveway approach and/or curb and gutter and that construction shall be contracted
for within the current or following fiscal year.
(2) Take action to repair or replace any driveway approach and/or curb and gutter as may be required
by this section without regard to possible future action of the city.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.1420)
Sec. 3.14.050 Sidewalk grades
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/385
The public works director shall furnish the grades for sidewalks to all persons applying to him for such grades.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.1421)
Secs. 3.14.051–3.14.080 Reserved
Division 3. Construction in Right-of-Way*
Sec. 3.14.081 Generally
No person shall commence or continue with excavation, construction, installation or the operation of facilities
within a public right-of-way in the city except as provided by this division and the applicable codes and ordinances
of the city, and the directives of the public works department. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1501)
Sec. 3.14.082 Permit required; submission of plans; issuance
(a) No franchisee, licensee, or other person or entity having a right to use or occupy a public right-of-way in the
city shall perform any excavation, construction or installation of facilities in such right-of-way without first
obtaining a construction permit from the public works director of the city or his or her designee, except as provided
herein. The permit will be in the name of the person or entity which owns or will own the facilities in the right-ofway.
The permit application must be completed and signed by the owner or a representative of the owner of the
facilities constructed or to be constructed in the right-of-way.
(1) Emergency responses requiring excavation, construction, or installation related to existing
facilities may be undertaken without first obtaining a permit; however, the public works department
must be notified in writing within one (1) business day of any excavation, construction or installation
related to an emergency response, including a reasonably detailed description of the work performed in
the right-of-way and an updated map of any facilities that were relocated, if applicable.
(2) The phrase “excavation, construction or installation of facilities” does not include the installation
of facilities necessary to initiate service to a customer's property, or repair or maintenance of existing
facilities unless such repair or maintenance requires the breaking of pavement, the closure of a
nonresidential traffic lane, excavation or boring.
(b) The permit shall state to whom it is issued, location of work, location of facilities, dates and times work is to
take place and any other conditions.
(c) The person requesting a permit will provide documentation in the format specified in the following:
(1) The proposed approximate location and route of all facilities to be constructed or installed and the
applicant's plan for right-of-way construction, including the place or places and the character and extent
of any excavation;
(2) Engineering plans for the overall site will be on a scale of one-inch (1") equals thirty feet (30')
unless otherwise approved by the public works department. Engineering plans for site-specific locations
will be on a scale of one-eighth inch (1/8") equals one foot (1');
(3) Detail of the location of all right-of-way and utility easements which the applicant plans to use;
(4) Detail of all existing city utilities and other public utilities in relationship to the applicant's
proposed route. Detail of all existing sidewalks and landscaping including trees, shrubs, bushes, etc.;
(5) Detail of what the applicant proposes to install, such as pipe size, number of interducts, valves,
etc.;
(6) Detail of plans to remove and replace asphalt or concrete in streets (include city standard
construction details);
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/385
(7) Drawings of any bores, trenches, handholes, manholes, switch gear, transformers, pedestals, etc.,
including depth located in public right-of-way;
(8) Handhole and/or manhole typicals of the type of manholes and/or handholes the applicant plans to
use or access;
(9) Complete legend of drawings submitted by the applicant;
(10) Two (2) sets of engineering plans must be submitted with the permit application;
(11) The name, address and phone numbers of the facility owner, contractor and/or subcontractor who
will perform the actual construction, including the name and telephone number of an individual with the
contractor who will be available at all times during construction. Such information shall be required
prior to the commencement of any work;
(12) The excavation, construction and installation methods to be employed for the protection of
existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the right-of-way, and the dates and times
work will occur, all of which (methods, dates, times, etc.) are subject to approval of the public works
director or his/her designee; and
(13) An indemnification of the city, its officers, agents and employees, from any damages or claims
arising out of the acts or omissions of the permittee in performance of activities in city right-of-way
pursuant to the permit. The indemnity shall be in a form prescribed by the public works director. The
permittee, its contractor and sub-contractors must sign an acknowledgement that they have read and
understood chapter 3, division 3 “construction in right-of-way” of this code.
(d) All excavation, construction and installation in the right-of-way shall be in accordance with the permit. The
public works director or his or her designee shall be provided access to the work and to such further information as
he or she may reasonably require to ensure compliance with the permit.
(e) A copy of the construction permit and approved engineering plans shall be maintained at the construction site
and made available for inspection by the public works director or his or her designee at all times when excavation,
construction or installation work is occurring.
(f) All work authorized by the construction permit must be completed in the time specified in the permit. If the
work cannot be completed in the specified time periods, the permittee may request an extension. The public works
director or his or her designee will use his or her best efforts to approve or disapprove a request for extension as
soon as possible.
(g) A copy of any permit or approval issued by federal or state authorities for work in federal or state right-ofway
located in the city must be submitted if requested by the public works department.
(h) Except in an emergency, a request for a construction permit must be submitted at least ten (10) working days
before the proposed commencement of work in the request, unless waived by the public works director or his or her
designee.
(i) Requests for permits will be approved or disapproved by the public works director or his or her designee
within a reasonable time of receiving all the necessary information. The public works director or his or her
designee will use his or her best efforts to approve or disapprove a request for a permit as soon as possible.
(j) The public works department or the applicant/permittee can request a preconstruction meeting with the
construction contractor, if any.
(k) Permit applications are required for construction on new, replacement or upgrading of the company's
facilities in the right-of-way, either aerial or underground.
(Ordinance 18/007 adopted 2/6/18)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/385
(l) Installation of network nodes and related equipment in the public right-of-way by a network provider shall be
exempted from this section if the installation is in accordance with chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government
Code, as amended, and in compliance with division 4 of this article and the city's design manual, as amended.
(Ordinance 17-025 adopted 8/15/17)
Sec. 3.14.082.5 Inspections; inspection fee authorized
(a) All private construction performed in city right-of-way pursuant to a construction permit issued as provided
in this article shall be subject to city inspection in the same manner as if it were being performed by the city's own
bonded contractor. The inspector will assure that the construction is in accordance with the plans and specifications
for which the permit was issued and with the standard specifications for public works construction adopted by this
chapter;
(b) An inspection fee, as specified in the master fee resolution of the city, shall be charged to the applicant and
collected at the time of issuance of the construction permit.
Sec. 3.14.083 Construction standards
(a) The department of public works must be notified forty-eight (48) hours in advance that construction is ready
to proceed by either the right-of-way user, its contractor or representative. At the time of notification, the right-ofway
user will inform the public works department of the number (or other information) assigned from the one-call
system.
(b) All construction shall be in conformance with all city codes and applicable local, state and federal laws.
(c) Informational signs stating the identity of the person doing the work, telephone number and permittee's
identity and telephone number shall be placed at the location where construction is to occur forty-eight (48) hours
prior to the beginning of work in the right-of-way and shall continue to be posted at the location during the entire
time the work is occurring, unless other posting arrangements are approved or required by the public works director
or his or her designee.
(d) Erosion control measures (e.g., silt fence) and warning signs, markers, cones and barricades must be in place
before work begins.
(e) Lane closures on major thoroughfares will be limited after 9:00 a.m. and before 3:30 p.m. unless the public
works department grants prior approval. Arrow boards will be required on lane closures, with all barricades,
advanced warning signs and thirty-six-inch (36") reflector cones placed according to the specifications of the public
works department.
(f) Permittees are responsible for the workmanship and any damages by contractors or subcontractors. A
responsible representative of the permittee will be available to public works at all times during construction.
(g) The permittee shall be responsible for stormwater management erosion control that complies with city, state
and federal guidelines. Requirements shall include, but not be limited to, silt fencing around any excavation that
will be left overnight, silt fencing in erosion areas until reasonable vegetation is established, barricade fencing
around open holes, and high erosion areas will require wire-backed silt fencing. Upon request, the permittee may be
required to furnish documentation submitted or received from the federal or state government.
(h) The permittee or contractor or subcontractor will notify the public works department and the facility owner
immediately of any damage to other utilities, either city or privately owned.
(i) It is the city's policy not to cut streets or sidewalks; however, when a street or sidewalk cut is required, prior
approval must be obtained by the public works department and all requirements of the public works department
shall be followed. Repair of all street and sidewalk removals must be made promptly to avoid safety hazards to
vehicle and pedestrian traffic.
(j) Installation of facilities must not interfere with city utilities, in particular gravity-dependent facilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/385
(k) New facilities must be installed to a depth approved by the public works department.
(l) All directional boring shall have the locator place bore marks and depths while the bore is in progress. The
locator shall place a mark at each stem with paint dot and depth at least every other stem.
(m) The working hours in the rights-of-way are 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Work that needs
to be performed after 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, must be approved in advance. Any work performed on
Saturday must be approved twenty-four (24) hours in advance by the public works department. Directional boring
is permitted only Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., unless approved in advance. No work will be
done, except for emergencies, on city holidays.
(n) People working in the right-of-way are responsible for obtaining line locates from all affected utilities or
others with facilities in the right-of-way prior to any excavation. Use of the geographic information system or the
plans of record does not satisfy this requirement.
(o) The permittee will be responsible for verifying the location, both horizontal and vertical, of all facilities.
When required by public works, the permittee shall verify locations by pot holing, hand digging or other method
approved by the public works department prior to any excavation or boring, with the exception of work involving
lane closures, as discussed above.
(p) Placement of all manholes and/or handholes must be approved in advance by the public works department.
Handholes or manholes will not be located in sidewalks, unless approved by the public works director.
(q) Locate flags shall not be removed from a location while facilities are being constructed.
(r) Construction which requires pumping of water or mud shall be contained in accordance with city codes and
ordinances and federal and state law and the directives of the public works department.
(Ordinance 18/007 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 3.14.084 “Plans of record” plans
(a) Right-of-way users will provide the public works director or his or her designee with “plans of record” within
ten (10) days of completion of facilities in the right-of-way. Users which have facilities in the right-of-way existing
as of the effective date of this division who have not provided “plans of record” shall provide one (1) quarter of the
information concerning facilities in city right-of-way within one (1) year after the effective date of this division and
one (1) quarter each six (6) months thereafter until the complete plans of record are furnished. The plans shall be
provided to the city with as much detail and accuracy as required by the public works director. All the requirements
specified for the plans submitted for the initial permit, as set forth herein, shall be submitted and updated in the
plans of record. The detail and accuracy will concern issues such as location, size of facilities, materials used, and
any other health, safety and welfare concerns. The detail will not include matters such as capacity of lines,
customers, or competitively sensitive details. Submittal of “plans of record” shall be in digital format.
(b) This requirement, or portions of this requirement, may be waived by the information services director and the
public works director for good cause.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.1504)
Sec. 3.14.085 Alteration of facilities due to public works projects
Whenever, by reason of widening or straightening of streets, water or sewer line projects, or any other public works
projects (e.g., install or improve storm drains, water lines, sewer lines, etc.), it shall be deemed necessary by the
city council to remove, alter, change, adapt, or conform the underground or overhead facilities of a right-of-way
user to another part of the right-of-way, such alterations shall be made by the owner of the facilities at its expense
(unless provided otherwise by state law or a franchise in effect on August 26, 1999, until that franchise expires or is
otherwise terminated) within the time limits set by the public works director or his or her designee, not less than
ninety (90) days from the day the notice was sent to make the alterations, unless a different schedule has been
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/385
approved by the public works director or his or her designee. Facilities not moved within ninety (90) days or within
the approved schedule, as same may be extended from time to time, shall be deemed abandoned after thirty (30)
days' notice. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1505)
Sec. 3.14.086 Improperly installed or maintained facilities
(a) Any person or entity doing work in city right-of-way shall properly install, repair, upgrade and maintain his
or its facilities.
(b) Facilities shall be considered to be improperly installed, repaired, upgraded or maintained if:
(1) The installation, repairs, upgrade or maintenance endangers people;
(2) The facilities do not meet the applicable city codes;
(3) The facilities are not capable of being located using standard practices;
(4) The facilities are not located in the proper place at the time of construction in accordance with the
directions provided by the public works department.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.1506)
Sec. 3.14.087 Restoration of property
(a) Users of the right-of-way shall restore property affected by construction of facilities to a condition that is
equal to or better than the condition of the property prior to the performance of the work. Restoration must be
approved by the public works department.
(b) Restoration must be to the reasonable satisfaction of the public works department and the property owner.
The restoration shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Replacing all damaged ground cover with the same type of ground cover, or ground cover of
better quality, either by sodding or seeding, as directed by the public works department;
(2) Installation of all manholes and handholes, as required;
(3) Backfilling all bore pits, potholes, trenches or any other holes shall be filled in daily, unless other
safety requirements are approved by the public works department;
(4) Leveling of all trenches and backhoe lines;
(5) Restoration of excavation site to city specifications; and
(6) Restoration of all landscaping, ground cover, and sprinkler systems.
(c) All locate flags and markings shall be removed during the cleanup process by the permittee or his or her
contractor at the completion of the work.
(d) Restoration must be made within the time required by this division as specified by approved public works
schedules and to the satisfaction of the public works director or his or her designee. If restoration is not satisfactory
or not performed within the time required, all work in progress, except that related to the problem, including all
work previously permitted but not complete, may be halted and a hold may be placed on any permits not approved
until all restoration is complete.
(Ordinance 18/007 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 3.14.088 Revocation or denial of permit
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/385
If any of the provisions of this division are not followed, the permit may be revoked upon notice to the permittee of
the cause by the public works director or his or her designee. If a person has not followed the terms and conditions
of this division in work done pursuant to a prior permit, new permits may be denied or additional terms required.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.1508)
Sec. 3.14.089 Removal of obsolete facilities
Any utility company or other entity having a legal right to place any of its facilities, infrastructure or appurtenances
in the public right-of-way in the city shall, upon replacement of such facilities, infrastructure or appurtenances, or
upon notice in writing from the public works director to do so, remove all obsolete, unused, or unusable aboveground
facilities from the area of replacement or from the public right-of-way, within the time required by the
director, but in no event later than ninety (90) days from such replacement or notice to remove. Any above-ground
facility in the public right-of-way that is replaced, or that is abandoned or unused by the utility company or entity
for longer than ninety (90) days, is, for purposes of this section, presumed to be “obsolete.” A utility or other entity
receiving written notice of obsolete facilities may file a written appeal to the public works director within fourteen
(14) days of the notice. The appeal must provide specific details why the facility is not obsolete. Upon receiving the
written appeal, the public works director will determine within fourteen (14) days whether to dismiss or uphold the
violation. (1996 Code, sec. 3.1509)
Secs. 3.14.090–3.14.100 Reserved
Division 4. Network Providers
Sec. 3.14.101 Definitions
In this division, the following words shall be used as defined hereinbelow:
Certificated telecommunications provider or “CTP”. A person who has been issued a certificate of convenience
and necessity, certificate of operating authority, or service provider certificate of operating authority by the Texas
Public Utility Commission or “PUC” to offer local exchange telephone service or a person who provides voice
service as defined by Local Government Code, chapter 283.
Network node. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a
communication network.
Network provider. A wireless service provider, or a person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an
electric utility but who builds or installs, on behalf of a wireless service provider, network nodes or node support
poles or any other structure that supports or can support a network node.
Provider. A person, including any certificated telecommunications utility and excluding network providers, as
defined herein, that delivers telecommunications service within the city to person(s) by way of a network and that
places facilities in, on or over the public rights-of-way. A provider does not include persons who are authorized by
the city to occupy the public rights-of-way in specifically approved routes within the city, unless they also have a
municipal consent under this chapter. To the extent allowed by law, provider also means a person that does not
deliver telecommunications service within the city, but who uses, constructs or maintains facilities or transmission
media within the public rights-of-way.
Transport facility. Each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line
from a network node directly to the network, for providing backhaul for network nodes.
Wireless service. Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of wi-fi, whether at
a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node.
Wireless service provider. A person that provides wireless services to the public.
Sec. 3.14.102 Authority required/nonexclusive use
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/385
A network provider must provide evidence that the network provider has acquired all required authorization
pursuant to state law, including but not limited permission to use a utility pole or city service pole, prior to
obtaining a permit from the city to use public right-of-way. The network provider's right to use and occupy the
public right-of-way shall not be exclusive, and the city shall have the right to exercise its police powers and manage
its public right-of-way, including on the basis of Texas Local Government Code chapter 284 and all other
applicable state or federal laws.
Sec. 3.14.103 Transfer and notice
A network provider shall notify the right-of-way manager of any sale, transfer, merger or assignment of the
ownership or control of network provider's business within 30 days of such sale, transfer, merger or assignment. A
network provider shall also maintain and provide current point-of-contact information with the right-of-way
manager at all times during which the network provider uses the right-of-way.
Sec. 3.14.104 Fees
(a) Exemptions. Network providers are exempted from payment to the city of any compensation other than the
compensation authorized by chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code for the right to use a public right-ofway
for network nodes, node support poles, or transport facilities for network nodes.
(b) Network provider fees.
(1) Annual network node rate. Network providers shall pay the city an annual network node rate for
each location for which network provider has obtained permit(s) for the installation of network nodes,
regardless of whether a network provider installs network nodes in the public right-of-way. The amount
of the annual network rate shall be set in city's fee schedule, appendix A to this code. The annual
network node public right-of-way rate payment for the first year at any location (“initial annual network
node payment”) begins accruing when the permit is issued and is due 30 days after the network provider
obtains a permit to install or collocate a network node at the location. The initial annual network
node payment shall be pro-rated for the months remaining in the calendar year after the permit issuance
date.
(2) Subsequent years annual network node rate due date. The annual network node public right-ofway
rate for every year after the initial annual network node payment shall be paid in advance on or
before December 31st of each calendar year for each network node in the public right-of-way for the
next calendar year period.
(3) Annual network node rate adjustment. Adjustment may be made of the annual network node
public right-of-way rate by an amount equal to one-half the annual change in the consumer price index
for all urban consumers for the state, as published by the federal Bureau of Labor Statistics. The city
shall provide written notice to each network provider of the new rate, and the rate shall apply to the first
payment due to the city on or after the 60th day following that notice.
(4) Annual collocation on service pole attachment fee. Network provider shall pay the city annually
$20.00 for each network node permitted to be collocated on a city service pole for each location for
which network provider has entered agreement with the city to collocate a network node on a city
service pole, regardless of whether a network provider collocates a network node on a service pole. This
fee is due 30 days after network provider obtains a permit to install a network node on the city service
pole. The initial annual collocation on service pole attachment fee payment shall be pro-rated for the
months remaining in the calendar year after the permit issuance date. The annual collocation on service
pole attachment fee for every year after the initial payment shall be paid in advance on or before
December 31st of each calendar year for each network node in the public right-of-way for the next
calendar year period.
(5) Monthly transport fee. A network provider that has transport facilities permitted from the network
nodes in the public right-of-way shall pay the city a monthly transport facilities fee on a quarterly basis,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/385
in the amount set in the fee schedule, appendix A to this code, which begins accruing when the permit is
issued. This transport facility fee is in addition to any annual network node public right-of-way rate
payment required by section 284.053 of the Texas Local Government Code.
(6) Application and permit fees. Network provider shall pay the city the application and permit fees
set forth herein or in the fee schedule, appendix A to this code, contemporaneously with the submittal of
the application for the permit.
Sec. 3.14.105 Compliance with design manual
A network provider shall comply with the city's design manual for the installation of network nodes and node
support poles, as amended. Any applications submitted for installation of network nodes, node support poles and
related equipment, the plans and specifications of which do not comply with the design manual, will not be
approved.
Sec. 3.14.106 Certificates of operation
(a) As part of the application process for the installation of network nodes, the network provider must certify that
the proposed network node will be placed into active commercial service by or for a network provider no later than
the 60th day after the date the construction and final testing of the network node is completed.
(b) An updated certification of active service must be submitted annually, by no later than December 31st, with
or prior to payment of the applicable annual fee(s).
(c) If the network provider is not in active commercial service for a period of sixty (60) consecutive days, the
equipment will be deemed abandoned and the permit will be revoked. The network provider will be required,
within ninety (90) days from notification from the city, to remove the equipment at the network provider's sole
expense.
Sec. 3.14.107 Indemnity
A person or entity that is a certificated telecommunications provider as defined in chapter 283 of the Texas Local
Government Code, or a network provider as defined in chapter 284 of the Local Government Code, shall provide to
the city the indemnity required by section 283.057 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
(Ordinance 17-025 adopted 8/15/17)
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 4.01.001 Display, storage and sale of goods outside building
(a) Generally. The display, storage, and sale of goods, wares, and merchandise on private and public property
outside of a building shall be prohibited, except as permitted in this section.
(b) Special event permit for private property. The building official may issue a temporary special event permit
(SEP) for the outside display, storage, and sale of goods, wares, and merchandise on private property on the
following conditions:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/385
(1) A temporary SEP may only be permitted in the General Retail, Retail Center, Shopping Center,
Commercial, and retail Planned Development districts.
(2) The SEP may be granted only for an entire shopping center or strip from the following list:
(A) Snider Plaza and Hillcrest Avenue from Lovers Lane to Daniel.
(B) Hillcrest Avenue from Haynie Avenue to Granada Avenue.
(C) Lovers Lane from Douglas to Lomo Alto Drive (Miracle Mile).
(D) Preston Road from Lovers Lane to Glenwick Lane.
(E) The Plaza at University Park.
(F) Park Cities Plaza.
(1996 Code, art. 4.800)
(G) The “P” Parking District lot west of Hillcrest, between Daniel and Haynie. (Ordinance
11/12 adopted 6/21/11)
(3) The SEP may be granted for any one area not more than four (4) times per calendar year, not
exceeding four (4) days per event, and with a minimum of sixty (60) days between events for any one
area.
(4) The SEP may only be granted in connection with the celebration of a specific holiday, civic event
or community function.
(c) Temporary license agreement for public property. The outside display, storage, and sale of goods, wares, or
merchandise on public property shall be prohibited except as may be permitted by the city council by granting a
temporary license agreement under the provisions of this division.
(1) Such license agreement shall not permit the obstruction of a minimum of four (4) foot pedestrian
sidewalk, whether such sidewalk is wholly or partially on public or private property.
(2) The license agreement may specifically authorize the temporary obstruction of parking areas and
other city rights-of-way.
(d) Special conditions. Other special conditions, as deemed necessary by the city council or the building official
to increase the compatibility of the temporary use with the adjoining neighborhood, may be required in the granting
of a special event permit or license agreement under this section.
(e) Seasonal displays. The display, storage, and sale of live plants, cut flowers, and traditional seasonal
decorations outside of a building shall be permitted under the following conditions:
(1) Such outside display, storage, and sale may be conducted only as an accessory and incidental use
to the main use.
(2) If the building official determines that the outside display, storage, and sale falls within this
subsection, he may permit the same without the necessity of the issuance of an SEP.
(3) Seasonal display shall be permitted under this subsection only on private property.
(1996 Code, art. 4.800)
Sec. 4.01.002 Christmas tree lots
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/385
Christmas tree lots may be permitted in nonresidential zoning districts if they comply with the following
requirements:
(1) A temporary permit may be issued by the building official upon application by any person
desiring to operate a Christmas tree lot under the provisions of this section. A $500.00 cleanup deposit,
in the form of a certified or cashier's check, payable to the city, must be tendered along with the
application to secure such temporary permit.
(2) No Christmas trees or other goods or wares may be displayed on the Christmas tree lot prior to
Thanksgiving day each year for which the temporary permit is issued.
(3) The Christmas tree lot or area used for Christmas tree sales must be cleared of all goods and
wares, including all Christmas trees and other supplies used in connection with the lot, prior to January
2, at which time such temporary permit will expire and be of no further force or effect.
(4) Christmas tree lots may not be placed on, nor may any other use be made of, required off-street or
public parking spaces.
(5) A temporary electric pole will be authorized for the Christmas tree lot or electricity may be
provided from a main building on the same tract, provided that any such connections will comply with
the adopted electrical code of the city. No permit holder may use a generator for electricity for the
Christmas tree lot.
(6) The Christmas tree lot shall be permitted to have one non-illuminated temporary sign not to
exceed eight (8) square feet in area. Such temporary sign shall be placed not closer to any adjacent
right-of-way at [than] the required building setback lines for the zoning district in which the property is
situated.
(7) No display of goods or wares, including Christmas trees, shall extend beyond the required
building setback lines for the zoning district in which the property is located.
(8) No Christmas tree lot shall be operated before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on any day during the
term of the temporary permit.
(1996 Code, art. 4.900)
ARTICLE 4.02 PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.02.001 Purpose
This article is and shall be deemed an exercise of the police powers of the state and of the city for the public safety,
comfort, convenience, and protection of the city and the citizens thereof, and all of the provisions of this article
shall be constructed for the accomplishment of that purpose. (1996 Code, sec. 4.101)
Sec. 4.02.002 Definitions
Charitable purpose. The solicitation of money or property, directly or indirectly, for the benefit of a charity or
philanthropy, or for the poor, underprivileged, needy, crippled, or handicapped persons, the teaching of patriotism
or assistance to veterans or veterans' organizations, or the existing educational institutions, or for the establishment
or endowment of educational institutions.
Consumer. An individual who acquires real or personal property, services, money, or credit for personal or family
purposes.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/385
Parkway. The area between the edge of the designated street and the adjacent owner's property line.
Peddler, solicitor, and person. Any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation, society, religious sect,
organization, or league, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent, or similar representative.
Religious organization. An organization that is dedicated to the support of a church, religious society, or any other
religious sect, group, or order.
Sidewalk. Any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians.
Solicitation. Conduct whereby a person, organization, society, corporation, or its agent, member, or representative
solicits property, financial aid, gifts and money, or any article representing monetary value; or sells or offers to sell
a product, article, tag, service, publication, ticket, advertisement, or subscription.
Street. The portion of the street which is generally paved, designated, or used for vehicular traffic, and all areas
dedicated to public use for public street purposes, which includes parkways, alleys, and sidewalks.
Traffic island. A barrier within a street or roadway to exclude vehicles, designated for the purpose of separating or
directing streams of vehicular traffic.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.102)
Sec. 4.02.003 Peddling, soliciting and begging prohibited in certain places
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, solicit, beg, panhandle, hawk or sell, or take orders for or offer
to take orders for any item or service, in the following places in the city:
(1) On any crosswalk, roadway, shoulder, private road or driveway, or from any sidewalk, median,
crosswalk, or shoulder, to peddle, solicit, beg, hawk, sell or take orders for any item or service from any
person in a motor vehicle in or on any such roadway, private road or driveway. All the terms used in this
section shall have the definitions given them in the Texas Transportation Code, section 541.302;
(2) As to begging or panhandling, in any residentially zoned area;
(3) Any residence which shall exhibit in a conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance to the
residence a weatherproof card, not less than three (3) inches by four (4) inches in size, containing the
words “NO SOLICITORS.” The letters shall not be less than two-thirds (2/3) of an inch in height.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to block or obstruct or hinder the free flow of traffic in the lawful use of
the street or free passage of pedestrians in the lawful use of the sidewalk. No solicitations, sales, or distribution of
merchandise, products, or service shall be offered or made to occupants of motor vehicles moving or stopped in
traffic on a public street or alley.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.104)
State law reference–Solicitation of business by pedestrian, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 552.007
Sec. 4.02.004 Consumer's right to cancel transaction
(a) The merchant, peddler, or seller shall provide to the consumer in writing the right to cancel a solicitation
transaction made in person or by telephone in which the consideration exceeds five dollars ($5.00), until midnight
of the third business day after the day on which the consumer signs an agreement or offer to purchase in a
solicitation transaction. For purposes of a telephone solicitation, date of transaction means the day that the
consumer receives the goods, services, or realty purchased in a solicitation transaction.
(b) If the consumer chooses to cancel the solicitation transaction, notification by mail shall be considered given
at the time mailed as evidenced by the postmark, notification by telegram shall be considered given at the time filed
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/385
for transmission, and notification by any other writing shall be considered given at the time delivered to the
merchant's designated place of business.
(c) It shall be unlawful for a merchant, peddler, or seller to refuse to allow the customer to cancel the solicitation
transaction.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.106)
State law reference–Cancellation of certain consumer transactions, V.T.C.A., Business and Commerce Code, ch. 39.
Secs. 4.02.005–4.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 4.02.041 Required; transfer; contents; age requirement
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, sell, solicit, canvass, or take orders for any services, wares,
merchandise, or goods, or any article of value, including plants, flowers, paintings, novelties, painting house
numbers on streets, firewood, books, magazines, photographs, or any articles for future delivery, on a sidewalk or
parkway within the city or from door to door, without having first obtained a permit therefor from the city.
(b) Each person engaged in peddling or soliciting or selling as defined in subsection (a) above must have a
permit issued under the terms of this division, and such permit shall be personal to the applicant and shall not be
reproduced nor assigned nor transferred to any other person. Any such attempted transfer or reproduction shall
render the permit void.
(c) Each permit shall expire as of the date noted thereon, which date shall be in accordance with the provisions of
this article, and such permit shall indicate the hours when peddling, solicitation and selling within the city is
permitted in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(d) A permit shall not be issued to any person under fourteen (14) years of age.
(e) Solicitation shall be deemed completed when made, regardless of whether or not the person making the
solicitation receives any contribution or makes any sale as defined herein.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.103(a))
Sec. 4.02.042 Application requirements
Each application for a permit required by this division shall be in writing, under oath, and shall set out the
following:
(1) Name of the applicant, with his permanent residence;
(2) Name and address of the firm or persons he represents;
(3) The kind, type and character of goods or services he proposes to offer for sale. Included shall be
the brand name, manufacturer and distributor of goods and commodities and the name, publisher and
distributor of all books, magazines or periodicals to be offered for sale;
(4) Names and addresses of five (5) persons as references, excluding relatives and persons living with
the applicant;
(5) How often the applicant will solicit during the year;
(6) The names of any cities where the applicant has worked within the previous thirty (30) days;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/385
(7) Whether or not the applicant has ever been arrested or convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude, including dates of all arrests, arresting agency, and final disposition for each,
and the applicant shall furnish with his application a certified copy of the judgment of conviction,
dismissal, or acquittal, or other disposition of each case;
(8) State driver's license number or a state-approved identification card number;
(9) Social security number.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.103(b))
Sec. 4.02.043 Attachments to application
In addition, there shall be attached to each application for a permit the following:
(1) Two (2) recent photographic likenesses of the applicant's face, which photographs shall not
exceed one (1) inch square in size.
(2) A certificate or letter from the president, vice-president, general manager, sales manager, assistant
sales manager or district or area manager of the company for which the applicant works, sells or solicits
stating that the applicant is an employee and/or agent of such company.
(3) A reference to a recognized financial rating publication, which reference shall show the page on
which the company's or firm's financial standing can be found; or a letter or a certificate from an
association or organization which has as its purpose the protection of citizens of the United States
against illegal or unsavory business practices stating that the firm or company is a member in good
standing of such association or organization.
(4) In the event that the applicant is an individual who is not canvassing, selling or soliciting for any
firm or company, letters of recommendation from two (2) citizens of the applicant's permanent residence
shall be submitted.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.103(c))
Sec. 4.02.044 Investigation fee
A fee for investigation shall be charged, which shall not be prorated and shall be paid at the time the application is
made and shall not be returned to the applicant, regardless of whether a permit is issued or not. (1996 Code, sec.
4.103(d))
Sec. 4.02.045 Investigation of applicant
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to investigate each applicant before issuance of a permit. (1996 Code, sec.
4.103(e))
Sec. 4.02.046 Issuance or denial; expiration
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to issue or refuse to issue such permit within a reasonable time after the
receipt of an application. All the permits shall expire within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance. The chief of
police may refuse to grant a permit if he discovers, in the course of his investigation, that the applicant has
committed fraud or misrepresentation, has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or
has failed to furnish items required by this article in his permit application. The chief of police may also deny a
permit if the applicant is wanted by another governmental agency in Texas or another state by an outstanding
warrant issued for any offense that is above a misdemeanor punishable by fine only. (1996 Code, sec. 4.103(f))
Sec. 4.02.047 Permit to be carried on person
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/385
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or solicit in the city without carrying the permit required by this division
on his person while engaged in such soliciting or selling. (1996 Code, sec. 4.103(g))
Sec. 4.02.048 Duties upon approaching customers; exhibition of permit
Every solicitor or peddler or seller shall identify himself as a salesman upon approaching a citizen in a public place
or at a private dwelling and explain his purpose, whether it be direct sales, solicitation or orders of the
demonstration of goods or merchandise, or any combination of purposes thereof, and shall produce for inspection,
upon request by any person, the solicitor's permit issued by the city. (1996 Code, sec. 4.103(h))
Sec. 4.02.049 Revocation
If, after the permit required by this division has been issued, the chief of police finds that the permit was obtained
by false representation in the application, or the permit has been reproduced or transferred or assigned to another
person, or the applicant has led someone to believe the permit is an endorsement of the applicant's product or
service by the city, or in the event of fraud or misrepresentation by the permit holder, or in the event of conviction
of the permit holder of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or in the event the permit holder has
failed to furnish the items required by this article, such permit may be revoked by the chief of police. (1996 Code,
sec. 4.103(i))
Sec. 4.02.050 Appeals
If the chief of police refuses to issue the permit required by this division, the applicant shall have the right to appeal
to the city council. Such appeal, if taken, must be in writing addressed to the city commission and filed with the
city manager within ten (10) days from the date of refusal. The same procedure of appeal shall apply also to
permits revoked under section 4.02.049 above. The city council shall hold an open public hearing on such appeal,
at either a regular or special meeting, after furnishing notice of such hearing to the applicant. (1996 Code, sec.
4.103(j))
Sec. 4.02.051 Exemptions
(a) The following persons engaged in the activities set out in subsections (1) through (7) below in the city shall
first register with the chief of police by filling out a form to be promulgated by the chief of police in accordance
with the provisions of this article and by furnishing proof that he is actually engaged in such activity in the city, and
the chief of police shall issue to such person a registration certificate exempting him from the terms and conditions
of this division and from paying a fee therefor, namely:
(1) Persons engaged in interstate commerce;
(2) Persons with religious organizations engaged in the sale of religious literature or in soliciting for
subscriptions for religious purposes, including religious newspapers, books and magazines;
(3) Persons seeking a contribution for a charitable purpose as provided by the definition of “charitable
purpose” in section 4.02.002 hereof;
(4) Other nonprofit organizations seeking charitable contributions, such as Multiple Sclerosis,
American Heart Association, Muscular Dystrophy, American Cancer Society, Boy Scouts of America,
etc.;
(5) Public utility companies operating under a franchise granted by the city;
(6) Commercial agents or drummers dealing with local business establishments in the usual course of
business; and
(7) Insurance salesmen, real estate salesmen and others licensed by the state.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/385
(b) Before making any solicitation, the persons listed above must obtain the registration certificate provided
above from the chief of police and exhibit the same to any person who requests such identification.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.103(k))
ARTICLE 4.03 AFFIXING OR PAINTING HOUSE NUMBERS ON STREETS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.03.001 Applicability
The provisions of this article shall apply to all persons seeking a permit to engage in business to affix house address
numbers on streets and alleys. (1996 Code, sec. 4.301)
Sec. 4.03.002 Definitions
Parkway. The area between the edge of the designated street and the adjacent owner's property line.
Permit. The written authorization of the city for a person to engage in business to affix house numbers on the
streets, alleys, and curbs of the city.
Sidewalk. Any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians.
Street. The portion of the street which is generally paved, designated, or used for vehicular traffic, and all areas
dedicated to public use for public street purposes, which includes curbs, parkways, alleys, and sidewalks.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.302)
Sec. 4.03.003 Specifications for numbers
Specifications for house numbers on curbs shall be as follows:
(1) Residential address or house number curb markings shall be white retro-reflective tape or paint,
with green numbering;
(2) The curb marking shall be a minimum of four inches in width and twelve inches in length, with a
minimum specific luminance of 760 at 0.5 observation angle;
(3) The numbers shall be a minimum of three inches in height and one and one-half inches in width
each, and shall be evenly spaced;
(4) The curb markings shall be applied or painted in accordance with the manufacturer's
recommendations for application of the material; and
(5) House numbers on curbs shall be neat in appearance, uniformly applied to the curb and shall be
located in the curb radius at one driveway entrance or centered on the lot.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.303(i))
Secs. 4.03.004–4.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 4.03.031 Required; transfer; contents; age requirement
(a) Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business to affix house numbers on streets or
curbs or in alleys without having a permit from the city authorizing such activity.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/385
(b) Transfer. Each person engaged in the activity as defined in subsection (a) above must have a permit issued
under the terms of this article, and such permit shall be personal to the applicant and shall not be reproduced nor
assigned nor transferred to any other person. Any such attempted transfer or reproduction shall render the permit
void.
(c) Contents. Each permit shall designate an expiration date and state the hours when the activity within the city
is permitted, which hours shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
(d) Age requirement. A permit shall not be issued to any person under fourteen (14) years of age.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.303(a))
Sec. 4.03.032 Application
Each application for a permit required by this article shall be in writing under oath filed with the city manager and
shall set out the following:
(1) Name of the applicant, with his permanent residence;
(2) Names and addresses of two (2) persons as references;
(3) State driver's license number or a state-approved identification card number;
(4) Social security number.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.303(b))
Sec. 4.03.033 Investigation fee
The city council shall establish a fee for investigation, which fee shall be charged, shall not be prorated, and shall
be paid at the time the application is made. The fee shall not be returned to the applicant regardless of whether a
permit is issued or not. (1996 Code, sec. 4.303(c))
Sec. 4.03.034 Investigation of applicant
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to investigate each applicant and make a report thereon to the city manager
before issuance of a permit. (1996 Code, sec. 4.303(d))
Sec. 4.03.035 Issuance; expiration
It shall be the duty of the city manager to issue or refuse to issue such permit not earlier than one (1) day and not
later than five (5) days from the time the application therefor is received by him. All permits shall expire within
twelve (12) months from the date of issuance. (1996 Code, sec. 4.303(e))
Sec. 4.03.036 Permit to be carried on person
It shall be unlawful for any person to paint house numbers on streets in the city without carrying the permit
required by this article on his person while engaged in such activity. (1996 Code, sec. 4.303(f))
Sec. 4.03.037 Exhibition
Each permittee shall produce for inspection, upon request by any person, the permit issued by the city. (1996 Code,
sec. 4.303(g))
Sec. 4.03.038 Revocation
If, after the permit required by this article has been issued, the mayor, city manager, chief of police, or other official
of the city finds that the permit was obtained by false representation in the application, or the permit has been
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/385
reproduced or transferred or assigned to another person, or the applicant has led someone to believe the permit is an
endorsement of the applicant's product or service by the city, it may be revoked by the city manager, city attorney,
or chief of police. (1996 Code, sec. 4.303(h))
ARTICLE 4.04 PRIVATE GUARDS
Sec. 4.04.001 Definition
The term “private guard,” as used herein, shall mean any person, firm, or corporation who furnishes or agrees to
furnish services of enforcing the parking regulations and issuing summons for parking violations in shopping
centers, office centers, or medical centers within the city. (1996 Code, sec. 4.401)
Sec. 4.04.002 Commission from city required
No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in the business of a private guard unless he has been commissioned by
the city. Such commission shall be held by the individual guards doing private guard duty if a firm or corporation is
involved. (1996 Code, sec. 4.402)
Sec. 4.04.003 Application for commission
Every person who wishes to engage in private guard duties shall make application to the chief of police for a
commission. The application shall be signed by the individual or, if a corporation, by a duly authorized officer, and
if a partnership, by all partners. Such application shall contain, among other things, the following, which shall be
sworn to:
(1) The trade name of the organization if other than an individual.
(2) The address of the organization or individual.
(3) The ownership of the organization.
(4) Where the guard duty will be performed.
(5) Whether the applicant has been convicted of a felony.
(6) The age of the applicant.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.403)
Sec. 4.04.004 Investigation of applicant for commission
The chief of police shall make such investigation into the application as he feels necessary to determine the true
facts. (1996 Code, sec. 4.404)
Sec. 4.04.005 Enforcement of fire lane violations on SMU campus
(a) Security personnel of Southern Methodist University are authorized to issue citations for parking violations
on fire apparatus access roads on the private streets and ways on the campus to the same extent to which private
guards commissioned by the city are authorized under this article.
(b) Such parking citations shall take the form determined by the department of public safety of Southern
Methodist University, provided they meet the requirements of the Texas Education Code.
(c) The campus security personnel authorized to issue citations for fire lane violations shall be designated in
writing by the chief of the SMU department of public safety to the chief of police of the city and shall be
commissioned in the same manner as are private guards under this article, provided that no fee shall be charged for
such commission.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/385
(d) Nothing in this article is intended to make campus security personnel officers of the city, nor to authorize
them to perform any police functions other than on the private streets and areas of the campus, nor to issue citations
for traffic violations on the public streets and highways running through or adjacent to university property. Such
security officers remain under the control and jurisdiction of the university, even while issuing citations for fire lane
violations as authorized hereby. Upon issuance of a citation and filing in the municipal court, such parking
violations will be handled in the same manner as other parking violations in municipal court.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.412)
ARTICLE 4.05 ALARM SYSTEMS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.05.001 Definitions
The following words and terms, as used herein, shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them as follows:
Alarm agent. Any person employed by an alarm business whose duties include the altering, installing, maintaining,
moving, repairing, replacing, selling, leasing, servicing, responding to, or causing others to respond to an alarm
device. The provisions of this section do not include persons who engage in the manufacture or sale of alarm
systems from a fixed location and who neither visit the location where the alarm system is to be installed, nor
design the scheme for the physical location of the alarm system in a specific location.
Alarm business. Any individual, company, partnership, corporation, or proprietorship, along with any of its
officers, directors, agents or employees, which alters, installs, leases, maintains, monitors, moves, repairs, replaces,
sells, services, or responds to an alarm system, or which causes any of those activities to take place.
Alarm notification. A notification intended to summon the police/fire department which is designed either to be
initiated purposely by a person or by an alarm system that responds to a stimulus characteristic of unauthorized
intrusion, fire, or medical emergency.
Alarm site. A single premises or location (one street address) served by an alarm system or systems that are under
the control of one owner.
Alarm system. A device or system which transmits a signal intended to summon aid from the police/fire department
in case of a robbery, burglary, personal hostage, fire, or medical emergency. The term “alarm system” does not
include a system installed on a vehicle or a system designed to alert only the persons within the premises which
does not emit a signal visible or audible outside of the premises. Systems commonly referred to as burglar alarm
systems, fire alarms, panic/alert systems and medical alert systems are included.
Alarm user. Any owner or occupant of premises within the city where an alarm system is maintained.
Annunciator. The instrumentation on an alarm console at the receiving terminal of a signal line which through both
visual and audible signals shows when an alarm device at a particular location has been activated, or it may also
indicate line trouble.
ANSI. The American National Standards Institute.
Answering service. A telephone answering service providing among its services receiving on a continuous basis,
through trained employees, emergency signals from alarm systems, and thereafter immediately relaying the
message by live voice to the police/fire department.
Burglar alarm system. An alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry into an area protected by the system.
Central station. An office to which remote alarm and supervisory signaling devices are connected, where operators
supervise the circuits, and where alarm signals are continuously monitored.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/385
Chief of police. The chief of police for the city or an authorized representative.
City council. The mayor and city council of the city, or any part thereof.
Digital dialer signaling system. An electronic alarm signaling system attached to an alarm system which when
activated automatically seizes an existing telephone line and signals the alarm monitoring service or the police/fire
department, where appropriate action is taken to respond to and/or investigate such signal.
False alarm notification. An alarm notification to the police/fire department when the responding personnel find no
evidence of robbery, burglary, personal hostage, fire or medical emergency, or attempted robbery, burglary, or
personal hostage. False alarm notification includes the activation of an alarm system through mechanical or
electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or
of their employees or agents, except that the following shall not be considered false alarms:
(1) Alarms caused by the failure or malfunction of the monitoring equipment located in the police/fire
department or its designated site.
(2) Alarms occurring on a repeated basis without apparent cause but where continuous and decided
effort, in the sole opinion of the department, is being made jointly by the alarm business used by the
alarm user for installation or servicing and any other concerned person to correct the malfunction
expeditiously.
(3) Alarms caused by an attempted illegal entry of which there is visible evidence, illegal entry, or
other demonstrable criminal activity.
(4) Alarms intentionally caused by a person acting under a reasonable belief that a need exists to call
the police/fire department.
(5) Alarms followed by an immediate call to the police/fire department canceling the alarm by giving
the proper code number, such call having been made prior to the arrival of the police/fire department at
the alarm site.
(6) Alarms resulting from the servicing of an alarm system by an alarm business when, prior to such
repair or service, the alarm user or their agent has notified in person the department that the alarm
system will be repaired or serviced at the particular date and time coinciding with that alarm.
Fire chief. The chief of the fire department of the city or any authorized representative.
Local alarm. A signaling system which, when activated, causes an audible and/or visual signaling device to be
activated in or on the premises within which the system is installed.
Modified central station. An office to which remote alarm and supervisory signaling devices are connected, where
operators supervise the circuits. Such modified central station is not listed by Underwriters' Laboratories.
Operator. Any employee of an alarm business whose duties include responding to or initiating responses to alarm
system signals.
Owner. The record title holder of real property.
Person. Any individual, corporation, organization, partnership, association, or any other legal entity.
Police/fire department or department. The city police department and/or the city fire department, including the
communications/dispatch center and all authorized agents and employees thereof.
Radio frequency (RF) signaling system. An alarm signaling system which, when activated by an alarm device,
transmits a signal by radio frequency to a monitoring company or the police/fire department, where appropriate
action is taken to respond to and/or investigate such signal.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/385
Residence or residence site. A structure intended as a dwelling unit, including but not limited to one-family
dwelling units, apartments, condominiums, townhouses and duplexes.
Signal line. The transmission line through which the signal passes from one of the elements of the signal
transmission to another.
Telephone company. Any utility that furnishes telephone services to the city.
UL. Underwriters' Laboratories.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.501)
Sec. 4.05.002 General requirements
(a) General standards; inspections. Except where modified or qualified elsewhere herein, the following standards
and inspections are required (a copy of all standards shall be available for public inspection at the police/fire
department):
(1) All alarm systems installed in commercial establishments after the effective date of this article
shall utilize equipment, components, and methods of installation equal to or exceeding the following
minimum applicable UL or ANSI standards: UL 609 (ANSI SE2.1-1972), Local Burglar Alarm Units
and Systems; UL 636 (ANSI SE2.7-1973), Hold-up Alarm Units and Systems; and UL 681 (ANSI
SE2.3-1972), Installation and Classification of Mercantile and Bank Burglar Alarm Systems. All
installations shall be made by an alarm business holding all required and current licenses issued by the
state.
(2) All alarm systems installed in residences after the effective date of this article shall utilize
equipment and components which shall be equivalent to or exceed the minimum applicable UL
Standard 1023 (ANSI SE2.4-1972), Household Burglar Alarm Systems Units, and such equipment shall
be installed in a safe, reliable and professional manner by an alarm business holding all required and
current licenses issued by the state. If the alarm system is to include fire protection, then the alarm
business, as well as the alarm technician installing the fire alarm system, must be licensed with the state
commission on fire protection as required in section 5 of Texas Insurance Code article 5.43-2, Fire
Detection and Alarm Devices, and the fire alarm rules issued by the state commission on fire protection.
All alarm systems equipped with fire protection must meet all requirements as set out in the National
Fire Alarm Codes as stated in the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards.
(b) Additional requirements. In addition to the requirements set forth by the current listed UL or ANSI standards,
the following additional requirements shall be met for all alarm systems installed and operated in the city:
(1) All alarm systems installed after the effective date of this article and all alarm systems heretofore
installed shall have a standby power supply for the control panel and attached equipment. This
secondary source of power shall be so installed that, if the main source of power fails, the system shall
not cause a non-valid alarm. All standby power [shall be] capable of operating the system for a
minimum of four (4) continuous hours. All new installations shall have rechargeable power supplies
installed at the time of the initial installation of the alarm system;
(2) All commercial alarm systems that use the telephone line to transmit a fire alarm signal must be
equipped with a digital alarm communicator transmitter (ACT) as described in National Fire Protection
Association NFPA 72;
(3) New alarm systems shall be installed in such a manner that the protective circuits shall indicate
whether they are closed prior to being turned on; and
(4) All triggering devices utilized in alarm systems within the city shall be adjusted to the degree
reasonably possible to suppress non-valid indications of fire or intrusion, so that alarms shall not be
activated by natural phenomena, including but not limited to transient pressure changes in water pipes,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/385
short flashes of light, wind noises or exterior pressure change, such as rattling or vibration of windows
or sonic booms, and vehicular noise adjacent to the installation.
(c) Systems which connect directly to police/fire department. In addition to the aforesaid requirements for alarm
systems, those alarm systems which connect directly to the police/fire department for monitoring shall meet or
exceed the following standards:
(1) All alarm systems which are directly connected to the department shall be installed by a licensed
alarm business in accordance with the standard procedures as published by the department.
(2) All alarm systems shall have the standby power sources required in subsection (b)(1) above
installed and operational prior to interconnection to the police/fire department. In the fire alarm
condition, local annunciation must be provided until manually reset. In the burglar alarm condition, the
panel shall reset after fifteen (15) minutes in alarm status, but shall retain all indication of the prior
alarm status until the system is manually disarmed.
(3) Fire alarm indications, when transmitted directly to the police/fire department, shall originate
from smoke or heat detectors at the alarm site.
(4) Levels of communication defined:
(A) A Level One communication is an alarm signal which shall be monitored directly by the
police/fire department.
(B) A Level Two communication shall consist of a digital dialing device with redundancy,
programmed to transmit alarm signals via the residential telephone line and/or radio transmitter to
an alarm monitoring station.
(d) Automatic shutoff required. A local alarm installed after September 1, 1983, shall be designed and
maintained to terminate the audible signal within fifteen (15) minutes of activation. A local alarm which sounds for
a period in excess of fifteen (15) minutes shall constitute prima facie proof that the permit holder has violated this
section.
(e) Maintenance of system. A permit holder shall maintain the alarm system in such a manner as to assure proper
operation and to minimize false alarm notifications. The alarm user shall assure that all batteries utilized as standby
power sources in their alarm systems are tested at least once annually and replaced when found to be defective.
(f) Manual reset required. The alarm permit holder for an alarm system which causes an alarm notification to be
sent directly to the city shall adjust the mechanism so that upon activation the system will not transmit another
alarm signal without first being manually reset.
(g) Reporting of alarm signals. A permit holder commits an offense if he allows alarm signals to be reported
through a relaying intermediary that is not licensed by the state private security bureau.
(h) Indirect alarm reporting. A person who relays alarm notifications to the city shall communicate such alarm
notifications only in a manner and form designated by the chief.
(i) Alarm dispatch records. The chief shall maintain a written record of all alarm notifications, including but not
limited to the following:
(1) Name of permit holder;
(2) Location of alarm site;
(3) Date and time of alarm notification;
(4) Name and badge number of the responding police officer or firefighter in charge of the response;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/385
(5) Weather conditions; and
(6) Whether or not the notification was a false alarm notification.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.503)
Sec. 4.05.003 False alarm fee
(a) An alarm user shall pay a fee for each false alarm notification in accordance with a schedule to be adopted by
the city council in the current master fee resolution. Each false alarm notification, other than a false fire alarm
notification, is subject to the following conditions:
(1) The chief may terminate law enforcement responses to a permit holder because of excess false
alarms if the permit holder fails to pay the false alarm fees required by this article. In order to effect
termination, the chief must issue written notice to the alarm permit holder that the account is past due on
false alarm charges. The notice must specify that law enforcement responses will be terminated if the
alarm permit holder does not remit payment or make arrangements for payment within a period of time
not less than thirty (30) days.
(2) The chief may set standards for burglary alarm systems to be permitted and may refuse to permit
particular systems which in his discretion have a history of unreliability.
(3) The city may not consider a false burglary alarm to have occurred unless a response is made by
the police department within thirty (30) minutes of the alarm notification and the police department
determines from an inspection of the interior or exterior of the premises that the alarm was false.
(4) The penalty for the signaling of a false alarm by a burglary alarm system may not be imposed
unless at least three other false alarms have occurred during the preceding twelve-month period. The
penalty for a false alarm shall be established as part of the city's master fee resolution.
(5) For other alarm systems, no fee shall be assessed for the first three (3) false alarm notifications
received during any calendar year. For alarm systems which were not in existence and use at the time of
issuance of a permit, no fee shall be assessed for false alarm notifications received during the first thirty
(30) days of the operation of the system and for the first three (3) false alarm notifications received
during any calendar year.
(b) The permit holder shall pay a fee for each false fire alarm notification, except as follows: For alarm systems
in existence and use at the time of the issuance of a permit, no fee shall be assessed for the first three (3) false fire
alarm notifications received during any calendar year. For alarm systems which were not in existence and use at the
time of the issuance of a permit, no fee shall be assessed for false alarm notifications received during the first thirty
(30) days of the operation of the system, and the first (3) false fire alarm notifications received during any calendar
year.
(c) The chief shall, on a monthly basis, file with the city manager a report of false alarm notifications for which a
fee is charged under the terms of this section. The city manager shall then send to the permit holder, at the address
stated on the application, a statement for fees due. Such fees shall be paid by the permit holder within thirty (30)
days of the date of the statement, and are delinquent after such thirty-day period.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.504)
Sec. 4.05.004 Registration of alarm monitoring services
All alarm businesses which monitor alarm systems protecting alarm sites within the city shall register with the
department by completing a registration form to be provided by the department. The registration form shall require
the alarm business to provide the following information and documents:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/385
(1) The address where monitoring is physically performed by the alarm business, including the street
address, city, state and zip code. The alarm business shall state whether their central station, modified
central station, or answering service is UL listed; and
(2) A copy of all the current licenses if the alarm business holds licenses issued by the state.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.506)
Sec. 4.05.005 Registration of installation and maintenance contractors
(a) All alarm businesses conducting any operations (as defined under “alarm business”) in whole or in part
within the city shall, within seven (7) working days prior to the commencement of the operations, provide the
police/fire department a copy of all current licenses issued by the state, which will include the following:
(1) A copy of the alarm license issued by the state private security bureau; or
(2) A copy of the alarm license issued by the state commission on fire protection, if applicable to the
work to be performed.
Both licenses are required if the alarm business services both burglar and fire alarm systems.
(b) It is the responsibility of any business and/or employee doing any type of digging or trench work within the
utility easements or areas within the city to contact the applicable telephone company prior to beginning work and
identify the location of any and all telephone cables that may be buried in the work area. If the telephone service is
disrupted because the telephone/burglar alarm cable was damaged or cut causing activation of any residential or
business burglar/fire alarm system, the chief will conduct an investigation. If the alarm business responsible for the
damage to the telephone cable failed to contact the telephone company to identify the location of buried cable, the
alarm business shall be fined a false alarm charge for each alarm signal activated at the department resulting from
the cut or damaged cable.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.507)
Sec. 4.05.006 Direct monitoring by police/fire department
Alarm users may elect to have their alarm systems connected directly to the police/fire department providing the
following conditions are met:
(1) Their alarm system shall meet such written standards for installation, maintenance and connection
set forth by the department;
(2) A valid alarm permit has been issued by the department for that alarm site;
(3) All applicable fees set by the city council in the master fee resolution for direct alarm monitoring
services are timely paid; and
(4) The alarm system is maintained by an alarm business currently licensed by the state.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.508)
Sec. 4.05.007 Time limit on local alarms
All alarm systems equipped with any exterior sound-producing device, including but not limited to gongs, buzzers,
sirens, bells or horns, shall be equipped with a time device which limits the operation of such sound-producing
device to a continuous fifteen (15) minutes, except that commercial establishments shall be allowed a continuous
thirty (30) minutes of operation of the sound-producing devices. (1996 Code, sec. 4.510)
Sec. 4.05.008 Inspections; correction of violations
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/385
(a) Systems monitored by police/fire department.
(1) For alarm systems which are directly monitored by the police/fire department, the department
shall require inspections of the alarm system to insure compliance with the published standards prior to
connecting the alarm system to the police/fire department alarm monitoring terminals.
(2) The alarm user of the alarm system which is directly monitored by the police/fire department may
request written notice of such inspection. All inspections required under the provisions of this article
shall be completed within thirty (30) days of the alarm user's application for an alarm system permit. In
the event that the alarm user cannot make the system available for inspection within a reasonable period
of time, the department shall be authorized to delay granting a permit or temporarily suspend a permit
already issued pending verification of compliance with the standards adopted herein.
(3) Should such inspection reveal any violations of the provisions of this article, a written report
detailing such violation shall be promptly sent to the alarm user. Such report shall require the correction
within thirty (30) days after receipt of the written notice from the department of the violation detected
and shall state that a failure to comply may result in a revocation of the alarm user's permit in
accordance with provisions of this article relating to revocation of permits.
(4) Written notice from the department to any alarm user required in any section of this article shall
be posted through the United States mail, certified return receipt requested, to the address stated in their
alarm system permit or, at the discretion of the department, hand delivered to the alarm user's address as
stated in their alarm system permit application.
(5) If an alarm system directly connected to the police/fire department is damaged in any way to
make it impossible to send alarm signals to the department, the alarm user will be notified by phone of
the problem. It will be the responsibility of the alarm user to have the alarm system repaired to required
standards where it can again be operational. The repairs must be made within thirty (30) days after
notification. If the repairs are not completed within the allotted time period, the alarm user will be
notified by certified mail that they will have ten (10) days to have the system repaired. In the event that
the alarm user fails to repair the system within a reasonable time, the department reserves the right to
disconnect the alarm user's alarm system from direct monitoring with the department. If the certified
letter is unclaimed by the alarm user and returned to the police/fire department, an officer from the
department will securely post the letter to the front door of the residence with tape. The officer will then
fill out an affidavit of fact concerning his actions in this matter.
(b) Systems installed after effective date of article. All alarm systems installed within the city after the effective
date of this article may be inspected by the department as provided in this article to assure compliance with its
provisions. If an alarm system is found not to be in compliance with this article, the alarm user will be notified. If
the violation is discovered during the time of installation, the problem must be corrected before the inspection can
be completed and the permit issued. If the violation is discovered after the alarm system is permitted, the alarm user
will be given sixty (60) days to bring the system into compliance with this article or the alarm permit will be
revoked.
(c) Existing systems. Permits for alarm systems currently utilized within the city will be issued by the
department without inspection unless the alarm user elects to be monitored directly by the police/fire department,
or the alarm system permit is revoked under the provisions of this article, in which case the alarm system will be
inspected prior to restoration of the permit.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.509)
Sec. 4.05.009 Designation of inspectors
The police/fire department is authorized to designate city employees to receive special training and perform duties
as inspectors to inspect alarm systems for compliance with the provisions of this article. The department shall set
standards for training, conduct and performance for personnel conducting inspections. (1996 Code, sec. 4.511)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/385
Secs. 4.05.010–4.05.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 4.05.041 Required
The owner or person in control of premises commits an offense if he/she installs an alarm system or possesses an
activated alarm system without first obtaining an alarm permit from the chief. A separate permit is required for
each alarm site. (1996 Code, sec. 4.502)
Sec. 4.05.042 Application
The application for such alarm permit shall contain the following information:
(1) Name, business address, home address, business telephone number and home telephone number
of the person in whose name the permit is requested;
(2) Name, business telephone number, and home telephone number of two (2) persons who are
authorized and have agreed to receive notification at any time from responding police or fire personnel
to come to the alarm site within thirty minutes after receiving such notification;
(3) Classification of the alarm site as residential, commercial, or banking institution;
(4) Purpose of the alarm (i.e., burglary, robbery, fire or medical assistance, etc., or any combination
thereof); and
(5) Any other information required by the chief to insure compliance with all provisions of this
article.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.502(1))
Sec. 4.05.043 Notification of change in information
The permit holder shall notify the chief of any change in the information contained in the application within five
(5) days of such change. Any failure of the alarm user to update any of the information required to obtain an alarm
permit as changes occur shall constitute a violation of this article. (1996 Code, sec. 4.502(2))
Sec. 4.05.044 Issuance
If the application complies with all requirements of this article, the chief shall issue a permit. (1996 Code, sec.
4.502(3))
Sec. 4.05.045 False statements
Any false statement of a material nature made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining a permit shall be
grounds for denial of the issuance of the permit, or cancellation of the permit if one has been issued. (1996 Code,
sec. 4.502(4))
Sec. 4.05.046 Transfer
A permit is not assignable or transferable to another person. (1996 Code, sec. 4.502(5))
Sec. 4.05.047 Expiration; renewal
The permit required by this article shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of its issuance,
unless revoked by the chief under the provisions of this article. The permit shall be renewed annually by the chief
upon payment by the permit holder of the annual renewal fee provided for in this article. (1996 Code, sec. 4.502(6))
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/385
Sec. 4.05.048 Fees
A nonrefundable initial fee and an annual renewal fee shall be paid for the permit by the applicant for each alarm
system. (1996 Code, sec. 4.502(7))
Sec. 4.05.049 New owner or occupant
It is the responsibility of each alarm user to obtain an alarm permit before operating their alarm system. If a citizen
purchases or occupies premises that have an alarm system monitored directly by the police/fire department, it is the
new owner's/occupant's responsibility to obtain an alarm permit and indicate in writing to continue direct
monitoring. If this process is not completed within 10 days of taking occupancy of the premises, the new
owner/occupant will be mailed a certified letter instructing them to obtain the above permit and indicate in writing
if they wish to continue direct alarm monitoring with the department. If the letter is unclaimed by the new
owner/occupant and returned to the department, an officer will post the letter to the front door of the residence
securely with tape. The officer will fill out an affidavit of fact concerning his actions in this matter. If the new
owner/occupant does not respond within 10 days after receiving the certified letter, their alarm system will be
disconnected from direct alarm monitoring with the city. (1996 Code, sec. 4.502(8))
Sec. 4.05.050 Operation of system without permit
The alarm permit contains emergency contact information on the alarm user with necessary information about the
alarm system. This permit must be obtained before operating an alarm system. If the alarm system is operated
without a valid alarm permit and the system is activated resulting in an emergency response, the officer responding
to the alarm will issue a citation in the name of the alarm user for “operating a non-permitted alarm system.” If the
alarm user is not home at the time of the alarm activation, the citation may be left with any authorized adult person
present at the time of the alarm response. If no one is home when the response is made, the officer issuing the
citation will keep all copies with him/her and make several attempts to personally deliver the citation. If the citation
cannot be delivered after seventy-two (72) hours, the officer will have the citation delivered by certified mail to the
alarm user. The court date must be set for at least thirty (30) days from the date of the certified letter to allow for a
proper response. If the certified letter is unclaimed by the alarm user and returned to the police/fire department, it
will be returned to the officer who issued the citation to be hand delivered. This will be done by posting the letter to
the front door of the residence securely with tape. The officer will then fill out an affidavit of fact concerning
his/her actions in this matter. (1996 Code, sec. 4.502(9))
Sec. 4.05.051 Revocation; appeals
(a) Grounds for revocation. The chief shall revoke an alarm permit if he/she determines that:
(1) There is a false statement of a material nature in the application for a permit;
(2) The permit holder has violated any provisions of this article; or
(3) The permit holder is delinquent in payment of fees for false alarm notifications.
(b) Appeal of denial or revocation.
(1) If the chief refuses to issue or renew a permit, or revokes a permit, he shall send to the applicant
or permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action, the reasons for
his action, and a statement of the right to an appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the
decision of the chief to the city manager by filing with the city manager a written request for a hearing,
setting forth the reasons for the appeal, within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice from the chief. In
the event the appeal is for the revocation of a permit, the filing of an appeal shall allow the permit
holder to continue to use the alarm system during the administrative appeal process. If an appeal is not
made within such ten-day period, the action of the chief is final.
(2) The city manager shall serve as hearing officer at an appeal and shall consider evidence by any
interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply at the appeal hearing. The city manager
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/385
shall base his decision on a preponderance of the evidence, and may affirm, reverse, or modify the
decision of the chief.
(3) The city manager shall make his/her decision on the matter and notify the applicant or permit
holder of the decision in writing within fifteen (15) days of the hearing. The decision of the city
manager is final as to administrative remedies with the city.
(c) Permit restoration. If, after an alarm system permit has been revoked, the alarm user has made all necessary
repairs or adjustments required by the department, and has complied with all provisions of this article, the
department shall restore the alarm system permit.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.505)
ARTICLE 4.06 PURCHASE AND SALE OF REGULATED PROPERTY*
Sec. 4.06.001 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply to and govern this article:
Authorized vendor. A commercial supplier who deals in the wholesale distribution of regulated property in the
ordinary course of business.
Crafted precious metals. Includes jewelry, silverware, art objects, or any other thing or object made, in whole or in
part, from gold, silver, platinum, palladium, iridium, rhodium, osmium, ruthenium, or their alloys.
Jewelry. Includes stones removed from a mounting.
Personal identification certificate. A certificate issued by the state department of public safety under V.T.C.A.,
Transportation Code chapter 521.
Power tools. Includes pneumatic equipment and welding equipment.
Purchase. A transaction in which a person takes title to regulated property in exchange for valuable consideration.
Regulated property. New or used electronic equipment, business machines, photographic equipment, power tools,
musical instruments, firearms, jewelry, or crafted precious metals.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.601)
Sec. 4.06.002 Requirements
A person who purchases regulated property for the purpose of resale shall:
(1) Keep a sales record which indicates the manufacturer or authorized vendor from which the
regulated property was purchased; or
(2) If the regulated property was purchased from other than a manufacturer or authorized vendor, the
person shall:
(A) At the time of purchase, record in a legible manner the name, address, driver's license
number or personal identification certificate number of the seller, a description of the property
purchased, and the price paid or other consideration exchanged for the property purchased;
(B) At the time of purchase, determine that the photograph on the driver's license or personal
identification certificate is a photograph of the seller;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/385
(C) Retain possession of the property purchased and withhold the property from resale for seven
(7) business days;
(D) Make the purchased property available for inspection by any police officer during regular
business hours while the property is in the person's possession; and
(3) Maintain on file the information required by subsections (1) and (2) above for one (1) year from
the date of purchase or until the item is sold, whichever occurs later.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.602)
ARTICLE 4.07 SALES OF PERSONAL PROPERTY
Sec. 4.07.001 Definitions
Motor vehicle. A motor vehicle as defined by the Texas Transportation Code.
Occasional sales. All sales entitled “garage sale,” “lawn sale,” “attic sale,” “rummage sale,” “flea market,” “estate
sale,” or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means whereby the public
at large is or can be made aware of such sale, and which sale is conducted by a resident owner on real property
zoned for residential uses only, which resident owner does not hold himself out as engaging in, and who does not
habitually engage in, the business of selling such tangible personal property at retail.
Person. An individual, firm, association, corporation, partnership or other form of sole or joint enterprise.
Personal property. Any and all tangible personal property of every kind and description.
Resident owner. The person residing in a residential zoning district in the city as defined by the zoning ordinances
of the city, who holds fee title to such premises, or a valid lessee or tenant of such premises who holds the same
under a valid rental agreement for the purpose of maintaining a residence at such location.
Sign. An outdoor sign, display, light, device, figure, painting, drawing, message, plaque, poster, or other thing
designed, intended, or used to advertise or inform.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.1001)
Sec. 4.07.002 Sale from public property
A person commits an offense if he sells or offers for sale any personal property or service from a street, sidewalk,
alley, park, open space, or any other public property within the city. (1996 Code, sec. 4.1002(a))
Sec. 4.07.003 Sales in residential district
A person commits an offense if he sells or offers for sale personal property within a residentially zoned district,
except as provided below, to wit:
(1) Occasional sales permitted. A person may conduct a sale of personal property from his or her
residence on no more than two occasions in any calendar year. A sale may be conducted for no more
than thirty-six hours on each occasion.
(Ordinance 13/05 adopted 2/19/13)
(2) Hours of occasional sales. Occasional sales may be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m. only.
(3) Merchandise at occasional sales. New merchandise or merchandise acquired solely for the
purpose of resale shall not be sold at an occasional sale, and any holding out for sale of such
merchandise shall be a violation of this section. Property sold at an occasional sale must be legally
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/385
owned, at the time of the sale, by the resident owner. A resident owner may not import or bring any
personal property from any other location to his or her residence for the purpose of selling or offering
the same for sale.
(4) Sale of motor vehicles. A resident owner may sell or offer for sale not more than two (2) motor
vehicles from his residence in any one (1) calendar year.
(5) Location of occasional sales. Occasional sales may be conducted only in the back yard, garage,
patio or driveway of a residence, provided that no portion of such sale may be conducted on any public
right-of-way or in the required front yard as that term is defined in the zoning ordinance.
(6) Signs for occasional sales. A resident owner may post a sign on his or her premises during the
hours in which the occasional sale will be conducted. Such sign may advertise such sale and shall not
exceed two (2) square feet in size. A person commits an offense if he places or affixes a sign advertising
such sale on any street, sidewalk, alley, park, open space, public right-of-way, utility easement, or any
other public property within the city. The police department or any other authorized officer or employee
of the city is empowered to remove any such sign from any such public property. The existence of a sign
not in conformance with the provisions of this section shall be prima facie evidence that the resident
owner has placed or caused to be placed such sign and shall constitute a violation of this article.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.1002(b))
Sec. 4.07.004 Parking motor vehicle for purpose of display for sale
No person shall stand or park a motor vehicle upon any public street, public parking area, shopping center parking
lot, park, playground or athletic field for the principal purpose of displaying it for sale. Any motor vehicle so
parked, other than at the personal residence of the registered owner thereof, shall be presumed to be in violation of
this section, and such conduct shall be prima facie evidence that the owner thereof parked such motor vehicle for
the purpose of sale. In such cases, the provisions of article 12.05 of this code shall apply. The police department or
a contractor on behalf of the police department shall have authority to remove and impound in the manner provided
in article 12.03 of this code any motor vehicle found parked on public property in violation of this section. (1996
Code, sec. 4.1002(c))
ARTICLE 4.08 DISPLAY AND SALE OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIAL
Sec. 4.08.001 Definitions
In this article:
Display. To locate an item in such a manner that it is available to the general public for handling and inspection or
that the cover or outside packaging on an item is visible to members of the general public without obtaining
assistance from an employee of a business establishment.
Material. A book, magazine, newspaper, photograph, picture, motion picture, film, videotape, laser-disc or
anything tangible that is capable of being used to arouse interest, whether through the medium of reading,
observation, sound or any combination of such media.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.701)
Sec. 4.08.002 Display to minors
A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons under the age of seventeen (17) years,
he displays any material with the knowledge that it depicts:
(1) Human sexual intercourse, masturbation or sodomy;
(2) Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/385
(3) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks or that portion of the female
breast below the top of areola; or
(4) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered, in a manner
calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or perversion for
commercial gain.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.702)
Sec. 4.08.003 Sale or rental near church or school
No business or enterprise which operates within one thousand feet (1,000') of a church or a public or private
elementary, middle or high school shall offer material for sale, lease or rental, knowing that said material is
sexually explicit as described above. (1996 Code, sec. 4.703)
ARTICLE 4.09 FILMING REGULATIONS
Sec. 4.09.001 Purpose
The use of public and private property in the city for commercial motion picture and television film productions,
both for feature programming and the production of commercials, has been found to have a significant impact on
the residents of this community. Therefore, the city council has determined that filming regulations are necessary to
provide a balance between the needs of the citizens of the city and the needs of the filming industry. (1996 Code,
sec. 4.1101)
Sec. 4.09.002 Definitions
Charitable films. Commercials, motion pictures, television, videotapes, or still photography produced by a
nonprofit organization which qualifies under section 501(c)(3) through (14) of the Internal Revenue Code as a
charitable organization. No person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a profit from the marketing of the film or
from showing the films, tapes or photos.
Film coordinator. The person(s) designated by the city manager to coordinate and facilitate the city's film permit
application and monitoring process.
Large production. Motion picture, television, and still photography which includes all activity required for staging
and shooting commercial motion pictures, television shows or photographs, and commercials, and requires four or
more vehicles on location, including equipment vehicles, trailers, and personal vehicles of production personnel.
News media. The filming or videotaping for the purpose of spontaneous, unplanned television news broadcast by
reporters, photographers or camera persons.
Small production. Motion picture, television, and still photography which includes all activity required for staging
and shooting commercial motion pictures, television shows or photographs, and commercials, and requires no more
than three vehicles on location, including equipment vehicles, trailers, and personal vehicles of production
personnel.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.1102)
Sec. 4.09.003 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be subject to a fine in accordance with
the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. (1996 Code, sec. 4.1108)
Sec. 4.09.004 Permit required; exemptions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/385
(a) Permit required. No person shall use any public or private property, facility or residence for the purpose of
motion picture, television or still photography without first applying for and receiving a film permit from the film
coordinator.
(b) Exemptions.
(1) The provisions of these regulations shall not apply to or affect reporters, photographers or camera
persons in the employ of a newspaper, news service, or similar entity engaged in on-the-spot
broadcasting of news events concerning those persons, scenes or occurrences which will be in the news
and are of general public interest.
(2) The filming or videotaping of motion pictures solely for noncommercial family use.
(3) Charitable films will be exempt from all fees, but must comply with all permit requirements and
other regulations hereof.
(4) Any project sponsored by Highland Park Independent School District performed entirely on
HPISD property and not infringing on any other person's or entity's property within 200 feet.
(5) Any project sponsored by Southern Methodist University filmed entirely on SMU property or in
the city areas zoned UC-1 or UC-2 and not infringing on the public right-of-way.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.1103)
Sec. 4.09.005 Application for permit; fees; conditions
(a) Change of date. Upon the request of the applicant, the film coordinator shall have the power, upon a showing
of good cause, to change the date for which the permit has been issued, provided established limitations are
complied with in respect to time and location and availability of required city personnel.
(b) Application requirements. The film coordinator shall maintain and enforce a permit application process
requiring the following at a minimum:
(1) The name of the owner and the address and telephone number of the place at which the activity
will be conducted.
(2) The specific location at such address or place.
(3) The inclusive hours and dates such activity will occur.
(4) A general statement or synopsis of the character or nature of the proposed filming.
(5) The name, address, and telephone number of the film company and person(s) in charge of the
filming activity.
(6) The exact number of personnel to be involved.
(7) A list of animals to be used in the filming.
(8) The exact amount/type of vehicles/equipment to be used.
(9) The name, address and telephone number of the officer of the film company who authorized the
application for permit.
(10) The name, address, and telephone number of the film company's designated agent for service of
process.
(11) The application shall be signed under penalty of perjury under the laws of the state.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/385
(12) The application shall be filed not less than three (3) working days before the filming is to begin
for small productions and no less than ten (10) working days before the filming is to begin for large
productions.
(13) If the applicant requests the use of city property, the filming company shall provide a written
indemnification and hold harmless, signed by an authorized agent, officer or employee of the film
company or entity, in substantially the form set out in section 4.09.007(l) of this article.
(c) Review of application; notification of residents; conditions.
(1) Review of application. Upon receipt of the properly completed application, the film coordinator
will forward a copy of the application to all department directors to determine if any part of the
proposed filming affects an area of city operations for which the respective departments are responsible.
Each department director shall review the application and return it with any written comments to the
film coordinator within two (2) working days of receipt thereof.
(2) Notification of residents and business owners. All residents and business owners within a 300-foot
radius of the large production filming project, as well as any residents or business owners whose
property is adjacent to parking areas being requested, must be notified of the project in writing.
Residents and business owners noted above must be provided with a copy of the filming permit
neighborhood impact notification form during the notification process. Filming company representatives
must fully answer any questions an individual might have regarding the filming activity, including use
of supplemental business contracts between the impacted residents and businesses and the filming
company. Proof of notification must be submitted with the application for permit.
(3) Prohibited activities. The use of pyrotechnics, car crashes, gunfire and/or other dangerous stunts
and displays is prohibited.
(4) Hours for filming. The hours for filming are between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Special filming
hours may be approved at the discretion of the film coordinator. Requests for special filming hours must
be made in writing to the film coordinator at the time of the application.
(5) Duration of project. A filming project is not to exceed three (3) consecutive days in duration
unless special permission is granted by the film coordinator.
(d) Application fee. The city council shall establish and maintain by resolution a film permit application fee
system in accordance with the requirements of the city's fee resolution.
(e) Use fee. The city reserves the right to charge a daily use fee for use of its buildings, facilities, or equipment in
addition to the required permit fee.
(f) Reimbursement for costs of city personnel. The applicant shall reimburse the city for any personnel costs plus
overhead (i.e., police, fire, traffic, etc.) directly related to providing assistance to the filming activity. The film
coordinator may require a cash deposit at the time of the application to ensure partial or full payment of personnel
costs.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.1104)
Sec. 4.09.006 Insurance and bond; indemnification of city
(a) Liability insurance. Before a permit is issued, a certificate of insurance must be provided for a minimum of
$1,000,000.00 which names the city and the officers and employees of the city as additional insured. Included in
the liability insurance shall be contractual indemnity coverage. The certificate of insurance shall not be subject to
cancellation or modification until after thirty (30) days' written notice to the city's film coordinator. A copy of the
certificate shall remain on file with the film coordinator. These requirements may be waived or reduced for small
productions at the discretion of the film coordinator.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/385
(b) Workers' compensation insurance. An applicant shall conform to all applicable federal and state requirements
for workers' compensation insurance for all persons operating under the film permit. The applicant shall provide
proof of coverage. These requirements may be waived for small productions at the discretion of the film
coordinator, unless the entity undertaking the production is required by law to maintain such coverage.
(c) Indemnity and hold harmless agreement. An applicant shall execute an agreement indemnifying and holding
the city harmless prior to the issuance of a permit under these regulations. The agreement shall be substantially in
the wording set out in section 4.09.007(l) of this article.
(d) Faithful performance bond. To ensure cleanup and restoration of the site, an applicant may be required to post
a refundable faithful performance bond in an amount not to exceed $25,000.00 at the time an application is
submitted. Upon completion, the bond or balance of the bond will be returned to the applicant.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.1105)
Sec. 4.09.007 General requirements
(a) Changes to permit. Any change to the initial permit requires completion of a filming permit revision form and
appropriate application revision fee. All changes require 24 hours' notice, and exceptions may be granted at the sole
discretion of the film coordinator.
(b) Rights granted by permit. The permit is issued to the applicant by the city for the purpose of filming a
commercial motion picture, television, film or still photograph within the city.
(c) Possession of permit; compliance with parking and traffic regulations. The permit must be in the possession
of the applicant at all times while on location. Posted parking regulations and/or vehicle code regulations shall be
enforced unless otherwise noted.
(d) Transfer of permit. The permit shall not be assigned by the applicant without the prior written consent of the
film coordinator.
(e) Authority of city representative; revocation of permit. The applicant shall be subject to the city's control and
instructions of the city representative assigned for the purpose of monitoring film activities in the city. The film
coordinator may suspend or revoke a permit in the following circumstances:
(1) Where there has been material misrepresentation in the permit application.
(2) Where the filming activity, as conducted, has become a hazard to persons or property, or caused a
hardship or become disruptive to neighboring businesses or residents.
(3) Any violation of this article or the permit, or any other applicable law.
No person shall conduct, or continue to conduct, filming activity after suspension or revocation of a filming permit.
(f) Change of date. Upon the request of the applicant, the film coordinator may, upon showing of good cause,
change the date for which the permit has been issued, provided established limitations are complied with in respect
to time and location.
(g) Temporary suspension of activity. The film coordinator may temporarily suspend filming activity when
police, fire or other city personnel assigned to the location are required to respond to an emergency elsewhere in the
city.
(h) Liability insurance. The applicant must provide a certificate of insurance indicating proof of an insurance
policy as required by section 4.09.006(a). The policy must state “The City of University Park, its officers, agents
and employees are hereby named as additional insured.” This insurance is primary to the coverage of the city and
shall provide contractual indemnity coverage. This requirement may be waived or reduced for small productions at
the discretion of the film coordinator.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/385
(i) Workers' compensation insurance. The applicant must present proof of workers' compensation insurance. This
requirement may be waived for small productions at the discretion of the film coordinator.
(j) Other conditions. The applicant/permittee agrees to abide by any other terms and conditions imposed by the
city which are attached to the permit.
(k) Removal of structures, rubbish, etc. On or before the date of expiration of this permit, the permittee shall
remove from said properties all location sets, structures, rubbish and unsightly matter placed on the property by the
applicant. In the event the applicant fails to do so, the city may cause same to be done, and the applicant agrees to
pay the city for all costs incurred therefor.
(l) Use of city property; indemnification of city. When the permittee uses city property, the permittee
acknowledges and represents that it has inspected the property, knows the condition thereof, and assumes full
responsibility for any injury to persons or damage to property by reason of the use of said property under this
permit, and undertakes and agrees to release and hold harmless and indemnify the city and all its officers and
employees from and against all actions, claims, loss, demands, expense, damage or liability of any nature
whatsoever, for death or injury to any person or damages to any property in any matter arising by reason of or
incident to the exercise or enjoyment of the premises herein given, whether or not caused solely or contributed to
by any act or omission, active or passive, negligent or otherwise, of the city, or any officer, employee or agent of
the city.
(m) Use fee. The applicant will pay the city a use fee for use of city facilities as locations or use of equipment in
filming activities, in addition to other costs and fees required.
(n) Termination of permit; payment of fees; return of deposit. The permit may be terminated at any time by either
the city or the permittee, and until so terminated the permittee agrees to abide by all the terms and conditions
thereof, and to pay all fees and charges herein provided. In the event the applicant has made a deposit for costs and
filming is terminated or if costs equal to the deposit are not incurred, a pro rata amount of such deposit shall be
returned to the applicant by the film coordinator.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.1106)
Sec. 4.09.008 Duties of permittee
The permittee, and makers of charitable films, shall at all times:
(1) Make sure all catering, craft services, construction, strike and personal trash is removed from the
location.
(2) When filming in a neighborhood or commercial business area, make sure proper notification is
provided to each business or resident within a 300-foot radius of the actual location as well as any
residents or businesses whose property is adjacent to requested parking areas. The filming notice shall
include:
(A) Name of company;
(B) Name of production;
(C) Kind of production (e.g., feature film);
(D) Duration of activity, to include days and hours of filming; and
(E) Company contact (1st AD, UPM, location manager).
(3) Confine cast and crew meals to the area designated in the location agreement or permit.
Individuals shall eat within the designated meal area during scheduled crew meals.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/385
(4) Prohibit removal, trimming and/or cutting of vegetation or trees unless approved by the film
coordinator or property owner.
(5) Remove or replace all signs erected or removed for filming purposes upon completion of the day's
filming, unless otherwise stipulated by the location agreement or permit.
(6) Keep noise levels as low as possible.
(7) Require production vehicles arriving on location in or near a residential neighborhood to enter the
area at a time no earlier than stipulated by the location agreement or permit.
(8) Prohibit the removal, moving, or towing of a private vehicle without the express permission of the
film coordinator or the owner of the vehicle.
(9) Not park production vehicles in or block driveways without the express permission of the film
coordinator or driveway owner.
(10) Insure that all members of the cast and crew behave in a courteous manner.
(11) Insure that articles of clothing which display vulgarities are not worn by any person involved in
the filming activity.
(12) Not interfere with the normal activities of the neighborhood, unless specified in the location
agreement or permit.
(13) Not allow cast or crew to bring personal animals (pets) to the location.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.1107)
ARTICLE 4.10 NEWS RACKS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.10.001 Definitions
Building and zoning administrator. Shall include his designated representative.
Distributor. The person responsible for placing and maintaining a news rack in a public right-of-way, or using a
city-owned unit.
News rack. Any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser, including city-owned
units, installed, used or maintained for the display and sale of newspapers or other news periodicals.
Parkway. That area between the sidewalks and the curb of any street, and where there is no sidewalk that area
between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. “Parkway” shall also include any area
within a roadway that is not open to vehicular travel.
Public right-of-way. All that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes, and shall include, but not be
limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks.
Roadway. That portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
Sidewalk. That portion of a street between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property
lines, intended for the use of pedestrians.
(1996 Code, secs. 4.1201, 4.1208)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/385
Sec. 4.10.002 Location and placement
(a) Any news rack which rests in whole or in part upon or on any portion of a public right-of-way or which
projects onto, into, or over any part of a public right-of-way shall be located in accordance with the provisions of
this article.
(1) No news rack shall be used or maintained which projects upon, into, or over any part of the
roadway of any public street, or which rests wholly or in part upon, along, or over any portion of the
roadway of any public street.
(2) No news rack shall be chained, bolted, or otherwise attached to any fixture located in the public
right-of-way, except to other news racks.
(3) News racks may be placed next to each other, provided that no group of news racks shall extend
for a distance of more than eight feet (8') along a curb, and a space of not less than three feet (3') shall
separate each group of news racks.
(4) No news racks shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
(A) Within three feet (3') of any marked crosswalk.
(B) Within twelve feet (12') of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk.
(C) Within five feet (5') of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency
facility.
(D) Within five feet (5') of any driveway.
(E) Within three feet (3') ahead or fifteen feet (15') to the rear of any sign marking a designated
bus stop.
(F) Within three feet (3') of the outer end of any bus bench.
(G) At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less
than six feet (6').
(H) Within three feet (3') of or on any public area improved with lawn flowers, shrubs, trees or
other landscaping.
(I) On any handicap access ramp.
(J) At any location in Snider Plaza, between Hillcrest, Daniel, Dickens, and Lovers Lane, except
city-owned news racks may be located as follows:
(i) Ten (10) units on the north side of Westminster, between Snider Plaza and Hillcrest;
(ii) Eight (8) units on the west side of Hillcrest, between Rankin and Westminster;
(iii) Fourteen (14) units at the southeast corner of Snider Plaza and Rankin;
(iv) Six (6) units at the southwest corner of Hillcrest and Milton;
(v) Six (6) units at the northwest corner of Snider Plaza and Milton;
(vi) Fourteen (14) units at the northwest corner of Snider Plaza and Daniel; and
(vii) Ten (10) units at the southwest corner of Snider Plaza and Rosedale.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/385
(K) At the intersections of Hillcrest and McFarlin, Hillcrest and Asbury, or Hillcrest and
Granada, except city-owned racks may be located as follows:
(i) Sixteen (16) units at the northwest corner of Hillcrest and McFarlin;
(ii) Sixteen (16) units at the southwest corner of Hillcrest and Asbury;
(iii) Ten (10) units at the southwest corner of Hillcrest and Granada.
(L) In the Shopping Center District zoning district in Preston Center East.
(M) In the 600 block of Preston Road near the Park Cities YMCA, on Normandy Avenue
between Preston Road and Connerly Drive, on Connerly Drive between Normandy Avenue and
Shenandoah Street, or on the 4000 block of Shenandoah Street, except a city-owned news rack
may be placed on the east side of the sidewalk near the southeast corner of Preston Road and
Shenandoah Street.
(b) The building and zoning administrator shall determine the exact design, location and configuration of the
city-owned units in Snider Plaza and an equitable manner of allocation of the units among distributors. The city
shall be responsible for the maintenance of such units.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.1205)
Sec. 4.10.003 Correction of violations; impoundment
Upon determination by the building and zoning administrator that a news rack has been installed, used or
maintained in violation of the provisions of this article, an order to correct the offending condition will be issued to
the distributor and owner of the news rack. Such order shall be telephoned to the distributor and confirmed by
mailing a copy of the order by certified mail return receipt requested. The order shall specifically describe the
offending conditions, suggest actions necessary to correct the condition, and inform the news rack distributor of the
right to appeal. Failure to properly correct the offending condition within five (5) days (excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays) after the mailing date of the order or to appeal the order within (3) days after its receipt
shall result in the offending news rack being summarily removed and processed as unclaimed property. If the
offending news rack is not properly identified as to the owner under the provisions of this article, it shall be
removed immediately and processed as unclaimed property. An impound fee, which shall be measured by the city's
cost and expense of impounding, shall be assessed against each news rack summarily removed. The building and
zoning administrator shall cause inspection to be made of the corrected condition of a news rack reinstalled after
removal under this section. The distributor of said news rack shall be charged an inspection fee, to be established
by council resolution, for each news rack so inspected. This charge shall be in addition to all other fees and charges
required under this article. (1996 Code, sec. 4.1206)
Sec. 4.10.004 Appeals
Any person or entity aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice, order or action taken under the provisions of
this article may appeal and shall be advised of his right to appeal to the zoning board of adjustment. Any appeal and
notice requirements shall be in the same manner as required for appeals and notice to the board in zoning cases.
The zoning board of adjustment shall give the appellant, and any other interested party, a reasonable opportunity to
be heard in order to show cause why the determination of the building and zoning administrator should not be
upheld. (1996 Code, sec. 4.1207)
Sec. 4.10.005 Abandonment
In the event a news rack remains empty for a period of thirty (30) continuous days, the same shall be deemed
abandoned and may be treated in the manner as provided in section 4.10.003 for news racks in violation of the
provisions of this article. (1996 Code, sec. 4.1209)
Secs. 4.10.006–4.10.030 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/385
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 4.10.031 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, place, maintain or operate, on any public street or
sidewalk, or in any other public way or place in the city, any news rack without first having obtained a permit from
the building and zoning administrator specifying the exact location of such news rack(s). One permit may be issued
to include any number of news racks and shall be signed by the applicant. (1996 Code, sec. 4.1202)
Sec. 4.10.032 Application
Application for such permit shall be made, in writing, to the building and zoning administrator upon such form as
shall be provided by him and shall contain the name and address of the applicant, and the proposed specific
location of said news rack, shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee established by the master fee resolution for
each news rack space requested, and shall be signed by the applicant. (1996 Code, sec. 4.1203)
Sec. 4.10.033 Conditions
(a) As an express condition of the acceptance of such permit, the permit holder thereby agrees to indemnify and
save harmless the city, its officers, directors, and employees against any loss or liability or damage, including
expenses and costs for bodily or personal injury and for property damage sustained by any person as the result of
the installation, use or maintenance of a news rack within the city.
(b) Permits shall be issued for the installation of a news rack or news racks without prior inspection of the
location, except as provided herein, but such news rack or news racks and their installation, use or maintenance
shall be conditioned upon observance of the provisions of this article. Permits shall be issued within twenty-four
(24) hours (excluding Saturday and Sunday and legal holidays) after the application has been filed.
(c) Such permits shall be valid for three (3) years and shall be renewable pursuant to the procedure for original
application referred to in section 4.10.032 above.
(d) Stickers showing the permit number shall be issued with the permit and must be displayed on the front of
each news rack at all times.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.1204)
ARTICLE 4.11 WRECKER SERVICES*
Sec. 4.11.001 Title
This article shall be known and may be cited as the city wrecker ordinance. (1996 Code, sec. 10.2401)
Sec. 4.11.002 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning
given herein. The word “shall” is mandatory and not merely directory.
Accident. Any occurrence which renders a vehicle wrecked or disabled.
Chief of police. The chief of police for the city or his designated agent.
Designated wrecker company. An emergency wrecker company authorized to provide emergency wrecker service
within the city.
Disabled vehicle. A vehicle which has been rendered unsafe to be driven as the result of some occurrence other
than a wreck, including, but not limited to, mechanical failure or breakdowns, fire, or vandalism, or a vehicle which
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/385
is in a safe driving condition, but the owner is not present, able or permitted to drive, so as to reasonably necessitate
that the vehicle be removed by a wrecker.
Emergency wrecker company. A person who owns, controls, or has a financial interest in one or more emergency
wrecker services.
Emergency wrecker service. The business of towing or removing wrecked or disabled vehicles from the streets
upon request of the chief of police.
Owner. A person who holds legal title to a vehicle, and who has legal right of possession of a vehicle, or legal right
of control of a vehicle.
Person. An individual, assumed name entity, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, or other legal
entity.
Street. Any street, alley, avenue, lane, square, or highway within the corporate limits of the city.
Vehicle. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street,
except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
Wrecked vehicle. A vehicle that has been damaged as a result of overturning or colliding with another vehicle or
object so as to reasonably necessitate that the vehicle be removed by a wrecker.
Wrecker. A vehicle designed to be used primarily for moving vehicles.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.2402)
Sec. 4.11.003 Driving wrecker to scene of accident
No person other than a driver of a wrecker operated by a designated wrecker company may drive a wrecker to the
scene of an accident on the streets of the city; provided, however, that in case of an emergency, the chief of police
or his designee may authorize others to render specific services in connection with a specific emergency. Such
authorization shall not extend to other situations or times. (1996 Code, sec. 10.2403)
Sec. 4.11.004 Soliciting business on streets
No person may solicit in any manner, directly or indirectly, on the streets of the city, the business of towing a
vehicle which is wrecked or disabled on any street, regardless of whether the solicitation is for the purpose of
soliciting the business of towing, removing, repairing, wrecking, storing, trading or purchasing the vehicle. Proof of
the presence of a person engaged in the wrecker business or the presence of a wrecker or motor vehicle owned or
operated by a person engaged in the wrecker business, either as owner, operator, employee or agent, on a street in
the city at or near the scene or site of an accident, which has not been called to the scene by the chief of police,
within one hour after the happening of an accident, is prima facie evidence of a solicitation in violation of this
section. (1996 Code, sec. 10.2404)
Sec. 4.11.005 Advertising at scene of accident or in public place
No person may solicit any business at or near the scene of an accident which deals directly or indirectly with the
towing, removing, repairing, wrecking, storing, trading or purchase of a wrecked or disabled motor vehicle, trailer
or semi-trailer on the streets or sidewalks of the city, nor may a person solicit the business of towing, removing,
repairing, wrecking, storing, trading, buying or offering to buy a wrecked or disabled motor vehicle, vehicle trailer,
or semitrailer on the streets, sidewalks or any public place in the city by distributing an advertisement advertising a
repair shop, garage, or place of business where the wrecked or disabled motor vehicle, vehicle trailer or semi-trailer
may be repaired, stored, wrecked, traded, or purchased. Proof of the unauthorized presence of a person engaged in
the business of towing, repairing, wrecking, storing, or offering to purchase or trade for a wreck or disabled motor
vehicle, vehicle trailer or semi-trailer at or near the scene of an accident is prima facie evidence of solicitation in
violation of this section. (1996 Code, sec. 10.2405)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/385
Sec. 4.11.006 Minimum requirements for service and equipment
Each designated wrecker company shall comply with the following minimum requirements for service and
equipment:
(1) Provide insurance as required by section 4.11.007.
(2) Provide emergency wrecker service on a twenty-four (24) hour basis, seven (7) days a week.
(3) Provide a minimum of three (3) light-duty wreckers which meet the following requirements:
(A) Each wrecker shall not be less than one (1) ton in size and be equipped with booster brakes;
(B) Each wrecker shall be equipped with a hydraulic wheel lift mechanism or a roll-back car
carrier;
(C) Each wrecker shall carry, as standard equipment, a tow bar, towing dollies, safety chains,
jack stands, fire extinguisher, wrecking bar, broom, shovel and flares; and
(D) Each wrecker and all of its equipment shall be in safe and good working condition.
(4) Provide, either itself or through subcontract with another emergency wrecker company, a heavyduty
wrecker which meets the following requirements:
(A) Each heavy-duty wrecker must comply with the requirements of subsection (3) of this
section unless a different requirement is specified in this section;
(B) Each heavy-duty wrecker must be not less than five (5) tons in size; and
(C) Each heavy-duty wrecker shall be equipped with a hydraulic wheel lift mechanism or a rollback
car carrier.
(5) Provide a response time on a reasonably consistent basis of fifteen (15) minutes for a light-duty
wrecker and forty-five (45) minutes for a heavy-duty wrecker.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.2406)
Sec. 4.11.007 Insurance
(a) Each designated wrecker company shall procure and keep in full force and effect and shall keep on file with
the state department of transportation automobile liability insurance that is combined single limit liability for bodily
injury to or death of an individual per occurrence, and loss or damage to property (excluding cargo), per
occurrence, or both, in limits of not less than the following:
(1) Tow trucks (gross vehicle weight less than twenty-six thousand pounds): $300,000.00.
(2) Commercial motor vehicles (gross vehicle weight in excess of twenty-six thousand pounds),
including tow trucks: $500,000.00.
(3) Cargo insurance in the amounts and types required by the current rules and regulations of the state
department of transportation.
(b) The insurance policy shall contain an endorsement which provides for thirty (30) days' written notice to the
chief of police or his designee in the event any such insurance coverage shall be cancelled or withdrawn. In lieu of
the insurance coverage as required above, a designated wrecker company may qualify as self-insured under the
applicable rules and regulations of the state department of transportation and furnish proof thereof to the chief of
police or his designee.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/385
(1996 Code, sec. 10.2407)
Sec. 4.11.008 Towing fees
(a) A designated wrecker company or another emergency wrecker company authorized by the chief of police to
render specific service in a specific emergency shall charge the authorized fees for towing vehicles with a lightduty
wrecker.
(b) The rates specified for light-duty wreckers shall be doubled for heavy-duty wreckers. In addition to the
specified rates for towing, a designated wrecker company is authorized to charge an additional sum per hour for
recovery time. The time for recovery time shall begin when the heavy-duty wrecker arrives on the scene, and shall
end when the vehicle is ready to be towed. Rates for fractions of an hour are based upon quarter-hour increments.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.2408)
Sec. 4.11.009 Storage fees
A designated wrecker company shall charge authorized fees for storing vehicles at its place of business. (1996
Code, sec. 10.2409)
Sec. 4.11.010 Procedure for designation
(a) An emergency wrecker company desiring to provide emergency wrecker service within the city and which
meets or exceeds the minimum requirements for service and equipment as specified in section 4.11.006 may apply
to operate as a designated wrecker company. Application for designation shall be made to the chief of police in the
manner in which he may require. The application shall contain evidence that such emergency wrecker company
complies with each requirement specified in section 4.11.006.
(b) After investigation and recommendation by the chief of police, the city council may designate an emergency
wrecker company to provide emergency wrecker service within the city.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.2411)
ARTICLE 4.12 VALET PARKING SERVICES
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.12.001 Purpose
The terms and provisions of this section are intended to accomplish the following public purposes:
(1) To provide that the city may permit valet parking operations as a special privilege, not as a matter
of right;
(2) That the approval of any permit for the use of the public right-of-way is on a temporary basis and
is for a nonexclusive use of the public right-of-way; and
(3) That permit holders shall have no property interest in or any entitlement to the granting or
continuation of any permit for the use of any public right-of-way.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.2701)
Sec. 4.12.002 Definitions
For purposes of this article, the following words shall have the following meanings:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/385
Nonresidential zone. Any area of the city having a zoning classification of commercial, general retail, office,
parking, planned development, retail center or shopping center.
Operator. Any company engaged in the business of valet parking.
Permittee. Any company permitted by the city to operate, for profit, a valet parking service that would use the
public right-of-way for pickup, drop-off or movement of vehicles to be parked.
Public right-of-way. Any area dedicated for public use as a public street, pedestrian way, or other thoroughfare,
including but not limited to streets, roadways, parkways, alleys, sidewalks, and pedestrian ways.
Regular valet parking permit. A permit issued for a valet parking operation of longer than two calendar days.
Temporary valet parking permit. A permit issued for a period of less than two calendar days and issued not more
than four times during any twelve-month period.
Valet parking. A business engaged in conducting or managing the parking of other persons' motor vehicles, whether
such persons are employed by, or under contract to, the business, residence, or other organization for which the
vehicles are being parked or whether such persons are operating independently thereof.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.2702)
Sec. 4.12.003 Penalties
(a) For failure to pay a permit fee when due, the city manager or his designee may revoke the permit or add a
penalty of ten percent of the original permit processing fee on the last day of each month after the due date,
provided that the total penalty does not exceed fifty percent of the original fee.
(b) Any person who operates a valet parking service prior to obtaining a permit shall pay a penalty of double the
permit processing fee. The payment of the penalty shall not relieve such person from the obligations imposed by
this article, or from the penalties otherwise prescribed herein.
(c) Any person violating this article or any condition of a permit issued pursuant to this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and may be subject to revocation of any permit issued as set forth in section 4.12.043.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.2706)
Sec. 4.12.004 Operating requirements
(a) The permittee shall at no time, unless expressly authorized by the permit, park or leave standing any patron's
or guest's vehicle upon any portion of a public right-of-way or other public property (including any publicly owned
off-street parking space).
(b) No operator shall park any patron's or guest's vehicle upon private property without express authorization by
the owner or other person in charge of such private property.
(c) No operator shall fail to provide adequate staffing to park vehicles so that traffic is not impeded by the
activities of the permit. No vehicle may stop or stand at a drop-off or loading area for longer than five minutes.
(d) Pedestrian walkways must not be blocked at any time during valet parking operations and operators must
provide a minimum pedestrian passing clearance of five feet.
(e) No operator shall fail to give a claim check to the owner upon receipt of each motor vehicle accepted for
valet parking. The claim clerk shall explicitly state the terms and conditions under which the vehicle is being
accepted.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/385
(f) Except where a patron or guest parks his or her own vehicle, the attendant parking a vehicle shall lock the
ignition and the vehicle, remove the key and place the key in a safe place. The attendant shall not place the key in
or upon the vehicle parked.
(g) A copy of the operator's permit must be displayed at every valet parking operation site.
(h) (1) Each permittee shall install and maintain, at each location in a nonresidential zone at which
a patron or guest surrenders his or her vehicle for parking, a reflective sign with contrasting letters and
numerals plainly visible from the street, displaying “Public Valet Parking,” the permittee's name, the
address and telephone number of the business, the time when the permittee is no longer on duty, and the
parking fees, if any.
(2) Valet signs must not be less than twenty-four by thirty-six inches in size. The “Valet Parking” and
the maximum rate portion of the sign must have a minimum lettering/numeral size of three inches per
character.
(i) The permit holder and employees of the permit holder shall cause a placard, to be developed and furnished by
the police department, to be displayed on the rearview mirror of any valet-parked vehicle at all times the vehicle is
under the permit holder's custody and control. The placard shall be placed so as to be visible from the outside
through the front windshield of the vehicle.
(j) The permittee, or his agents and employees, shall notify the city police department whenever a vehicle has
been left in his or her custody for a period in excess of forty-eight hours without a prior contractual arrangement for
such period of time in order to determine whether the vehicle is stolen or abandoned.
(k) The permittee and all employees of the permittee who drive patrons' or guests' vehicles or who handle keys
belonging to patrons or guests shall each have an appropriate current and valid driver's license.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.2705)
Sec. 4.12.005 Insurance
(a) Prior to the issuance of a permit under this article, the applicant shall obtain a business auto liability policy, to
include garagekeeper's legal liability, with a limit of not less than one hundred thousand dollars for each accident.
(b) The city shall be covered as an additional insured under the business auto liability policy of the permittee.
(c) Insurance must be placed with insurers admitted in the state or have a current A.M. Best rating of no less than
A+.
(d) Any deductibles must be declared and approved by the city. Self-insurance is not approved in lieu of a policy
of insurance.
(e) The insurance policy shall be endorsed to state that coverage shall not be cancelled except after thirty days'
prior written notice by certified mail has been given to the city.
(f) Prior to the issuance of a permit under this article, and at all times while the permit is in effect, the applicant
shall maintain on file with the city proof of the insurance required herein and provide the city a copy of applicable
insurance policies.
(g) If the insurance policies issued to the permit holder pursuant to this article are cancelled for any reason, the
permit issued under this article is automatically suspended. In order to reinstate the permit, the permit holder shall
provide a new certificate and policy of insurance to the city.
(h) The permittee shall maintain in force and effect at all times while the permit is in effect workers'
compensation insurance as required by law.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/385
(1996 Code, sec. 10.2708)
Sec. 4.12.006 Indemnification of city
The permittee, and any person acting under or pursuant to an operator's permit, agrees to indemnify, hold harmless,
release and defend (even if the allegations are false, fraudulent or groundless), to the maximum extent permitted by
law, and covenants not to sue, the city, its council and each member thereof and its officers, employees, board and
commission members and representatives, from any and all liability, loss, suits, claims, damages, costs, judgments,
and expenses (including attorney's fees and costs of litigation) which in whole or in part result from, or arise out of:
(1) Any use or performance under the permit;
(2) The activities and operations of the permittee and his or her employees, subcontractors or agents;
(3) Any condition of property used in the operation; or
(4) Any acts, errors or omissions (including, without limitation, professional negligence) of the
permittee and his or her employees, subcontractors or agents in connection with the valet parking
operation.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.2709)
Sec. 4.12.007 Authority to issue additional regulations
(a) The city manager or his designee may from time to time issue written regulations for distribution to
applicants and permittees regarding the implementation of the provisions of this article, including, but not limited
to, the safe and lawful conduct of all valet operations, permit application procedures and permit standards.
(b) Such regulations shall be binding upon applicants and permittees, who shall comply with such written
regulations as a term and condition of the permit.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.2710)
Sec. 4.12.008 Authorized parking zones
A valet parking operation in nonresidential zones may be conducted only at a location and during hours approved
by the permit and designated by official valet parking signs stating the authorized location and hours of operation.
Permits shall designate the specific location for which a valet parking operation in a nonresidential zone is
approved. Valet parking operations are permitted as a special privilege and not as a matter of right and are
considered temporary, nonpermanent and for a nonexclusive use of the specific location. (1996 Code, sec. 10.2711)
Sec. 4.12.009 Compliance with applicable laws
Nothing in this article is intended to authorize or authorizes the parking of motor vehicles by valet parking
operators and sponsors in a manner contrary to, and all permittees shall comply with, applicable state laws and
local parking and traffic regulations, including the city code. (1996 Code, sec. 10.2712)
Secs. 4.12.010–4.12.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 4.12.041 Required
The city council finds that valet parking requires specific regulation in order to maintain the public health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of the city. No person(s) shall engage in, conduct or carry on the business of valet
parking, in a nonresidential zone, where movement of vehicles is on or over any public right-of-way or public
property, without a city-issued valet parking permit. (1996 Code, sec. 10.2703)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/385
Sec. 4.12.042 Application; issuance
Regular and temporary valet parking permits shall be issued as follows:
(1) Generally. All regular and temporary permit applications shall be completed on a form designed
by the city and signed by the applicant; all forms shall be filed with the city manager or his designee a
minimum of five days prior to the date requested for the issuance of the permit. Regular valet parking
permits shall be issued annually. Renewal applications for regular permits shall be filed a minimum of
thirty days prior to the expiration of any existing permit. Where the applicant is a corporation,
association, partnership, or other legal entity, “applicant” shall mean each partner, officer, director, and
each shareholder owning or controlling more than ten percent of such entity. All applicants for valet
parking permits shall provide the following information with their applications:
(A) The name and location of the business(es) to be served (if applicable);
(B) The hours of operation and the number of employees of the operator who will be assigned to
carry out the activity for which the permit is sought;
(C) Information as to the seating capacity or other capacity of the business(es) to be served (if
applicable);
(D) A statement from the owner(s) or manager(s) of the business(es) requesting the services of
the operator (if applicable);
(E) The location(s) where vehicles will be parked or stored for the business(es) served (if
applicable);
(F) The name, location, and telephone number where a responsible person, employee, or agent
of the operator will be available at all times during the hours of operation;
(G) Disclosure of all prior valet parking permits issued to the applicant by the city during the
prior twelve months;
(H) A statement from the operator(s) of any parking facility designated as the parking or storage
location(s) as to that facility's ability to accept the cars, the number of spaces to be reserved for the
permittee's operations, the total number of spaces in such parking facility, and estimates of the
percent of usage of the facility prior to and subsequent to the proposed activity for which the
permit is sought. In cases where the parking facility is part of a building or premises devoted to
other uses which require off-street parking, the statement shall also include information as to the
number of parking spaces which were required by law to be provided in the parking facility to
serve such other uses when said uses were established (for use in nonresidential zones);
(I) A copy of the written contract or covenant between the applicant and the operator of the
parking facility designated as the parking or storage location(s), which contract or covenant shall
contain a provision that it cannot be canceled without at least sixty days' notice to the other party
and to the city (for use in nonresidential zones);
(J) The location of any proposed signs for the valet parking service and any proposed attendant
stand. An attendant stand, not exceeding four feet (4') in height, three feet (3') in width, or eighteen
inches (18") in depth, shall be located on the private property adjacent to where the valet service is
being performed. A sign, stating “Valet Parking” and not exceeding 24" by 36" in size, shall be
installed on the face of the attendant stand. Only one attendant stand shall be permitted at any
business address;
(K) Proof that the applicant has insurance in force acceptable to the city risk manager;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/385
(L) Payment of a nonrefundable permit fee in an amount to be set by resolution adopted by the
city council.
(2) Temporary permit. In a circumstance involving a nonrecurring special event or a special need of
an applicant to commence operations prior to the time an application can be processed for regular permit
issuance, a temporary parking permit for a period of operation not exceeding two calendar days may be
issued by the city manager or his designee upon the submittal of an application, accompanied by the
applicable fees, the certificate of insurance required by this article, and such other information as the
city manager or his designee determines is necessary to assess the requested application.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.2704)
Sec. 4.12.043 Denial or revocation
(a) A permit may be revoked or denied by the city manager or his designee if:
(1) The permittee, or his agents or employees, through carelessness, negligence or failure to make
proper provision for the safeguarding of vehicles left in his custody, has facilitated or contributed toward
the theft or conversion of any such vehicle;
(2) The permittee, or his agents or employees, has failed to cooperate with the city police department
in the investigation of any accident involving a patron's vehicle, or a theft or other crime committed on a
parking lot used or which arose out of the conduct of the business for which the permit was issued;
(3) The permittee, or his agents or employees, knowingly delivered a vehicle in his custody to a
person who is neither the registered owner thereof nor entitled to the custody of such vehicle;
(4) The permittee has made a material misrepresentation in his application;
(5) The business or valet operation of the permittee has substantially impacted traffic or disrupted the
peace and quiet within any area of the city;
(6) The valet parking operation at the specified locations is found to be incompatible with other uses
in the vicinity;
(7) The permittee has violated any condition of a previous or existing permit within the city during
the past five years;
(8) The proposed valet operation fails to comply with other criteria designated under this article for
the issuance of a permit or any other rules or regulations governing valet parking;
(9) The building, structure, premises or equipment used by the permittee to conduct business fails to
comply with all applicable health, zoning, fire, building and safety laws of the state or the city; or
(10) The permit holder and his employees fail to cause the placard required by section 4.12.004(i) to
be displayed at all times a vehicle is in their custody and control.
(b) An applicant/permittee shall be notified in writing when a permit is denied or revoked.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.2707)
Sec. 4.12.044 Special conditions
(a) Conditions reasonably necessary to protect the peace and tranquility of any area, mitigate traffic impacts,
protect other uses in the area, or protect the public health, welfare and safety may be imposed on permits and may
be modified, subject to the permit holder's right to notice and the opportunity to be heard.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/385
(b) Every person issued a permit pursuant to this article shall comply with all conditions that are imposed as part
of the permit pursuant to subsection (a) of this section.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.2713)
ARTICLE 4.13 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Sec. 4.13.001 Sale of alcoholic beverages near a church, public or private school or public hospital;
exceptions
(a) The sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by a dealer whose place of business is within:
(1) Three hundred feet (300') of a church, public or private school, or public hospital; or
(2) One thousand feet (1,000') of a private school, if the city council by resolution, approves a request
from the governing body of the private school.
(b) Subsection (a)(1) does not apply to the holder of a license or permit issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Code who also holds a food and beverage certificate by the state alcoholic beverage commission covering the
premises that is located within 300 feet of a private school. Subsection (a)(2) does not apply to a retail off-premises
consumption permit or license if less than 50 per cent of the gross receipts for the premises, excluding the sale of
items subject to the motor fuels tax, is from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages.
(c) Subsection (a)(2) does not apply to the holder of:
(1) A license or permit issued under V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code chapter 27 (Temporary and
Special Wine and Beer Retailer's Permit), V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code chapter 31 (Caterer's
Permit), or V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code chapter 72 (Temporary Licenses) who is operating on the
premises of a private school; or
(2) A license or permit covering a premises where minors are prohibited from entering under V.T.C.A.
Alcoholic Beverage Code section 109.53 and that is located within 1,000 feet of a private school.
(d) For the purposes of this section, “private school” means a private school, including a parochial school, which
offers a course or instruction for students in one or more grades from kindergarten through grade 12 and has more
than 100 students enrolled and attending courses at a single location.
(e) The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and a
church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of street fronts and from front door to front door, and in
direct line across intersections. The measurement of the distance between the places of business where alcoholic
beverages are sold, and a public or private school shall be:
(1) In a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to property line of the place
of business, and in a direct line across the intersections; or
(2) If the permit or license holder is located on or above the fifth story of a multistory building, in a
direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of
business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the
base of the floor on which the permit or license holder is located.
(f) For any dealer who held a license or permit from the state alcoholic beverage commission on September 1,
1983, the measurement of the distance between the place of business of the dealer and a public or private school
shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across
intersections.
(g) Applications of distance requirements:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/385
(1) If at the time an original alcoholic beverage permit or license is granted by the state alcoholic
beverage commission for a premises, the premises satisfies the requirements regarding distance from
schools, churches, and other types of premises set forth in this section, the premises shall be deemed to
satisfy the distance requirements for all subsequent renewals of the license or permit.
(2) On the sale or transfer of the premises or the business on the premises in which a new original
license or permit is required for the premises, the premises shall be deemed to satisfy any distance
requirements as if the issuance of the new original permit or license were a renewal of a previously held
permit or license.
(h) The city council may allow variances to this section if it determines that enforcement of the regulation in a
particular instance is not in the best interest of the public, constitutes waste or inefficient use of land or other
resources, creates an undue hardship on an applicant, does not serve its intended purpose, is not effective or
necessary, or for any other reason is in the best interest of the city.
(Ordinance 10/47, sec. 1, adopted 12/7/10)
Sec. 4.13.002 Fees established; permit required
(a) There is hereby levied an annual permit fee in an amount equal to one-half (1/2) of the fee charged by the
state for each particular permit or license (or the maximum fee that the city is authorized by law to charge) issued
by the state alcoholic beverage commission, except when said fee is waived according to the provisions of the
Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. The fee shall be paid to the city secretary at the time of application and on the
date such state permit or license is renewed with the state thereafter. Following payment of the fee and approval of
the permit application, the city secretary shall issue a permit for the location for a period of time equal to the state
permit or license. The amount of the fee shall be set by appropriate resolution of the city council amending the
city's master fee resolution.
(b) The permit or license issued under the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Code shall be prima facie proof
of the classification of the permit or license upon which the fee is levied and shall be the sole basis of determination
of the amount of the city's license fee.
(c) In addition to any license fee provided for by state law and the master fee resolution for the issuance of a
permit or license, the city secretary shall collect an administrative review fee from each applicant to defray the
city's cost of review of the original and any renewal application, review of the zoning and other code requirements
of the city, measurement to determine if the premises meet minimum distance requirements, and completion and
certification of the application to the alcoholic beverage commission. The amount of the administrative review fee
shall be set by resolution of the city council amending the master fee resolution.
(Ordinance 10/47, sec. 1, adopted 12/7/10)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE 5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 5.01.001 Arson reward
A reward in the sum of no less than $500.00 and no more than $1,000.00 shall be paid out of the general fund for
information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person guilty of the crime of arson within the city, such sum
to be paid to the person obtaining the arrest of the malefactor and procuring sufficient evidence thereof to result in
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/385
conviction. The city secretary is authorized to post such notice of this reward in public places within the city. The
city manager shall have sole and exclusive determination in making this reward. (1996 Code, art. 5.200)
State law reference–Arson, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 28.02.
Sec. 5.01.002 Fire equipment for open parking structures
(a) Open parking structures will be required to install hose and equipment cabinets for fire department use only.
A hose and equipment cabinet will be required to be installed on the third floor and each floor above the third floor.
If the diagonal dimension of the floor exceeds 300 feet, two hose and equipment cabinets will be required on each
floor. The hose and equipment cabinets will be located adjacent to the stairwell(s) next to the standpipe system.
(b) The hose and equipment cabinet and equipment housed in cabinets will be purchased by the fire department
after the cost of equipment (including all freight and handling charges) is paid in full by either the contractor or
building owner to the city, and securely mounted prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. All equipment
purchased shall be of the same type used by the fire department and shall meet NFPA specifications.
(c) The fire hose and equipment shall be maintained by the fire department according to NFPA and fire
department standards. The fire department will test all fire hose and equipment twice yearly and maintain all testing
records of fire hose and equipment. The cost of testing the fire hose and equipment will be assessed to the owner of
the structure for each cabinet tested in accordance with the master fee resolution of the city.
(d) The hose and equipment cabinet shall be securely mounted to the wall of the structure and shall be locked
with a Knox padlock purchased by the owner of the structure. The bottom of the cabinet shall be mounted 36
inches from the floor level for easy access by fire department personnel. Although the fire department will store
and utilize 1-3/4 inch fire hose in the hose and equipment cabinet, the cabinet must have capacity for 300 feet of 2-
1/2 inch fire hose, and contain the following equipment:
(1) 1 each - 1-1/2 inch fog nozzle equipped with iron pipe threads (IPT);
(2) 2 each - Fire hose spanner wrenches;
(3) 1 each - Standpipe wrench;
(4) 1 each - Pick head fire ax;
(5) 1 each - Halligan tool;
(6) 1 each - 6 feet of 3 inch fire hose with 2-1/2 inch NST couplings; and
(7) 1 each - 2-1/2 inch NST gated wye with 1-1/2 inch IPT connections.
(e) The amount of 1-3/4 inch fire hose required shall be determined by diagonal measurement of the structure.
All 1-3/4 inch hose shall be synthetic double-jacketed, equipped with 1-1/2 inch IPT lightweight couplings. All
hand tool type equipment shall be mounted securely to the inside of the cabinet with quick-release hardware. The
cabinet must be equipped with louvered vents to allow air to circulate through the cabinet to dissipate any moisture
accumulation. Any additional equipment that may be required will be determined by the chief of the fire
department and shall be the responsibility of the owner for purchase.
(1996 Code, art. 5.300)
ARTICLE 5.02 FIRE CODE
Sec. 5.02.001 Adopted
The International Fire Code, 2015 edition, as hereafter amended, including appendices B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, and J
(the “code”) is herewith adopted by reference as the fire code of the city. A copy of the code, with approved
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/385
appendices and amendments, shall be kept on file in the office of the fire marshal for reference and inspection.
Sec. 5.02.002 Enforcement
The International Fire Code, 2015 edition, will be enforced by the Division of Fire Prevention of the University
Park Fire Department through its fire marshal and other authorized representatives.
Sec. 5.02.003 Amendments
The sections of the 2015 International Fire Code that are changed, added, or deleted are as follows:
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
“101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of University Park, Texas, hereinafter
referred to as “this Code.”
Section 102.1 #3 is changed to read as follows:
“102.1. Construction and design provisions.
3. Existing structures, facilities and conditions when required by Chapter 11 or in specific
sections of this Code.”
Section 102.4 is changed to read as follows:
“102.4 Application of other codes. The design and construction of new structures shall comply with this
Code, and other codes as applicable. Repairs, alterations, and additions to existing structures shall
comply with this Code and the International Building Code. This Code shall apply to new and existing
one- and two-family dwellings. The provisions of this Code apply to buildings built under the
International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC).”
Section 102.7 is changed to read as follows:
“102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this Code shall be those
that are listed in Chapter 80 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be
considered part of the requirements of this Code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
…
102.7.2 Provisions in referenced codes and standards. Whenever amendments have been adopted
to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered
to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the ICC Electrical Code shall
mean the electrical code as adopted. The latest or the most recent standard shall be used in the fire
code.”
Section 103.1 shall read as follows:
“103.1 General. The Fire Prevention Division is established within the jurisdiction under the direction
of the Fire Chief. The function of the division shall be the implementation, administration, and
enforcement of the provisions of this Code.”
Section 103.1.1 is added to read as follows:
“Section 103.1.1. Department of fire prevention personnel and police. The Fire Chief and members of
the department's Fire Prevention Division shall have the power to issue citations for violations of this
Code. When requested to do so by the Fire Chief, the Police Chief is authorized to assign such available
police officers as necessary to assist the Fire Department in enforcing the provisions of this Code.”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/385
Section 103.2 shall read as follows:
“103.2 Appointment. The Fire Marshal in charge of the Division of Fire Prevention shall be appointed
by the Fire Chief of the jurisdiction and function as the fire code official for the jurisdiction; the Fire
Marshal shall not be removed from the office except for cause and after full opportunity to be heard on
specific and relevant charges by and before the appointing authority.”
Section 103.3 shall read as follows:
“103.3 Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the
concurrence of the appointing authority, the Fire Chief shall have the authority to appoint an Assistant
Fire Marshal, other related technical officers, inspectors and other employees authorized to enforce
provisions of the International Fire Code.”
Section 105.1.1 shall read as follows:
“105.1.1 Permit required. Permits required by this Code shall be obtained from the University Park Fire
Department, Fire Prevention Division. Permit fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit. Issued
permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all times and shall be readily available for
inspection by the fire code official. A permit must be obtained prior to the use of any permit or the
installation of any construction.”
Section 105.3.3 shall read as follows:
“105.3.3 Occupancy Prohibited before Approval. The building or structure shall not be occupied prior to
the fire code official issuing a permit when required and conducting associated inspections indicating
the applicable provisions of this Code have been met.”
Section 105.7.16 is added to read as follows:
“105.7.19. [105.7.16] Electronic access control systems. Construction permits are required for the
installation or modification of an electronic access control system, as specified in chapter 10. A separate
construction permit is required for the installation or modification of a fire alarm system that may be
connected to the access control system. Maintenance performed in accordance with this Code is not
considered a modification and does not require a permit.”
Section 109.4 shall be modified to read as follows:
“109.4 Violation; penalties. It is the intent of this department to achieve compliance by the traditional
means of inspection, notification, granting of reasonable time to comply and re-inspection. Persons who
shall violate a provision of this Code or shall fail to comply after all reasonable means to gain
compliance have failed with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do
work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a
permit or certificate used under the provisions of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable
by a fine of not more than the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.”
Section 111.4 shall read as follows:
“111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a
stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $2,000.00 dollars for each offense, and each and every
day any such violation shall continue be deemed to constitute a separate offense.”
Section 202, the definitions in section 202 are amended, changed, or added to read as follows:
“Ambulatory Health-care Facility…
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/385
This group may include but not be limited to the following:
- Dialysis centers
- Sedation dentistry
- Surgery centers
- Colonic centers
- Psychiatric centers”
“[B] ATRIUM. An opening connecting three or more stories . . .” (Balance remains unchanged).
“ADDRESSABLE FIRE DETECTION SYSTEM. Any system capable of providing identification of each
individual alarm-initiating device. The identification shall be in plain English and as descriptive as
possible to specifically identify the location of the device in alarm. The system shall have alarm
verification.”
“ANALOG INTELLIGENT ADDRESSABLE FIRE DETECTION SYSTEM. Any system capable of
calculating a change in value by directly measurable quantities (voltage, resistance, etc.) at the sensing
point. The physical analog may be conducted at the sensing point or at the main control panel. The
system shall be capable of compensating for long-term changes in sensor response while maintaining a
constant sensitivity. The compensation shall have a preset point at which a detector maintenance signal
shall be transmitted to the control panel. The sensor shall remain capable of detecting and transmitting
an alarm while in the maintenance mode.”
“BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION shall be held to mean the Fire Department of the City of University
Park.”
“COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT MANAGER shall be held to mean the Community Development
Manager for the City of University Park, Texas.”
“CHIEF OF THE BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION shall be the Fire Chief of the City of University
Park or the Chief's authorized representatives.”
“CITY shall be held to mean the City of University Park, Texas.”
“CORPORATE COUNSEL shall be held to mean the City Attorney for the City of University Park.”
“[B] DEFEND IN PLACE. A method of emergency response that engages the building components and
trained staff to provide occupant safety during an emergency. Emergency response involved remaining
in place, relocating, within the building, or both without evacuating the building.”
“FIRE CODE OFFICIAL is the Fire chief, Fire Marshal or other designated authority charged by the
applicable governing body with the duties of administration and enforcement of the Code, or a duly
authorized representative.”
“FIRE WATCH. A temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and systematic surveillance of a
building or portion thereof by one or more qualified individuals or standby personnel when required by
the fire code official, for the purposes of identifying and controlling fire hazards, detecting early signs of
unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire and notifying the fire department. When utilized, the number
required shall be as directed by the fire chief. Charges for utilization shall be as normally calculated by
the jurisdiction.”
“FIREWORKS. Any composition or device for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect
for entertainment purposes by combustion, deflagration, detonation, and/or activated by ignition with a
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/385
match or other heat producing device that meets the definition of 1.4G fireworks or 1.3G fireworks as
set forth herein.”
“FLEET VEHICLE shall be held to mean a motor vehicle which is one of a group of motor vehicles,
owned or operated as a unit and used in the ongoing course of business.”
“HIGH PILED COMBUSTIBLE STORAGE”: add a paragraph… “Any building classified as a group S
or speculative building exceeding 6000 sq. ft. that has a clear height in excess of 14 feet, making it
possible to be used for storage in excess of 12 feet, shall be considered to be high-piled storage. When a
specific product cannot be identified, fire protection systems and life safety features shall be installed as
for class IV commodities, to the maximum height.”
“HIGH RISE BUILDING. A building having floors used for human occupancy located more than 55
feet above the lowest level of fire department access.”
“JURISDICTION is the City of University Park, Texas.”
“POLICE CHIEF shall be held to mean the chief of police for the city.”
“REPAIR GARAGE. A building or portion thereof used for servicing or repairing motor vehicle. This
occupancy shall also include garages involved in minor repair, modification and servicing of motor
vehicles for items such as lube changes, inspections, windshield repair or replacement, shocks, minor
part replacement or other such repair.”
“SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY. Real property designed and used for the purpose of renting or
leasing individual storage spaces to customers for the purpose of storing and removing personal
property on a self-service basis.”
“STANDBY PERSONNEL. Qualified fire service personnel, approved by the Fire Chief. When utilized,
the number required shall be as directed by the fire chief. Charges for utilization shall be as normally
calculated by the jurisdiction.”
“UPGRADED OR REPLACED FIRE ALARM SYSTEM. A fire alarm system that is upgraded or
replaced includes, but is not limited to the following:
* Replacing one single board or fire alarm control unit component with a newer model
* Installing a new fire alarm control unit in addition to or in place of an existing one
* Conversion from a horn system to an emergency voice/alarm communication system.
* Conversion from a conventional system to one that utilizes addressable or analog devices.
The following are not considered an upgrade or replacement
* Firmware updates, software updates, replacing boards of the same model with chips utilizing
the same or newer firmware.”
Section 307.1.1 changed to read as follows:
“307.1.1 Prohibited Open Burning. Open burning is not permitted in the City of University Park.”
Section 307.2 is changed to read as follows:
“307.2 Permit Required. A permit shall be obtained from the code official in accordance with Section
105.6 prior to kindling a fire for recognized silvicultural or range or wildlife management practices,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/385
prevention or control of disease or pests, or open burning. Application for such approval shall only be
presented by and permits issued to the owner of the land upon which the fire is to be kindled.
{Examples of state or local law, or regulations referenced elsewhere in this section may include but not
be limited to the following:
1. State commission on environmental quality (Texas Commission on Environmental Quality)
guidelines and/or restrictions.
2. State, county or local temporary or permanent bans on open burning.
3. Local written policies as established by the fire department.}”
Section 307.3 is changed to read as follows:
“307.3 The fire code official is authorized to order the extinguishment by the permit holder, another
person responsible or the fire department of any burning that creates or adds to a hazardous or
objectionable situation.”
In Section 307.4.3, add exception #2 to read as follows:
“Exceptions:
2. Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an approved automatic sprinkler
system.”
Section 307.4.4 is added to read as follows:
“307.4.4 Fire pits. All fire pits shall be constructed in a manner consistent with good engineering and
construction practices. Fire pits shall not be installed within 10 feet of adjoining property line, within 15
feet of a residence or within 10 feet of any combustible material. Fire pits must be equipped with a spark
arrester. The maximum diameter of a fire pit shall be 3 feet, unless approved by the fire code official.”
Section 307.5; changed to read as follows:
“307.5 Attendance. Open burning, recreational fires and use of portable outdoor fireplaces must be
constantly attended until the… {Remainder of section unchanged}”
Section 308.1.4 is changed to read as follows:
“308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices. Open flame cooking devices such as hibachis, gas-fired grills,
charcoal grills, outdoor fireplaces and other similar devices used for cooking, heating or any other
purpose, shall not be located or operated on any combustible balcony, deck, or within 10 feet (3048 mm)
of any combustible construction.
Exceptions:
1. One- and two-family dwellings, except that LP-gas containers are limited to a water
capacity not greater than 50 pounds (22.68 kg) [nominal 20 pound (9.08 kg) LP-gas
capacity] with an aggregate LP-gas capacity not to exceed 100 lbs (5 containers).
2. Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an approved automatic sprinkler
system, except that LP-gas containers are limited to a water capacity not greater than 50
pounds (22.68 kg) [nominal 20 pound (9.08 kg) LP-gas capacity], with an aggregate LP-gas
capacity not to exceed 40 lbs (2 containers).
3. {...remainder of text unchanged...}”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/385
In Section 308.1.6.2, Exception number 3 is changed to read as follows:
“Exceptions:
{text unchanged}
3. Torches or flame-producing devices in accordance with Section 308.1.3”
Section 308.1.6.3; change to read as follows:
“308.1.6.3 Sky Lanterns. A person shall not release or cause to be released an unmanned free floating
device containing an open flame or other heat source, such as, but not limited to a sky lantern.”
Section 311.5 is changed to read as follows:
“311.5 Placards. The fire code official is authorized to require marking of any vacant or abandoned
buildings or structures determined to be unsafe pursuant to Section 110 of this Code relating to
structural or interior hazards. Such marking shall be as required by Sections 311.5.1 through 311.5.5.”
Section 401.3.2 is changed to read as follows:
“401.3.2 Alarm Activations. Upon activation of a fire alarm signal, employees/staff shall immediately
notify the fire department. All occupants shall go to the lowest level of exit discharge within the
building and prepare to evacuate the building as needed.”
Section 403.5; change Section 403.5 to read as follows:
“403.5 Group E Occupancies. An approved fire safety and evacuation plan, prepared in accordance with
Section 404, shall be prepared and maintained for Group E occupancies and for buildings containing
both a Group E occupancy and an atrium. A diagram depicting two evacuation routes shall be posted in
a conspicuous location in each classroom. Group E occupancies shall also comply with Sections 403.5.1
through 403.5.3.”
Section 404.2.2; add Number 4.10 to read as follows:
Add “4.10 Fire extinguishing system controls.”
Section 405.4; change Section 405.4 to read as follows:
“405.4 Time. The fire code official may require an evacuation drill at any time. Drills shall be held at
unexpected times and under varying conditions to simulate the unusual conditions that occur in case of
fire.”
Section 501.4 is added to read as follows:
“501.4 Timing of installation. When emergency access roads or a water supply for fire protection is
required to be installed for any structure or development, they shall be installed, tested, and approved.
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, for emergency access roads required by this section shall be
designated on a site plan and a minimum of three sets of plans submitted to the Fire Marshal for
approval. No structure shall be allowed to progress beyond the foundation until the required fire
apparatus access roads are serviceable and acceptable.”
In Section 503.1.1, add the following sentence to the end of the first paragraph:
“503.1.1 Except for one- or two-family dwellings, the path of measurement shall be along a minimum
of a ten feet (10') wide unobstructed pathway around the external walls of the structure.”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/385
Section 503.1.4 added to read:
“503.1.4 Fire Lane Approval. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the emergency apparatus access
roads required by this section shall be designated on a site plan and a minimum of two sets of plans
shall be submitted to the Fire Marshal for approval.”
In Section 503.1.5, add the following:
“503.1.5 Existing Fire Lanes. … Any fire lane that has been established prior to passage of the
ordinance from which this article is derived and designated by the Fire Marshal or that has been
established by a separate ordinance shall be a fire lane for all intents and purposes and shall be
maintained as required by this Code.”
Section 503.1.6 is added to read as follows:
“Section 503.1.6. Maintenance Generally. The fire code official shall report any negligent surface
conditions, markings, or signs to the owner or person in control of property upon which a fire lane exists
and shall issue instructions for repair. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of property
upon which a fire lane has been designated or exists to fail to maintain the surface of the fire lane in
good condition, free of potholes and other unapproved obstructions. It shall be unlawful for the owner
or person in control of property on which a fire lane has been designated or exists to fail to maintain any
marking of the fire lane as required by this Code in a condition which is not clearly legible.”
Section 503.2.1 is changed to read as follows:
“503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 20
feet (7315mm), except for approved security gates in accordance with Section 503.6, and an
unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 14 feet (4267 mm).
Exception: Vertical clearance may be reduced provided such reduction does not impair access by
fire apparatus and approved signs are installed and maintained indicating the established vertical
clearance when approved.”
Section 503.2.2 is changed to read as follows:
“503.2.2 Authority. The fire code official shall have the authority to require an increase in the minimum
access widths and vertical clearances where they are inadequate for fire or rescue operations.”
Section 503.2.3; change Section 503.2.3 to read as follows:
“503.2.3 Surface. Emergency access roads shall be designed and maintained to support imposed loads
of 80,000 pounds for fire apparatus and shall be surfaced so as to provide all-weather driving
capabilities.”
Section 503.2.4 shall be amended to read as follows:
“503.2.4 Turning Radius. The turning radius of a fire department access road shall be a minimum inside
turning radius of twenty-five feet (25') and a minimum outside turning radius of fifty feet (50').”
Section 503.3 shall be changed to read as follows:
“503.3 Marking. Striping, signs, or other markings, when approved by the fire code official, shall be
provided for fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit the obstruction thereof.
Striping, signs and other markings shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and
be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/385
(1) Striping – Fire apparatus access roads shall be continuously marked by painted lines of red
traffic paint six inches (6") in width to show the boundaries of the lane. The words “NO
PARKING FIRE LANE” or “FIRE LANE NO PARKING” shall appear in four inch (4") white
letters at 25 feet intervals on the red border markings along both sides of the fire lanes. Where a
curb is available, the striping shall be on the vertical face of the curb.
(2) Signs – Signs shall read “NO PARKING FIRE LANE” or “FIRE LANE NO PARKING”
and shall be 12" wide and 18" high. Signs shall be painted on a white background with letters and
borders in red, using not less than 2" lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary
post and the bottom of the sign shall be six feet, six inches (6'6") above finished grade. Signs shall
be spaced not more than fifty feet (50') apart along both sides of the fire lane. Signs may be
installed on permanent buildings or walls or as approved by the Fire Chief.”
Section 503.4 is changed to read as follows:
“503.4 Obstruction of emergency apparatus access roads. Emergency apparatus access roads shall not be
obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles. The minimum widths and clearances
established in Section 503.2.1 and any area marked as a fire lane as described in Section 503.3 shall be
maintained at all times. The operator of a premises shall maintain, free of obstruction, all fire lanes on
his premises. No person may mark, post or otherwise identify a non-fire lane private vehicular
passageway as a fire lane or in such a manner as tends to create confusion as to whether the passageway
is a fire lane. Any unauthorized vehicle on a fire lane is:
(1) Subject to removal by the operator of the premises, with the expense of removal and storage
to be borne by the registered owner of the vehicle,
(2) Subject to citation, as well as removal, by the Fire Marshal or a police officer, and
(3) Prima facie evidence that the person in whose name the vehicle is registered is guilty of a
violation of the parking provisions of this section.”
Change Section 505.1 to read as follows:
“505.1 Address identification. Approved numerals of a minimum 6" height and of a color contrasting
with the background designating the address shall be placed on all new and existing buildings or
structures in a position as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or road fronting the property
and from all rear alleyways/access. Where buildings do not immediately front a street, approved 6
inches height building numerals or addresses and 3-inch height suite/apartment numerals of a color
contrasting with the background of the building shall be placed on all new and existing buildings or
structures. Numerals or addresses shall be posted on a minimum 20 inches by 30 inches background on
border. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. The minimum stroke width shall
be 0.5 inches. Where access is by means of a private road and the building cannot be viewed from the
public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure.
Exception: R-3 Single-family occupancies shall have approved numerals of a minimum 3-1/2
inches in height and a color contrasting with the background clearly visible and legible from the
street fronting the property and rear alleyway where such alleyway exists.”
Section 507.4 is changed to read as follows:
“507.4 Water supply test date and information. The water supply test used for hydraulic calculation of
fire protection systems shall be conducted in accordance with NFPA 291 “Recommended Practice for
Fire Flow Testing and Marking of Hydrants” and within one year of sprinkler plan submittal. The fire
code official shall be notified prior to the water supply test. Water supply tests shall be completed by
City of University Park Infrastructure Maintenance personnel or their designee, as required. The exact
location of the static/residual hydrant and the flow hydrant shall be indicated on the design drawings.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/385
All fire protection plan submittals shall be accompanied by a hard copy of the water flow test report, or
as approved by the fire code official. The report must indicate the dominant water tank level at the time
of the test and the maximum and minimum operating levels of the tank, as well, or identify applicable
water supply fluctuation. The licensed contractor must then design the fire protection system based on
this fluctuation information, as per the applicable referenced NFPA standard.”
Section 507.5.4 change to read as follows:
“507.5.4 Obstruction. Unobstructed access to fire hydrants shall be maintained at all times. Posts,
fences, vehicles, growth, trash, storage and other materials or objects shall not be placed or kept near
fire hydrants, fire department inlet connections or fire protection system control valves in a manner that
would prevent such equipment or fire hydrants from being immediately discernible. The fire department
shall not be deterred or hindered from gaining immediate access to fire protection equipment or fire
hydrants.”
Section 507.5.7 shall be added to read as follows:
“507.5.7 Fire Department Connection. The fire department connection for a sprinkler and/or a standpipe
connection shall be within twenty-five feet (25') of a dedicated street or fire apparatus access road or
approved by the fire code official.”
Add new Section 509.1.2 to read as follows:
“509.1.2 Sign Requirements. Unless more stringent requirements apply, lettering for signs required by
this section shall have a minimum height of two (2) inches when located inside a building and four (4)
inches when located outside, or as approved by the fire code official. The letters shall be of a color that
contrasts with the background.”
Section 603.3.2.1 change exception to read as follows:
“Exception: The aggregate capacity limit shall be permitted to be increased to 3,000 gallons (11,356 L)
in accordance with all requirements of Chapter 57.”
Section 603.3.2.2 change to read as follows:
“603.3.2.2 Restricted use and connection. Tanks installed in accordance with Section 603.3.2 shall be
used only to supply fuel oil to fuel-burning equipment installed in accordance with Section 603.3.2.4.
Connections between tanks and equipment supplied by such tanks shall be made using closed piping
systems.”
Section 604; change and add to read as follows:
[Section 604.1]
“604.1.1 Stationary Generators. Stationary emergency and standby power generators required by
this code shall be listed in accordance with UL 2200.
604.1.2 Installation. Emergency power systems and standby power systems shall be installed in
accordance with the International Building Code, NFPA 70, NFPA 110 and NFPA 111. Existing
installations shall be maintained in accordance with the original approval, except as specified in
Chapter 11.
604.1.3 through 604.1.8 {No changes to these sections.}
604.1.9 Critical Operations Power Systems (COPS). For Critical Operations Power Systems
necessary to maintain continuous power supply to facilities or parts of facilities that require
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/385
continuous operation for the reasons of public safety, emergency management, national security, or
business continuity, see NFPA 70.
604.2 Where Required. Emergency and standby power systems shall be provided where required by
Sections 604.2.1 through 604.2.16 [sic] 604.2.24 or elsewhere identified in this code or any other
referenced code.
604.2.1 through 604.2.3 {No change.}
604.2.4 Group A occupancies. Emergency Voice/alarm Communications Systems. Emergency
power shall be provided for emergency voice/alarm communications systems in the following
occupancies, or as specified elsewhere in this code, as required in Section 907.5.2.2.5. The system
shall be capable of powering the required load for a duration of not less than 24 hours, as required
in NFPA 72.
Covered and Open Malls, Section 907.2.20 and 914.2.3
Group A Occupancies, Sections 907.2.1 and 907.5.2.2.4.
Special Amusement Buildings, Section 907.2.12.3
High-rise Buildings, Section 907.2.13
Atriums, Section 907.2.14
Deep Underground Buildings, Section 907.2.19
604.2.5 through 604.2.11 {No change.}
604.2.12 Means of Egress Illumination. Emergency power shall be provided for means of egress
illumination in accordance with Sections 1008.3 and 1104.5.1. (90 minutes)
604.2.13 Membrane Structures. Emergency power shall be provided for exit signs in temporary
tents and membrane structures in accordance with Section 3103.12.6.1. (90 minutes) Standby
power shall be provided for auxiliary inflation systems in permanent membrane structures in
accordance with Section 2702 of the International Building Code. (4 hours) Auxiliary inflation
systems shall be provided in temporary air-supported and air-inflated membrane structures in
accordance with section 3103.10.4.
604.2.14 {No change.}
604.2.15 Smoke Control Systems. Standby power shall be provided for smoke control systems in
the following occupancies, or as specified elsewhere in this code, as required in Section 909.11:
Covered Mall Building, International Building Code, Section 402.7
Atriums, International Building Code, Section 404.7
Underground Buildings, International Building Code, Section 405.8
Group I-3, International Building Code, Section 408.4.2
Stages, International Building Code, Section 410.3.7.2
Special Amusement Buildings (as applicable to Group A's), International Building Code,
Section 411.1
Smoke Protected Seating, Section 1029.6.2.1
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/385
604.2.17 Covered and Open Mall Buildings. Emergency power shall be provided in accordance
with Section 907.2.20 and 914.2.3.
604.2.18 Airport Traffic-control Towers. A standby power system shall be provided in airport
traffic-control towers more than 65 ft. in height. Power shall be provided to the following
equipment:
1. Pressurization equipment, mechanical equipment and lighting.
2. Elevator operating equipment.
3. Fire alarm and smoke detection systems.
604.2.19 Smoke proof Enclosures and Stair Pressurization Alternative. Standby power shall be
provided for smoke proof enclosures, stair pressurization alternative and associated automatic fire
detection systems as required by the International Building Code, Section 909.20.6.2.
604.2.20 Elevator Pressurization. Standby power shall be provided for elevator pressurization
system as required by the International Building Code, Section 909.21.5.
604.2.21 Elimination of Smoke Dampers in Shaft Penetrations. Standby power shall be provided
when eliminating the smoke dampers in ducts penetrating shafts in accordance with the
International Building Code, Section 717.5.3, exception 2.3.
604.2.22 Common Exhaust Systems for Clothes Dryers. Standby power shall be provided for
common exhaust systems for clothes dryers located in multistory structures in accordance with the
International Mechanical Code, Section 504.10, and Item 7.
604.2.23 Hydrogen Cutoff Rooms. Standby power shall be provided for mechanical ventilation
and gas detection systems of Hydrogen Cutoff Rooms in accordance with the International
Building Code, Section 421.8.
604.2.24 Means of Egress Illumination in Existing Buildings. Emergency power shall be provided
for means of egress illumination in accordance with Section 1104.5 when required by the fire code
official. (90 minutes in I-2, 60 minutes elsewhere.)
604.3 Through 604.7 {No change.}
604.8 Energy Time Duration. Unless a time limit is specified by the fire code official, in this chapter or
elsewhere in this code, or in any other referenced code or standard, the emergency and standby power
system shall be supplied with enough fuel or energy storage capacity for not less than 2-hour fulldemand
operation of the system.
Exception: Where the system is supplied with natural gas from a utility provider and is approved.
Section 609.2; change to read as follows:
“609.2 Where Required. A Type I hood shall be installed at or above all commercial cooking appliances
and domestic cooking appliances used for commercial purposes that produce grease vapors, including
but not limited to cooking equipment used in fixed, mobile, or temporary concessions, such as trucks,
buses, trailers, pavilions, or any form of roofed enclosure, as required by the fire code official.
Exceptions:
Tents, as provided for in Chapter 31.
{No change to existing Exception.}
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/385
Additionally, fuel gas and power provided for such cooking appliances shall be interlocked with the
extinguishing system, as required by Section 904.12.2. Fuel gas containers and piping/hose shall be
properly maintained in good working order and in accordance with all applicable regulations.”
Section 704.1 is changed to read as follows:
“704.1 Enclosure. Interior vertical shafts, including but not limited to stairways, elevator hoist-ways,
service and utility shafts, that connect two or more stories of a building shall be enclosed or protected in
accordance with the codes in effect at the time of construction but, regardless of when constructed, not
less than as required in Chapter 46. New floor openings in existing buildings shall comply with the
International Building Code.”
Section 807.3; change to read as follows:
“807.3 Combustible Decorative Materials. In other than Group I-3 In occupancies in Groups A, E, I, and
R-1, and dormitories in Group R-2, curtains, draperies, fabric hangings and other similar combustible
decorative materials suspended from walls or ceilings shall comply with Section 807.4 and shall not
exceed 10 percent of the specific wall or ceiling area to which they are attached.”
Section 807.5.2.2 and 807.5.2.3; change to read as follows:
“807.5.2.2 Artwork in Corridors. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on the walls of
corridors to not more than 20 percent of the wall area. Such materials shall not be continuous from floor
to ceiling or wall to wall. Curtains, draperies, wall hangings, and other decorative material suspended
from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in
accordance with Section 807 or be noncombustible.
Exception: Corridors protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1 shall be limited to 50 percent of the wall area.
807.5.2.3 Artwork in Classrooms. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on walls of
classrooms to not more than 50 percent of the specific wall area to which they are attached. Curtains,
draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet
the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807 or be
noncombustible.”
Section 807.5.5.2 and 807.5.5.3; change to read as follows:
“807.5.5.2 Artwork in Corridors. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on the walls of
corridors to not more than 20 percent of the wall area. Such materials shall not be continuous from floor
to ceiling or wall to wall. Curtains, draperies, wall hangings, and other decorative material suspended
from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in
accordance with Section 807 or be noncombustible.
Exception: Corridors protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance
with Section 903.3.1.1 shall be limited to 50 percent of the wall area.
807.5.5.3 Artwork in Classrooms. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on walls of
classrooms to not more than 50 percent of the specific wall area to which they are attached. Curtains,
draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet
the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807 or be
noncombustible.”
Add Section 901.6.1.1 to read as follows:
“901.6.1.1 Standpipe Testing. Building owners/managers must maintain and test standpipe systems as
per NFPA 25 requirements. The following additional requirements shall be applied to the testing that is
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/385
required every 5 years:
1. The piping between the Fire Department Connection (FDC) and the standpipe shall be
hydrostatically tested for all FDC's on any type of standpipe system. Hydrostatic testing shall also
be conducted in accordance with NFPA 25 requirements for the different types of standpipe
systems.
2. For any manual (dry or wet) standpipe system not having an automatic water supply capable
of flowing water through the standpipe, the tester shall connect hose from a fire hydrant or
portable pumping system (as approved by the fire code official) to each FDC, and flow water
through the standpipe system to the roof outlet to verify that each inlet connection functions
properly. There are no required pressure criteria at the outlet. Verify that check valves function
properly and that there are no closed control valves on the system.
3. Any pressure relief, reducing, or control valves shall be tested in accordance with the
requirements of NFPA 25.
4. If the FDC is not already provided with approved caps, the contractor shall install such caps
for all FDC's as required by the fire code official.
5. Upon successful completion of standpipe test, place a blue tag (as per Texas Administrative
Code, Fire Sprinkler Rules for Inspection, Test and Maintenance Service (ITM) Tag) at the bottom
of each standpipe riser in the building. The tag shall be check-marked as “Fifth Year” for Type of
ITM, and the note on the back of the tag shall read “5 Year Standpipe Test” at a minimum.
6. The procedures required by Texas Administrative Code Fire Sprinkler Rules with regard to
Yellow Tags and Red Tags or any deficiencies noted during the testing, including the required
notification of the local Authority Having Jurisdiction (fire code official) shall be followed.
7. Additionally, records of the testing shall be maintained by the owner and contractor, if
applicable, as required by the State Rules mentioned above and NFPA 25.
8. Standpipe system tests where water will be flowed external to the building shall not be
conducted during freezing conditions or during the day prior to expected night time freezing
conditions.
9. Contact the fire code official for requests to remove existing fire hose from Class II and III
standpipe systems where employees are not trained in the utilization of this firefighting equipment.
All standpipe hose valves must remain in place and be provided with an approved cap and chain
when approval is given to remove hose by the fire code.”
Section 901.6.3 is added to read as follows:
“901.6.3 False Alarm and Nuisance Alarms. False alarms and nuisance alarms shall not be given,
signaled, or transmitted or caused or permitted to be given, signaled, or transmitted in any manner.”
Section 901.7 is changed to read as follows:
“901.7 Systems out of service. Where a required fire protection system is out of service or in the event
of an excessive number of activations, the fire department and the fire code official shall be notified
immediately and, where required by the fire code official, the building shall either be evacuated or an
approved fire watch shall be provided for all occupants left unprotected by the shut down until the fire
protection system has been returned to service. {Remainder unchanged}”
Section 901.8.2; change to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/385
“901.8.2 Removal of existing Occupant-use Hose Lines. The fire code official is authorized to permit
the removal of existing occupant-use hose lines and hose valves where all of the following conditions
exist:
…
2. The hose line(s) would not be utilized by trained personnel or the fire department.
3. If the occupant-use hose lines are removed, but the hose valves are required to remain as per
the fire code official, such shall be compatible with fire department fittings.”
Section 903.1.1 Alternative protection, is changed to read as follows:
“903.1.1 Alternative protection. Alternative automatic fire-extinguishing systems complying with
Section 904 shall be permitted in addition to automatic sprinkler protection where recognized by the
applicable standard and approved by the fire code official.”
Section 903.1.2 is amended by addition of the following second paragraph:
“903.1.2 Residential Sprinkler Systems. … Unless specifically allowed by this Code or the International
Building Code, residential sprinkler systems installed in accordance with NFPA 13D or 13R shall not be
recognized for the purposes of exceptions or reductions, commonly referred to as “trade-offs,” permitted
by other requirements of this Code. In addition, all residential sprinkler systems installed in accordance
with NFPA 13D or 13R must include attic sprinkler protection to be recognized for the purposes of such
trade-offs permitted by other requirements of this Code.”
Add the following to Section 903.2:
“903.2 Where required. (Language unchanged…) Automatic Sprinklers shall not be installed in elevator
machine rooms, elevator machine spaces, and elevator hoist-ways. Storage shall not be allowed within
the elevator machine room. Signage shall be provided at the entry doors to the elevator machine room
indicating “ELEVATOR MACHINERY – NO STORAGE ALLOWED.”
In Section 903.2, delete the exception.
Section 903.2.1.1 is changed to read as follows:
“903.2.1.1 Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout a fire area
containing Group A-1 Occupancies.”
Section 903.2.1.3 [903.2.1.2] is changed to read as follows:
“903.2.1.2 Group A-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout a fire area
containing Group A-2 Occupancies.”
Section 903.2.1.3 is changed to read as follow:
“903.2.1.3 Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout a fire area
containing Group A-3 Occupancies.”
Section 903.2.1.4 is changed to read as follows:
“903.2.1.4 Group A-4. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout a fire area
containing Group A-4 Occupancies.”
Section 903.2.1.5 is changed to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/385
“903.2.1.5 Group A-5. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout a fire area
containing Group A-5 Occupancies.”
Section 903.2.2 is changed to read as follows:
“903.2.2. Group B Ambulatory health-care facilities. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided
throughout a fire area containing Group B ambulatory health-care facility occupancy.”
Section 903.2.3 is changed to read as follows:
“903.2.3 Group E. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all Group E
Occupancies.”
Section 903.2.4 is amended to read as follows:
“903.2.4 Group F-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings
containing Group F-1 Occupancies.”
Section 903.2.7 is amended to read as follows:
“903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings containing
Group M Occupancies.”
Section 903.2.8 is amended to read as follows:
“903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 shall
be provided throughout all buildings in a Group R fire area.”
Section 903.2.9 is amended to read as follows:
“903.2.9 Group S-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings
containing Group S-1 Occupancies.”
Section 903.2.9.1 is amended to read as follows:
“903.2.9.1 Repair Garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings
used as repair garages in accordance with the International Building Code.”
Section 903.2.9.2 is amended to read as follows:
“903.2.9.2 Bulk Storage of Tires. Buildings and structures with areas for the storage of tires shall be
equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.”
Section 903.2.9.3 is added to read as follows:
“903.2.9.3 Self-service storage facility. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all
self-service storage facilities.”
Section 903.2.10 is amended to read:
“903.2.10 Group S-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings classified
as enclosed parking garages in accordance with Section 406.4 of the International Building Code or
where located beneath other groups.”
Section 903.2.10.1 is amended to read:
“903.2.10.1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings used for storage of
commercial trucks or buses.”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/385
Section 903.2.11.1 is amended as follows:
“903.2.11.1. Stories without openings. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in every story or
basement of all buildings without openings.”
Section 903.2.11.3 is changed to read as follows:
“903.2.11.3 Buildings over 35 feet in height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed
throughout buildings with a floor level, other than penthouses in compliance with Section 1510 of the
International Building Code, which is located 35 feet (10,668 mm) or more above the lowest level of
fire department vehicle access.
Exception: Open parking structures in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building
Code, having no other occupancies above the subject garage.”
Section 903.2.11.7 is added to read as follows:
“903.2.11.7 High-Piled Combustible Storage. For any building with a clear height exceeding 12 feet
(4572 mm), see Chapter 32 to determine if those provisions apply.”
Section 903.2.11.8 is added to read as follows:
“903.2.11.8 Spray Booths and Rooms. New and existing spray booths and spraying rooms shall be
protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system.”
Section 903.2.11.9 is added as follows:
“903.2.11.9 Sprinkler system for new construction. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed
throughout all buildings. For the purpose of this provision, firewalls shall not define separate buildings.
Exceptions:
1. Detached Group U occupancies that are 500 square feet or less;
2. Detached Group U occupancies that are greater than 500 square feet, but less than 1,000
square feet, are required to choose from one of the following methods as a means for additional
fire protection:
a. Automatic fire sprinkler system, or
b. Install 5/8" Type X Gypsum Board on all walls and ceilings of the entire structure.
3. Detached Group U occupancies 1,000 square feet or larger are required to be furnished with
an automatic fire sprinkler system.
4. Covered walkways or open canopies above fuel dispensing pumps, bus stops or other similar
structures intended only for the temporary protection of persons from inclement weather, but not
including patios attached to buildings.
5. Temporary buildings housing construction materials and offices not exceeding 500 square
feet for 180 days. Additional time can be granted by the Fire Code Official or Community
Development Manager.
6. Open parking structures in compliance with Section 406.3 of the International Building Code.
7. Guard houses for commercial and residential development.
8. Gazebos and ramadas for residential and public use.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/385
9. Independent restroom buildings associated with golf courses, construction sites, parks and
similar uses.”
Section 903.2.11.10 is added as follows:
“903.2.11.10 Existing Buildings. The owner of any building shall be required to install an automatic
sprinkler system at such time as the owner(s) constructs an addition or enlargement to the building if the
total square footage of such an addition, when combined with the total square footage of all previous
additions and enlargements to the building completed after April 3, 2007:
1. Causes the building to exceed 4,000 square feet (371.6 m2) of total floor area; and
2. The total square footage of all such additions and enlargements exceeds the original floor area
of the building by more than thirty percent (30%), regardless of fire area, area separation walls, or
fire walls.
Exception: Open parking garages in compliance with Section 406.3 of the International Building Code.”
Amend Section 903.3.1.1.1 to read as follows:
“903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. When approved by the fire code official, automatic sprinklers shall not
be required in the following rooms or areas where such . . . {bulk of section unchanged} . . . because it
is damp, of fire-resistance-rated construction or contains electrical equipment.
1. Any room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes a serious life or fire
hazard.
2. Any room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature of the
contents, when approved by the code official.
3. Generator and transformer rooms, under the direct control of a public utility, separated from
the remainder of the building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having a fireresistance
rating of not less than 2 hours.”
4. Elevator machine rooms, machinery spaces, and hoist ways, other than pits where such
sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances.”
Change the following to Section 903.3.1.3:
“903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems. Where allowed, automatic sprinkler systems installed in oneand
two-family dwellings and townhouses shall be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D
or in accordance with state law.”
Add Section 903.3.1.4 as follows:
“903.3.1.4 Freeze protection. Freeze protection systems for automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be in
accordance with the requirements of the applicable referenced NFPA standard and this section.
903.3.1.4.1 Attics. Only dry-pipe, pre-action, or listed antifreeze automatic fire sprinkler systems
shall be allowed to protect attic spaces.
Exception: Wet-pipe fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect non-ventilated attic
spaces where:
1. The attic sprinklers are supplied by a separate floor control valve assembly to allow
ease of draining the attic system without impairing sprinklers throughout the rest of the
building, and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/385
2. Adequate heat shall be provided for freeze protection as per the applicable referenced
NFPA standard, and
3. The attic space is a p art of the building's thermal al, or heat, envelope, such that
insulation is provided at the roof deck, rather than at the ceiling level.
903.3.1.4.2 Heat trace/insulation. Heat trace/insulation shall only be allowed where approved by
the fire code official for small sections of large diameter water-filled pipe.”
Add Section 903.3.1.5 as follows:
“903.3.1.5. Installation. Automatic sprinklers and standpipe systems shall be installed with the
following:
1. A single underground supply and point for the Fire Department Connection (FDC) shall be
provided for all buildings.
2. All inspector's test, ball drips, and main drains shall be piped directly to the outside of the
building.
3. Fire pumps shall be equipped with a properly sized test header.
4. Underground piping shall have a 10 feet minimum separation from all other utilities and
placed in a separate trench. Underground piping within 5 feet of the building may be combined
with other utilities for the entrance to the building.
5. Porches and balconies shall be fire-sprinkled on all Group R-2 and R-3 occupancies.
6. A minimum of 4 feet of pipe between the check valve and inside the wall of the FDC.”
Amend Section 903.3.5 to add a second paragraph to read as follows:
“Water supply as required for such systems shall be provided in conformance with the supply
requirements of the respective standards; however, every fire protection system shall be designed with a
10 psi safety factor. Reference section 507.4 for additional design requirements.”
Section 903.3.5.1 is amended to read as follows:
“903.3.5.1. Connections for Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems. Automatic fire sprinkler systems in
residential structures with more than two individual units and all nonresidential structures shall have a
separate connection to the potable water supply. Installation plans for the underground supply main shall
be submitted for review and approval. The underground supply main shall be installed in accordance
with this Code, National Fire Protection Association Standard 24, and State Fire Marshal's Office
guidelines. The size of the connection shall be reviewed and approved by the University Park Fire
Department prior to installation. The water supply for two individual units and a single-family residence
can be installed, in accordance with Section 903.3.5.1.1 or this section. The minimum size of a water
line supplying a one- and two-family residence is 1-1/4 inches diameter. The potable water supply shall
be protected against backflow in accordance with the requirements of this section and the International
Plumbing Code.”
Delete Section 903.3.5.1.1.
Delete Section 903.3.5.1.2.
Section 903.3.8, add the following section:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/385
“903.3.8 Fire Department Connection Attachment. Fire department connections must be installed in
accordance with section 912 (IFC). All fire department connection outlets installed for the automatic
sprinkler systems that are 1-1/2 inches in diameter shall be installed with iron pipe threading (IPT).
Outlets that are 2-1/2 inches in diameter shall be American National Fire Hose Connection Screw
Threads (NH). When a reducer is added to a system from a 2-1/2 inch to 1-1/2 inches outlet, the 2-1/2
inch diameter outlet must have NH screw threads and the 1-1/2 inch diameter outlet shall have IPT
threading.”
Add a second paragraph to Section 903.4, after the exceptions, to read as follows:
“Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the
sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All
control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves
shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering.”
In Section 903.4.2, add second paragraph to read as follows:
“The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a weatherproof horn/strobe
notification appliance with a minimum 75 candela strobe rating, installed as close as practical to the fire
department connection.”
Section 903.3.5; add a second paragraph to read as follows:
“Water supply as required for such systems shall be provided in conformance with the supply
requirements of the respective standards; however, every water-based fire protection system shall be
designed with a 10 psi safety factor. Reference Section 507.4 for additional design requirements.”
Amend Section 905.2 to read as follows:
“905.2 Installation standard. Standpipe systems shall be installed in accordance with this section and
NFPA 14. Manual dry standpipe systems shall be supervised with a minimum of 10 psig and a
maximum of 40 psig air pressure with a high/low alarm.”
Section 905.3.1 is changed to read as follows:
“905.3.1 Height. Class III standpipe systems shall be installed throughout buildings where the floor
level of the highest story is located more than 30 feet or 2 stories above the lowest level of the fire
department vehicle access, or where the floor level of the lowest story is located 30 feet or 2 stories
below the highest level of fire department vehicle access {remainder unchanged}.”
Section 905.3. add Section 905.3.9 and exception to read as follows:
“905.3.9 Building area. In buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet in area per story, Class I automatic
wet or manual wet standpipes shall be provided where any portion of the building's interior area is more
than 200 feet (60960 mm) of travel, vertically and horizontally, from the nearest point of fire department
vehicle access.
Exception:
1. Automatic dry and semi-automatic dry standpipes are allowed as provided for in NFPA 14.”
2. R-2 occupancies of four stories or less in height having no interior corridors.”
Sectionb 905.4, change Item 1, 3, and 5, and add Item 7 to read as follows:
“1. In every required exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provided for each story above and
below grade plane. Hose connections shall be located at an intermediate landing between stories, unless
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/385
otherwise approved by the fire code official.
2. {No change.}
3. In every exit passageway, at the entrance from the exit passageway to other areas of a building.
Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to an exit passageway are reachable from an exit stairway
hose connection by a {No change to rest.}
4. {No change.}
5. Where the roof has a slope of less than four units vertical to 12 units horizontal (33.3 percent
slope), each standpipe shall be provided with a two-way a hose connection shall be located to serve the
roof or at the highest landing of an interior exit stairway with stair access to the roof provided in
accordance with Section 1011.12.
6. {No change.}
7. When required by this Chapter, standpipe connections shall be placed adjacent exits to the structure
and at two hundred feet (200') intervals along major corridors thereafter, or as otherwise approved by
the fire code official.”
Section 905.9, add a second paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows:
“Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the
sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All
control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves
shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering.”
Section 907.1; add Section 907.1.4 Design Standards to read as follows:
“907.1.4 Design Standards. All alarm systems new or replacement shall be addressable. Alarm systems
serving more than 20 smoke detectors shall be analog addressable.
Exception: Existing systems need not comply unless the total building remodel or expansion
initiated after the effective date of this Code, as adopted, exceeds 30% of the building. When
cumulative building remodel or expansion exceeds 50% of the building must comply within 18
months of permit application.”
Change Section 907.2.1 to read as follows:
“907.2.1 Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in
accordance with new Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group A occupancies having an occupant load
of 300 or more persons or more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge.
Group A occupancies not separated from one another in accordance with Section 707.3. 10 of the
International Building Code shall be considered as a single occupancy for the purposes of applying this
section Portions of Group E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be provided with a fire
alarm system as required for the Group E occupancy.
Exceptions: {no change}
Activation of fire alarm notification appliances shall:
1. Cause illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1 footcandle (11 lux) at
the walking surface level, and
2. Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions.”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/385
Amend Section 907.2.3 to read as follows:
“907.2.3 Group E. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in
accordance with Section 907.6 shall be installed in Group E educational occupancies. When automatic
sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems or detectors shall be connected to the
building fire alarm system. An approved smoke detection system shall be installed in Group E day care
occupancies. Unless separated by a minimum of 100' open space, all buildings, whether portable
buildings or the main building, will be considered one building for alarm occupant load consideration
and interconnection of alarm systems.”
Change Section 907.2.3 exception 1 and add exception 1.1 to read as follows:
“Exceptions:
1.1. No Change.
1.2. Residential In-Home day care with not more than 12 children may use interconnected
single station detectors in all habitable rooms. (For care of more than five children 2-1/2 or less
years of age, see Section 907.2.6.)”
Section 907.2.11.5 add a second paragraph after the exceptions to read as follows:
“In an R-3 structure, the household fire alarm system shall be monitored by an approved supervising
station and be maintained in accordance with NFPA 72.”
Change Section 907.2.13 exception 3 to read as follows:
“3. Open air portions of buildings with occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with Section 303.1 of
the International Building Code, when used for open air seating; however, this exception does not apply
to accessory uses including but not limited to sky boxes, restaurants and similarly enclosed areas.”
Add Section 907.4.2.7 to read as follows:
“907.4.2.7 Type. Manual alarm initiating devices shall be an approved double action type.”
Add Section 907.6.1.1 as follows:
“907.6.1.1 Wiring Installation. All fire alarm systems shall be installed in such a manner that a failure of
any single initiating device or single open in an initiating circuit conductor will not interfere with the
normal operation of other such devices. All signaling line circuits (SLC) shall be installed in such a way
that a single open will not interfere with the operation of any addressable devices (Class A). Outgoing
and return SLC conductors shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 requirements for Class A
circuits and shall have a minimum of four feet separation horizontally and one foot vertically between
supply and return circuit conductors. The initiating device circuit (IDC) from a signaling line circuit
interface device may be wired Class B, provided the distance from the interface device to the initiating
device is ten feet or less.
Section 907.6.3; delete all four exceptions.
Add Section 907.6.6.3 as follows:
“907.6.6.3 Communication Requirements. All alarm systems, new or replacement, shall transmit alarm,
supervisory and trouble signals descriptively to the approved central station, remote supervisory station
or proprietary supervising station as defined in NFPA 72, with the correct device designation and
location of addressable device identification. Alarms shall not be permitted to be transmitted as a
General Alarm or Zone condition.”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/385
Section 909.22; add to read as follows:
“909.22 Stairway or Ramp Pressurization Alternative. Where the building is equipped throughout with
an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and the stair pressurization
alternative is chosen for compliance with Building Code requirements for a smoke-proof enclosure,
interior exit stairways or ramps shall be pressurized to a minimum of 0.10 inches of water (25 Pa) and a
maximum of 0.35 inches of water (87 Pa) in the shaft relative to the building measured with all interior
exit stairway and ramp doors closed under maximum anticipated conditions of stack effect and wind
effect. Such systems shall comply with Section 909, including the installation of a separate fire-fighter's
smoke control panel as per Section 909.16, and a Smoke Control Permit shall be required from the fire
department as per Section 105.7.
909.22.1 Ventilating equipment. The activation of ventilating equipment for the stair or ramp
pressurization system shall be by smoke detectors installed at each floor level at an approved
location at the entrance to the smoke-proof enclosure. When the closing device for the stairway or
ramp shaft and vestibule doors is activated by smoke detection or power failure, the mechanical
equipment shall activate and operate at the required performance levels. Smoke detectors shall be
installed in accordance with Section 907.3.
Ventilation Systems. Smoke-proof enclosure ventilation systems shall be independent of other
building ventilation systems. The equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall
comply with one of the following:
Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located exterior to the building
and directly connected to the smoke-proof enclosure or connected to the smoke-proof enclosure by
ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707
of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the
Building Code, or both.
Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within the smoke-proof
enclosure with intake or exhaust directly from and to the outside or through ductwork enclosed by
not less than 2-hour barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or
horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both.
Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within the building if
separated from the remainder of the building, including other mechanical equipment, by not less
than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or
horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both.
Exceptions:
1. Control wiring and power wiring utilizing a 2-hour rated cable or cable system.
2. Where encased with not less than 2 inches (51 mm) of concrete.
3. Control wiring and power wiring protected by a listed electrical circuit protective
systems with a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.
909.22.1.2 Standby Power. Mechanical vestibule and stairway and ramp shaft ventilation
systems and automatic fire detection systems shall be provided with standby power in
accordance with Section 2702 of the Building Code.
909.22.1.3 Acceptance and Testing. Before the mechanical equipment is approved, the
system shall be tested in the presence of the fire code official to confirm that the system is
operating in compliance with these requirements.”
Section 910.2; change Exception 2. Add 3 to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/385
“2. Only manual smoke and heat removal shall not be required in areas of buildings equipped with
early suppression fast-response (ESFR) sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat removal is prohibited.
3. Only manual smoke and heat removal shall not be required in areas of buildings equipped with
control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50(m*S)1/2 or less that are
listed to control a fire in stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat
removal is prohibited.”
Add subsections 910.2.3 with exceptions and 910.2.4 to Section 910.2 as follows:
“910.2.3 Group H. Buildings and portions thereof used as Group H occupancy as follows:
1. In occupancies classified as Group H-2 or H-3, any of which are more than 15,000 square
feet (1394 m2) in single floor area.
Exceptions:
1. Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials.
2. In areas of buildings in Group H used for storing Class 2, 3 and 4 liquid and solid
oxidizers, Class 1 and unclassified detonable organic peroxides, Class 3 and 4 unstable
(reactive) materials, or Class 2 or 3 water-reactive materials as required for a high-hazard
commodity classification.
910.2.4 Exit access travel distance increase. Buildings and portions thereof used as Group F-1 or S-1
occupancy where the maximum exit access travel distance is increased in accordance with Section
1017.3.2”
Section 910.3; add section 910.3.4 to read as follows:
“910.3.4 Vent Operation. Smoke and heat vents shall be capable of being operated by approved
automatic and manual means. Automatic operation of smoke and heat vents shall conform to the
provisions of Sections 910.3.2.1 through 910.3.2.3.
910.3.4.1 Sprinkled buildings. Where installed in buildings equipped with an approved automatic
sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall be designed to operate automatically. The automatic
operating mechanism of the smoke and heat vents shall operate at a temperature rating at least 100
degrees F (approximately 38 degrees Celsius) greater than the temperature rating of the sprinklers
installed.
Exception: Manual only systems per Section 910.2.
910.3.4.2 Non-sprinkled Buildings. Where installed in buildings not equipped with an approved
automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall operate automatically by actuation of a
heat-responsive device rated at between 100°F (56°C) and 220°F (122°C) above ambient.
Exception: Listed gravity-operated drop out vents.”
Section 910.4.3.1; change to read as follows:
“910.4.3.1 Makeup Air. Makeup air openings shall be provided within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the floor
level. Operation of makeup air openings shall be manual or automatic. The minimum gross area of
makeup air inlets shall be 8 square feet per 1,000 cubic feet per minute (0.74 m2 per 0.4719 m3/s) of
smoke exhaust.”
Section 910.4.4; change to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/385
“910.4.4 Activation. The mechanical smoke removal system shall be activated by manual controls only
automatically by the automatic sprinkler system or by an approved fire detection system. Individual
manual controls shall also be provided.
Exception: Manual only systems per Section 910.2.”
Add Section 912.2.3 to read as follows:
“912.2.3 Hydrant distance. An approved fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of the fire
department connection as the fire hose lays.”
Add second paragraph and exception to Section 913.2.1 as follows:
“When located on the ground level at an exterior wall, the fire pump room shall be provided with an
exterior fire department access door that is not less than 3 ft. in width and 6 ft. - 8 in. in height,
regardless of any interior doors that are provided. A key box shall be provided at this door, as required
by section 506.1.
Exception: When it is necessary to locate the fire pump room on other levels or not at an exterior
wall, the corridor leading to the fire pump room access from the exterior of the building shall be
provided with equivalent fire resistance as that required for the pump room, or as approved by the
fire code official. Access keys shall be provided in the key box as required by section 506.1.”
Add a second paragraph to Section 913.4 as follows:
“The fire-pump system shall also be supervised for “loss of power,” “phase reversal” and “pump
running” conditions by supervisory signal on distinct circuits.”
Section 914.3.1.2; change to read as follows:
“914.3.1.2 Water Supply to required Fire Pumps. In buildings that are more than 420 feet (128 m) in
building height, required fire pumps shall be supplied by connections to no fewer than two water mains
located in different streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each connection to the
water main and the pumps. Each connection and the supply piping between the connection and the
pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and pressure required for the pumps to operate.
Exception: {No change to exception.}”
Section 1006.2.2.6; add a new Section 1006.2.2.6 as follows:
“1006.2.2.6 Electrical Rooms. For electrical rooms, special exiting requirements may apply. Reference
the Electrical Code as adopted.”
Section 1009.1; add the following Exception 4:
“Exceptions:
{previous exceptions unchanged}
4. Buildings regulated under State Law and built in accordance with State registered plans,
including any variances or waivers granted by the State, shall be deemed to be in compliance with
the requirements of Section 1009.”
Section 1010.1.9.4 Bolt Locks; change Exceptions 3 and 4 to read as follows:
“Exceptions:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/385
3. Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load of less than 50 persons in a Group B, F, M or S
occupancy. {Remainder unchanged}
4. Where a pair of doors serves a Group A, B, F, M or S occupancy {Remainder unchanged}”
Section 1015.8 Window Openings; change number 1 to read as follows:
“1. Operable windows where the top of the sill of the opening is located more than 55 feet (16 764
mm) above the finished grade or other surface below and that are provided with window fall prevention
devices that comply with ASTM F 2006.”
Section 1020.1 Construction; add Exception 6 to read as follows:
“6. In Group B office buildings, corridor walls and ceilings need not be of fire-resistive construction
within office spaces of a single tenant when the space is equipped with an approved automatic fire alarm
system with corridor smoke detection. The actuation of any detector shall activate alarms audible in all
areas served by the corridor. The smoke-detection system shall be connected to the building's fire alarm
system where such a system is provided.”
Change Section 1023.11 to read as follows:
“1023.11 Smoke-proof enclosures and pressurized stairways. In buildings required to comply with
Section 403 or 405 of the IBC, each of the exit enclosures serving a story with a floor surface located
more than 55 feet (16 764 mm) above the lowest level of fire . . . {remainder of section unchanged}.”
Section 1029.1.1.1; delete this section. Spaces under Grandstands and Bleachers.
Section 1031.2 change to read as follows:
“1031.2 Reliability. Required exit accesses, exits or exit discharges shall be continuously maintained
free from obstructions or impediments to full instant use in the case of fire or other emergency. An exit
or exit passageway shall not be used for any purpose that interferes with a means of egress. Security
devices affecting means of egress shall be subject to approval of the fire code official.”
Section 1103.3; add sentence to end of paragraph as follows:
“Provide emergency signage as required by Section 607.3.”
Section 1103.5; add Section 1103.5.4 to read as follows:
“1103.5.4 Spray booths and rooms. New and existing spray booths and spray rooms shall be protected
by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system in accordance with Section 2404.”
Section 1103.7; add Section 1103.7.8 and 1103.7.8.1 to read as follows:
“1103.7.8 Fire Alarm System Design Standards. Where an existing fire alarm system is upgraded or
replaced, the devices shall be addressable. Fire alarm systems utilizing more than 20 smoke and/or heat
detectors shall have analog initiating devices.
Exception: Existing systems need not comply unless the total building, or fire alarm system,
remodel or expansion exceeds 30% of the building. When cumulative building, or fire alarm
system, remodel or expansion initiated after the date of original fire alarm panel installation
exceeds 50% of the building, or fire alarm system, the fire alarm system must comply within 18
months of permit application.”
1103.7.8.1 Communication requirements. Refer to Section 907.6.6 for applicable requirements.”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/385
Change Section 2304.1 to read as follows:
“2304.1 Supervision of dispensing. The dispensing of fuel at motor fuel-dispensing facilities shall be the
following:
1. Conducted by a qualified attendant; and/or
2. Shall be under the supervision of a qualified attendant; and/or
3. Shall be an unattended self-service facility in accordance with Section 2304.3.
4. Any time the qualified attendant of item #1 or #2 above is not present, such operations shall
be considered as an unattended self-service facility and shall also comply with Section 2304.3.”
Section 2401.2; delete this section.
Table 3206.2, footnote j; change text to read as follows:
“j. Where storage areas are protected by either early suppression fast response (ESFR) sprinkler
systems or control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50 (m * s) 1/2 or
less that are listed to control a fire in the stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers, installed in
accordance with NFPA 13, manual smoke and heat vents or manually activated engineered mechanical
smoke exhaust systems shall be required within these areas.”
Section 3310.1; add sentence to end of paragraph to read as follows:
“When fire apparatus access roads are required to be installed for any structure or development, they
shall be approved prior to the time at which construction has progressed beyond completion of the
foundation of any structure.”
Add Section 5003.1.5 to read as follows:
“5003.1.5 Hazardous materials storage is prohibited in residential occupancies.
Exception. Quantities are permitted for the maintenance of pertinent equipment of systems for
such uses and shall be in accordance with Chapter 50.”
Section 5601.1.3; change to read as follows:
“Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling, or use of fireworks is prohibited.
Exceptions:
1. Only when approved for fireworks displays, storage, and handling of fireworks as
allowed in Section 5604 and 5608.
2. The use of fireworks for approved fireworks displays as allowed in Section 5608.”
{Delete remainder of text.}
Amend Section 5608.5.3 by adding the following:
“Marking of shell. Each aerial shell shall have printed directly under its outer casing the following
minimum warning 1/8-inch high letters, which contrast to the background:
WARNING
EXPLOSIVES CLASS “1.4G or 1.3G”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/385
FIREWORK
DO NOT HANDLE- CALL “911”
Section 5608.8.1 is added as follows:
“5608.8.1 Ignition. Aerial shells shall be ignited by lighting the tips of fusses by an electrical ignition
source except when manual ignition is approved by the Fire Marshal. Operators shall not place any part
of their bodies over the throat of the mortar.”
Add a sentence to Section 5703.6 as follows:
“5703.6 Piping systems. Piping systems, and their component parts, for flammable and combustible
liquids shall be in accordance with Sections 5703.6.1 through 5703.6.11. An approved method of
secondary containment shall be provided for underground tank and piping systems.”
Section 5704.2.9.5; change Section 5704.2.9.5, add Section 5704.2.9.5.3 as follows:
“5704.2.9.5 Above-ground tanks inside of buildings. Above-ground tanks inside of buildings shall
comply with Section 5704.2.9.5.1 through 5704.2.9.5.3.
5704.2.9.5.1 {No change.}
5704.2.9.5.2 {No change.}
5704.2.9.5.3 Combustible Liquid Storage Tanks Inside of Buildings. The maximum aggregate
allowable quantity limit shall be 3,000 gallons (11 356 L) of Class II or III combustible liquid for
storage in protected aboveground tanks complying with Section 5704.2.9.7 when all of the
following conditions are met:
1. The entire 3,000 gallons (11 356 L) quantity shall be stored in protected above-ground
tanks;
2. The 3,000 gallon (11 356 L) capacity shall be permitted to be stored in a single tank or
multiple smaller tanks;
3. The tanks shall be located in a room protected by an automatic sprinkler system
complying with Section 903.3.1.1; and
4. Tanks shall be connected to fuel-burning equipment, including generators, utilizing an
approved closed piping system.
The quantity of combustible liquid stored in tanks complying with this section shall not be counted
towards the maximum allowable quantity set forth in Table 5003.1.1(1), and such tanks shall not
be required to be located in a control area. Such tanks shall not be located more than two stories
below grade.”
Section 5704.2.9.6.1 is added as follows:
“The storage of flammable or combustible liquids in aboveground tanks is prohibited in residential
areas.”
Amend Section 5704.2.11.5 to add a sentence to read as follows:
“5704.2.11.4 Leak Prevention. Leak prevention for underground tanks shall comply with Sections
5704.2.11.4.1 through 5704.2.11.5.3. An approved method of secondary containment shall be provided
for underground tank and piping systems.”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/385
Section 5704.2.11.4.2; change to read as follows:
“5704.2.11.4.2 Leak detection. Underground storage tank systems shall be provided with an approved
method of leak detection from any component of the system that is designed and installed in accordance
with NFPA 30 and as specified in Section 5704.2.11.4.3.”
Section 5704.2.11.5.3; add Section 5704.2.11.5.3 to read as follows:
“5704.2.11.4.3 Observation wells. Approved sampling tubes a minimum of 6 inches in diameter shall be
installed in the backfill material of each underground flammable or combustible liquid storage tank. The
tubes shall extend from a point 12 inches below the average grade of the excavation to ground level and
shall be provided with suitable surface access caps. Each tank site shall provide a sampling sump at the
corners of the excavation with a minimum of 4 tubes. Sampling tubes shall be placed in the product line
excavation within 10 feet of the tank excavation and one every 50 feet routed along product lines
towards the dispensers, a minimum of two are required.”
Add Section 6103.2.1.8 to Section 6103.2.1 to read as follows:
“6103.2.1.8 jewelry repair, Dental Labs and Similar Occupancies. Where natural gas service is not
available, portable LP-Gas containers are allowed to be used to supply approved torch assemblies or
similar appliances. Such containers shall not exceed 20-pound (9.0 kg) water capacity. Aggregate
capacity shall not exceed 60-pound (27.2 kg) water capacity. Each device shall be separated from other
containers by a distance of not less than 20 feet.”
Add exception number 2 to Section 6104.2 to read as follows:
“Exceptions:
1. {Existing exception unchanged}
2. Except as permitted in 308 and 3804.3.2, LP-gas containers are not permitted in residential
areas.”
Add Section 6104.3.2 to Section 6104.3 to read as follows:
“6104.3.2 Spas, pool heaters and other listed devices. Where natural gas service is not available, an LPGas
container is allowed to be used to supply spa and pool heaters or other listed devices. Such
container shall not exceed 250-gallon water capacity per lot. See Table 6104.3 for location of containers.
Exception: Lots where LP can be off loaded wholly on the property where the tank is located;
owner may install 500 gallons above ground or 1,000 gallons in an underground approved
container.”
Section 6107.4 and 6109.13; change to read as follows:
“6107.4 Protecting Containers from Vehicles. Where exposed to vehicular damage due to proximity to
alleys, driveways or parking areas, LP-gas containers, regulators and piping shall be protected in
accordance with NFPA 58 Section 312.”
“6109.13 Protection of Containers. LP-gas containers shall be stored within a suitable enclosure or
otherwise protected against tampering. Vehicle impact protection shall be provided as required by
Section 6107.4.”
{Delete the exception}
Table B105.2; change footnote a. to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/385
“a. The reduced fire-flow shall be not less than 1,500 gallons per minute.”
Amend Chapter 47 Referenced Standards for NFPA 13 listed below:
Amend NFPA 13 D, 2016 edition:
1. Delete Section 8.3.2 and 8.3.4.
2. Amend Section 10.2.1 to read as follows:
(1) “10.2.1 Number of Design Sprinklers. The number of design sprinklers under flat, smooth,
horizontal ceilings shall include all sprinklers within a compartment, up to a maximum of two
sprinklers that require the greatest hydraulic demand. When the compartment exceeds two
sprinkler heads for coverage in accordance with this standard, the total amount of heads to be
designed shall not exceed four sprinklers.”
(Ordinance 18/004 adopted 1/16/18)
Sec. 5.02.004 Appeals
Whenever the fire marshal disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed
that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued
or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire marshal to the city council, sitting as
a board of appeals, within thirty days after such decision date, or within the time allowed by a specific section of
the code, whichever is applicable. Any provision of the code establishing a board of appeals or fire code appeal
board shall be revised and amended to read “city council.” (1996 Code, sec. 5.104)
Sec. 5.02.005 New materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits
The chief of the division of fire prevention shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected
persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies for which permits are required in
addition to those now enumerated in said code. The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall post such list in a
conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. (1996 Code, sec. 5.105)
Sec. 5.02.006 Penalty
(a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this code or standards hereby adopted or fail to comply
therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of
any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit
issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as
affirmed or modified by the city or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall for each
and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine as
provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 109.3 of the International Fire Code, 2006 edition.
The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and, when not
otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions.
(1996 Code, sec. 5.106)
ARTICLE 5.03 INSPECTIONS FOR FIRE HAZARDS
Sec. 5.03.001 Required
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/385
It shall be the duty of the fire department to inspect or cause to be inspected by the fire marshal, or members
designated by the fire marshal, as often as necessary, but not less than twice a year in the commercial districts of
the city, all buildings, premises, and public thoroughfares, for ascertaining and causing to be corrected any
conditions liable to cause fire, or any violations of the provisions or intent of any ordinance of the city relating to a
fire hazard. (1996 Code, sec. 5.401)
Sec. 5.03.002 Order to correct dangerous conditions
(a) Whenever any officer or member of the fire department shall find in any building, or upon any premises or
other place, combustible or explosive matter or a dangerous accumulation of rubbish or unnecessary accumulation
of wastepaper, boxes, shavings, or any other highly flammable materials, and which is so situated as to endanger
property, or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows liable to interfere
with the operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in case of fire, he shall order the same to be
removed or remedied. Such order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of such premises or
buildings, subject to appeal within twenty-four (24) hours to the mayor, who shall within ten (10) days review such
order and file his decision thereon, and unless the order is revoked or modified it shall remain in full force and be
obeyed by such owner or occupant.
(b) The service of any such order shall be made upon the occupant of the premises to whom it is directed, by
either delivering a true copy of same to such occupant personally or by delivering the same to and leaving it with
any person in charge of the premises, or, in case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy
thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of the premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve
such an order upon the owner of premises, such order may be served either by delivering to and leaving with said
person a true copy of said order, or, if such owner is absent from the jurisdiction of the officer making the order, by
mailing such copy to the owner's last known post office address.
(1996 Code, sec. 5.402)
Sec. 5.03.003 Failure to comply with order
Any owner or occupant failing to comply with the order required in section 5.03.002 within ten (10) days after the
appeal shall have been determined, or, if no appeal is taken, then within ten (10) days after the service of the order,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1996 Code, sec. 5.403)
ARTICLE 5.04 FIRE MARSHAL
Sec. 5.04.001 Office created
The office of city fire marshal is hereby created. (1996 Code, sec. 5.601)
Sec. 5.04.002 Appointment and removal
The fire marshal shall be appointed by the chief of the fire department subject to the approval of the city manager.
The fire marshal shall be properly qualified for the duties of his office. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 5.04.003 Duty to investigate fires
The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of every fire occurring within this city by
which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was
the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be commenced within twenty-four (24) hours, not
including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. (1996 Code, sec. 5.603)
Sec. 5.04.004 Taking of testimony
The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the
testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation
to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing. (1996 Code, sec. 5.604)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/385
Sec. 5.04.005 Authority to summon witnesses and require production of evidence
The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is,
by the provisions of this article, a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book,
paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer
oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. (1996 Code, sec. 5.605)
Sec. 5.04.006 Investigations may be private
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and persons
other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held and
witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until
they have been examined. (1996 Code, sec. 5.606)
Sec. 5.04.007 Duty when evidence indicates crime
If the fire marshal shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of
arson or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud or criminal conduct in
connection with any fire, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense, or either
of them, and shall furnish the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with names of witnesses and
all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of pertinent and material testimony taken in the case.
(1996 Code, sec. 5.607)
Sec. 5.04.008 Misconduct of witnesses
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear and testify, or who disobeys any lawful order to the
fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under
examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in the
matter of such investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under
investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and it shall be the duty of the fire marshal to
cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. (1996 Code, sec. 5.608)
Sec. 5.04.009 Inspections
The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent, or without
complaint, shall have the right, at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon all
buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his duty, monthly or more often, to enter upon and make, or
cause to be entered upon and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings,
together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he shall find any building or other structure which, for
want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which
is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that fire would endanger persons or
property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or
other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues and pipes with which the same may be
connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of
explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, or
combustible, inflammable and refuse materials, or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable
to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to firemen or occupants, he shall order the same to be
removed or remedied, and such order [shall] be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of the building
or premises. If the owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he may, within five (5) business
days, appeal to the fire chief, who shall investigate the cause of the complaint and, unless by his authority the order
is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant. Any owner
or occupant who fails to comply with such order shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1996 Code, sec. 5.609;
Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 5.04.010 Record of fires
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/385
The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances,
including the origin of the fires and the amount of loss which may be determined by the investigation required by
this article. (1996 Code, sec. 5.610)
ARTICLE 5.05 FIRE DEPARTMENT*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 5.05.001–5.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Firemen's Relief and Retirement Fund†
Sec. 5.05.031 Ratification of prior payments
The city council hereby ratifies, approves, and confirms all payments heretofore made by the city to the firemen's
relief and retirement fund of the city, and ratifies each and every act of the city in the prior participation in the
firemen's relief and retirement fund, and confirms all expenditures made by the city which have been paid to the
firemen's relief and retirement fund in the past. (1996 Code, sec. 8.701)
Sec. 5.05.032 Pay deduction authorized
The finance director shall cause a percentage, not to exceed 10%, of the monthly compensation of each member of
the fire department who participates in the firemen's relief and retirement fund (the “fund”) to be deducted from
such compensation and paid over to the fund. The percentage to be deducted shall be set by official action of the
city council.
Sec. 5.05.033 Payments by city
The finance director shall pay over to the fund, by the last day of each month, an amount, set by official action of
the city council, of the monthly compensation of each member of the fire department who participates in the fund
for the preceding month. There is hereby appropriated from the general fund of the city an amount necessary to
make this payment.
(Ordinance 17/036 adopted 12/5/17)
Sec. 5.05.034 Deferred compensation
City firefighters may defer federal income taxes under the terms of sections 10E(a) and (b) of the state firemen's
relief and retirement law, subject to a favorable determination by the Internal Revenue Service that the firefighter's
pension plan is a qualified retirement plan. (1996 Code, sec. 8.704)
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/385
ARTICLE 6.02 HEALTH OFFICER
Sec. 6.02.001 Office created
There is hereby created the office of city health officer. (1996 Code, sec. 6.101)
Sec. 6.02.002 Qualifications
The city health officer shall be a duly licensed medical doctor authorized to practice medicine in the state and be
well trained in the science of preventative medicine. (1996 Code, sec. 6.102)
Sec. 6.02.003 Appointment; term
The city health officer shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council and shall hold office at
the will of the board. (1996 Code, sec. 6.103)
Sec. 6.02.004 Oath
The city health officer shall qualify by taking the oath of office prescribed by the state constitution. (1996 Code,
sec. 6.104)
Sec. 6.02.005 Applicability of regulations of state board of health
The city health officer shall act under and be governed by the rules and regulations prescribed by the state board of
health. (1996 Code, sec. 6.105)
Sec. 6.02.006 Powers and duties
(a) The city health officer shall have the power to establish such rules and regulations as he may think needful
for the health and welfare of the citizens of this city, and shall investigate all conditions within the city limits from
which communicable disease may arise, and with the utmost care and diligence shall study such diseases and
disorders, and shall institute and direct such measures as may be necessary to eradicate and destroy such conditions
wherever found in the city.
(b) The city health officer shall perform such duties as are required by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, chapter
121, and other duties as the city council may prescribe by resolution.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.106)
Sec. 6.02.007 Compensation
The city health officer shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the city council. (1996 Code, sec. 6.107)
Sec. 6.02.008 Enforcement of rules, regulations and orders
Whenever it may be necessary to use any force to secure the observance and execution of any rule, regulation, or
order issued by the health officer under authority of this article, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to detail
the necessary men and execute the same upon a requisition made by the health officer and approved by the mayor.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.108)
Sec. 6.02.009 Participation in county-wide public health advisory board
By resolution of the city council, the city elected to participate with twenty-four (24) cities and towns and the
county for participation and membership in the county-wide public health advisory board, whose principal
functions and responsibilities are to inform itself of sound public health practices and procedures, and to counsel
with and advise health, welfare, hospital, and all other elected officials and their appointees within the county upon
matters pertaining to public health services and protection, particularly those requiring coordinated administration
and joint interest. (1996 Code, sec. 6.109)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/385
ARTICLE 6.03 CODE COMPLIANCE OFFICERS
Sec. 6.03.001 Office created
There is hereby created the office of code compliance officer for the city. The code compliance officer shall be
employed by and under the direction and control of the director of community development, and shall have the
duties and responsibilities as provided herein. (Ordinance 11/30 adopted 11/15/11)
Sec. 6.03.002 Duties
The code compliance officer shall have the responsibility of inspecting city rights-of-way and issuing citations to
property owners to appear in municipal court for noncompliance with the following regulations:
(1) Health and sanitation regulations specified in this chapter;
(2) Regulations prohibiting the disposal of garbage or trash in alleyways or on private property;
(3) Building regulations specifying house numbering procedures;
(4) Enforcement of other city ordinances as required by the director of community development.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.502; Ordinance 11/30 adopted 11/15/11)
Sec. 6.03.003 Notice to correct condition
When any condition prohibited by this code is found to exist on any alleyway within the city, such condition shall
constitute a nuisance, and the owner, occupant or person in charge of the adjacent lot or premises shall be notified
in writing to correct, remedy or remove such condition within ten (10) days after notice is given to such owner,
occupant or person in charge in person, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by publication in the city's
official newspaper or by posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the
violation relates, or by posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to
which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings, if actual or mailed notice cannot be accomplished.
Requirement of a ten (10) day official notification in this section is met and fulfilled when such notice has been
given in writing as aforesaid at least one time in any calendar year to such owner, occupant or person in charge of
such lot or premises adjacent to an alleyway upon which there exists such nuisance in violation of this section.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.503; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 6.03.004 Correction of condition by city
In the event the owner, occupant or person in charge of any lot or premises adjacent to an alleyway upon which a
condition prohibited by this code exists, does not comply with such notice and fails or refuses to correct the
condition so as to remove the nuisance described above, the city may, after having given notice personally to the
owner in writing by letter addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address or by publication at least twice
within ten (10) consecutive days if personal service cannot be obtained or the owner's post office address is
unknown, do the work or make the improvements required so as to eliminate the nuisance condition on the
alleyway adjacent to such lot or premises, and charge for the work done or the improvements made and charge the
expenses to the owner of the adjacent lot or premises. The doing of such work by the city shall not relieve the
owner, occupant or person in charge of said lot or premises adjacent to said alleyway from prosecution for failure to
comply with the requirements of this article, and such additional notice of intent to perform the work by the city
shall not be a prerequisite to prosecution for maintaining such nuisance condition. (1996 Code, sec. 6.504;
Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 6.03.005 Filing of statement of city's expenses
Whenever any work is done by the city under the provisions of this article, the city council may assess expenses
incurred against the real estate on which the work is done or improvements made. The mayor, health officer or
other city official designated by the mayor shall file a statement of expenses with the county clerk stating the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/385
amount of such expenses, the name of the owner of such lot, a legal description of such lot or premises and the date
or dates on which such work was performed. The statement of expenses shall be acknowledged and placed in such
form as will permit it to be recorded in the real property records of the county. (1996 Code, sec. 6.505)
Sec. 6.03.006 Lien for city's expenses
The statement of expenses filed pursuant to section 6.03.005 is security for the expenditures made and the interest
accruing thereon at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum from the date of payment by the city until paid. The
lien for collection of expenses is inferior only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. The city council may
authorize the bringing of suit for foreclosure in the name of the city to recover the expenditures and interest due.
The statement of expenses or a certified copy thereof is prima facie proof of the expenses incurred by the city in
doing the work or making the improvements. The remedies provided in this section shall be in addition to the
remedy of prosecution in municipal court for violation of this section. (1996 Code, sec. 6.506; Ordinance adopting
Code)
ARTICLE 6.04 SMOKING*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 6.04.001–6.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Smoking in Public Buildings
Sec. 6.04.031 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply to this division:
Bar or tavern. An establishment that derives 75 percent or more of the establishment's gross revenue from the onpremises
sale of alcoholic beverages.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.801; Ordinance adopting Code)
Electronic or digital smoking device. Any product containing or delivering nicotine or any other substance intended
for human consumption that can be used by a person to simulate smoking through inhalation of vapor or aerosol
from the product. The term includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an ecigarette,
e-cigar, e-pipe, e-hookah, or vape pen, or under any other product name or descriptor. (Ordinance 18/025
adopted 7/17/18)
Enclosed area. All space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed on all sides by walls or windows (exclusive
of doors or passageways) which extend from the floor to the ceiling.
Patio. An improved and defined unenclosed outside area associated with a food service establishment or bar used
for purposes of dining or entertainment.
Person. Any individual.
Public building. Any building other than a building used as a private residence. If portions of a building are used as
a private residence and another portion of the building is used for business purposes or commercial activities, then
“public building” as used herein shall apply to the portions of the building used for business purposes or
commercial purposes, but not the portion used solely as a residence. The term “public building” includes, but is not
limited to, restaurants, bars and taverns.
Restaurant. An establishment that primarily serves food prepared in the kitchen of the same establishment for
patrons and may serve alcohol with a valid state alcoholic beverage commission license as long as the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/385
establishment derives less than 50 percent of its gross revenues from alcohol sales, and includes all indoor and
outdoor seating areas, kitchen, bar area, restrooms and lobby.
Retail tobacco store. Any retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in
which the sale of other products is merely incidental.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.801; Ordinance adopting Code)
Smoke or smoking. Inhaling, exhaling, or burning a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other lighted tobacco product in
any manner or form, or to inhale or exhale from an electronic or digital smoking device. (Ordinance 18/025
adopted 7/17/18)
Sec. 6.04.032 Prohibited; posting of signs
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to perform the following acts in any public building in the city:
(1) Smoke;
(2) Carry a lighted cigarette, cigar, or tobacco-containing pipe; or
(3) Light a cigarette, cigar or tobacco-containing pipe.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any owner of any restaurant, bar and tavern to allow the operation of the
establishment unless one or more of the following signs have been posted at a location clearly visible to a person
entering the establishment:
(1) A no smoking sign; or
(2) The international “no smoking” symbol (depiction of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle
with a red bar across it).
(c) It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of any public building to place or allow to be placed any of the
following items in any public building:
(1) Ashtrays; or
(2) Signs that indicate that smoking is permitted.
(d) It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any public building to allow smoking in such public building
in violation of the provisions of this article.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.802)
Sec. 6.04.033 Exceptions
Notwithstanding any other provision of this division to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to the
smoking restrictions of this division:
(1) Retail tobacco stores, provided such establishments provide separate ventilation and HVAC
systems that prevent the commingling of air with other businesses, common areas, hallways and other
non-smoking areas; and
(2) Patios.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.803)
ARTICLE 6.05 WEEDS, GRASS AND OTHER UNSANITARY MATTER*
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/385
Sec. 6.05.001 Prohibited conditions
It shall be unlawful and an offense for the owner occupant, or person in charge of any lot or premises in the city to
allow, suffer, or permit weeds or grass in excess of eight inches (8") in height to grow thereon, or to permit rubbish,
brush, or other objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter whatsoever to be, grow, accumulate or remain on any
lot or premises in the city. (1996 Code, sec. 6.201)
Sec. 6.05.002 Notice to remove
When any condition described in section 6.05.001 above is found to exist on any lot or premises within the city,
such condition shall constitute a nuisance, and the owner, occupant or person in charge of such lot or premises shall
be notified in writing to correct, remedy or remove such condition within seven (7) days after notice is given to
such owner, occupant or person in charge, in person, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by publication in
the city's official newspaper, or by posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to
which the violation relates or by posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the
property to which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings, if actual or mailed notice cannot be
accomplished. Requirement of a seven-day official notification in this section is met and fulfilled when such notice
has been given in writing as aforesaid at least one time in any calendar year to such owner, occupant or person in
charge of such lot or premises upon which there exists such nuisance in violation of this article. (1996 Code, sec.
6.202; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 6.05.003 Removal by city
In the event the owner, occupant or person in charge of any lot or premises upon which a condition described in
section 6.05.001 above exists does not comply with such notice and fails or refuses to correct the condition so as to
remove the nuisance described above, the city may, after having given notice personally to the owner in writing by
letter addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address or by publication at least twice within ten (10)
consecutive days if personal service cannot be obtained or the owner's post office address is unknown, do the work
or make the improvements required so as to eliminate the nuisance condition on the lot or premises and pay for the
work done or improvements made and charge the expenses to the owner of the property. The doing of such work by
the city shall not relieve the owner, occupant or person in charge of said lot or premises from prosecution for failure
to comply with the requirements of this article, and such additional notice of intent to perform the work by the city
shall not be a prerequisite to prosecution for maintaining such nuisance condition. (1996 Code, sec. 6.203)
Sec. 6.05.004 Filing of statement of city's expenses
Whenever any work is done by the city under the provisions of this article, the city council may assess expenses
incurred against the real estate on which the work is done or improvements made. The mayor, health officer or
other city official designated by the mayor shall file a statement of expenses with the county clerk stating the
amount of such expenses, the name of the owner of such lot, a legal description of such lot or premises and the date
or dates on which such work was performed. The statement of expenses shall be acknowledged and placed in such
form as will permit it to be recorded in the real property records of the county. (1996 Code, sec. 6.204)
Sec. 6.05.005 Lien for city's expenses
The statement of expenses filed pursuant to section 6.05.004 above is security for the expenditures made and the
interest accruing thereon at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum from the date of payment by the city until paid.
The lien for collection of expenses is inferior only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. The city council
may authorize the bringing of suit for foreclosure in the name of the city to recover the expenditures and interest
due. The statement of expenses or a certified copy thereof is prima facie proof of the expenses incurred by the city
in doing the work or making the improvements. The remedies provided in this section shall be in addition to the
remedy of prosecution in municipal court for violation of section 6.05.001 above. (1996 Code, sec. 6.205)
ARTICLE 6.06 TRASH AND RUBBISH*
Sec. 6.06.001 Depositing on private property
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/385
No person shall throw or deposit litter, rubbish, or trash on any private property within this city, whether owned by
such person or not; except that the owner or person in control of such private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for the collection of litter, rubbish, or trash in such manner that the litter may be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other private property within the city.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.601)
Sec. 6.06.002 General prohibition
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in control of private property to place, deposit, throw, or permit to
accumulate on any lot, yard, or ground located in this city any filth, litter, rubbish, trash, or any other impure or
unwholesome matter of any kind, unless the same has been deposited in an authorized receptacle for collection.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.602)
Sec. 6.06.003 Duty to maintain property
It shall be the duty of the owner of every lot or lots within this city to keep the same free from rubbish, brush, trash,
or any other objectionable, unsightly, or unsanitary matter of any kind or character whatsoever. (1996 Code, sec.
6.603)
Sec. 6.06.004 Notice of violation; removal by city
(a) Notice. Upon determination that a violation of this article exists, the community development director or his
designated representative shall notify the owner or person in control of the property to keep the same free from
rubbish, brush, trash, and any other objectionable, unsightly, or unsanitary matter of any nature whatsoever, to
remove the violation within ten (10) days thereafter, and to thereafter maintain said property free of rubbish, brush,
trash, and any other objectionable, unsightly, or unsanitary matter. This notice shall be in writing addressed to the
owner and mailed to his post office address, or it may be delivered to the owner or occupant in person, or, if neither
of these means of notification is possible, then by publication in the official publication of this city for two (2)
times within ten (10) consecutive days, or by posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the
property to which the violation relates or by posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the
ground on the property to which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings. No owner or person in
control of such premises shall fail, neglect, or refuse to carry out the requirements of such notice within ten (10)
days after notice has been given as herein provided, and to thereafter maintain such property free and clear of
rubbish, brush, trash, and any other objectionable, unsightly, and unsanitary matter.
(b) Removal by city. The community development director or his designated representative shall enforce the
terms and conditions of this article when violations occur. If the owner or occupant of such property should fail or
refuse to comply with the terms of the notice set out in subsection (a) above, within ten (10) days after the notice
has been perfected as provided above, this city may do such work or may cause the same to be done and may pay
therefor and charge all expenses incurred in doing or having such work done to the owner of such property. All
expense to this city may be assessed on the real estate or lot or lots upon which such expense is incurred. In order to
carry this provision out, a statement shall be made in writing by the fire marshal or his designated representative
detailing such expenses as this city has had and describing the lot involved, and thereupon the city shall have a
prior lien on the lot, lots, or premises second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements to secure the
expenditures so made together with ten (10) [percent] interest thereon from the date of such payment by the city
until the same is fully paid and satisfied. This statement shall be sworn to and filed with the county clerk in the
deed records. Furthermore, a suit may be instituted for such expenditures and foreclosure had in the name of the
city, and a statement made by the city as outlined above or a certified copy thereof shall constitute prima facie
proof of the amount expended in any such work or improvement.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.604; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 6.07 FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS*
Division 1. Generally
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/385
Sec. 6.07.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the words and phrases used herein shall have the following meanings:
Food service establishment. Any place where food is prepared and intended for individual portion service, and
includes the site at which individual portions are provided. The term includes any such place whether or not there is
a charge for the food. The term, as used within this article, shall also refer to retail food stores.
Person in charge. The individual present in a food service establishment who is the apparent supervisor of the food
service establishment at the time of inspection. If no individual is the apparent supervisor, then any employee
present is the person in charge.
Retail food store. Any establishment where food and food products are offered for sale to the ultimate consumer
and intended for off-premises consumption. Such food or food products may be expected to vary in degrees of
preparation and may often need further preparation or processing after it has been purchased. In this article, the
term will be included when referring to food service establishments.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.301)
Sec. 6.07.002 State rules adopted; amendments
(a) The additional definitions, provisions for the inspection of food service establishments, and other provisions
of the state food establishment rules of the department of state health services, dated May 2006, are hereby adopted
by reference and incorporated herein, the same as if fully copied at length, and one copy of such rules shall be kept
on file in the office of the city secretary at all times.
(b) Section 229.169(a)(1) of the rules is amended to add the following:
Catering trucks operating as mobile food establishments and permitted by the city shall have the
name of the catering service permanently affixed on both sides of the truck at all times when
operating in the city. Each permit holder for a mobile food establishment shall permanently carry,
and display, on request, its actual paper health permit in the catering truck. Each catering truck
shall have a city-issued permit sticker permanently affixed to the left rear bumper.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.302)
Sec. 6.07.003 Regulatory authority
The regulatory authority shall be the code enforcement officer of the city or his designee, the county health
department (environmental health division), or other authorities having jurisdiction over food service
establishments, including the commissioner of health of the state. However, in all cases where references are made
to licenses, permits, or hearings, the location is the City of University Park city hall. (1996 Code, sec. 6.303)
Sec. 6.07.004 Inspections required; frequency; right of entry
Representatives of the regulatory authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any food service
establishment at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this
article, and such inspection shall be performed two times per year or as often as necessary for enforcement of this
article. (1996 Code, sec. 6.310)
Sec. 6.07.005 Report of inspection
Whenever an inspection of a food service establishment or commissary is made, the findings shall be recorded on
the inspection report form set out in section 301.73.011(f) of the Rules on Food Service Sanitation. The inspection
report form shall summarize the requirements of this article and shall set forth a weighted point value for each
requirement. Inspectional remarks shall be written to reference, by section number, the section violated, and shall
state the corrections to be made. A copy of the completed inspection report form shall be furnished to the person in
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/385
charge of the establishment at the conclusion of the inspection. The form shall specify a reasonable period of time
for the correction of any violations found, and correction of the violations shall be accomplished within the period
specified. The completed inspection report form is a public document that, according to law, shall be made
available for public disclosure to any person who requests it. (1996 Code, sec. 6.311)
Sec. 6.07.006 Minimum requirements
The minimum requirements regarding food and drinking establishments as established by the county health
department (environmental health division) from time to time are incorporated herein by reference, the same as if
fully copied at length, including all amendments, revisions or additions thereto from time to time adopted by the
department. True copies of such requirements shall be kept on file with the code enforcement officer and available
to food service establishments for copy or review. (1996 Code, sec. 6.312)
Sec. 6.07.007 Approval of plans prior to construction, remodeling or conversion
No food service establishment shall be constructed, extensively remodeled, or converted involving an expenditure
in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) without the review and approval of the regulatory authority. Properly
prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the
regulatory authority for review and approval before construction, remodeling or conversion begins. The regulatory
authority shall inspect the food service establishment prior to the start of operations to determine compliance with
the approved plans and specifications and with the requirements of this article. (1996 Code, sec. 6.313)
Sec. 6.07.008 Food manager certification
Every food service establishment within the city shall have on duty at all times when open at least one (1) manager
or employee who has been currently certified as a food manager pursuant to an approved course of study and
instruction sanctioned by the department of state health services. Each food service establishment shall have posted
in public view the food manager's certification certificates of each of its employees holding such a certificate.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.314)
State law references–Certification of food managers, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 438.101 et seq.; authority to require
employment of certified food managers in certain establishments, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 437.0076.
Secs. 6.07.009–6.07.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permit, License or Certificate*
Sec. 6.07.041 Application; issuance
Any person desiring to operate a food service establishment shall make written application for a permit, license, or
certificate on forms provided by the regulatory authority. Prior to approval of an application, the regulatory
authority shall inspect the proposed food service establishment, and if such inspection reveals that the
establishment complies with requirements of this article, the regulatory authority shall issue the permit, license, or
certificate to the inspected food service establishment. (1996 Code, sec. 6.304)
Sec. 6.07.042 Posting; transfer
No person shall operate a food service establishment without having a valid permit, license, or certificate issued to
him/her by the regulatory authority. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this article shall be
entitled to receive or retain such a permit, license, or certificate. Permits, licenses, or certificates are not
transferable. A valid permit, license, or certificate shall be posted in every food service establishment. (1996 Code,
sec. 6.305)
Sec. 6.07.043 Suspension
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/385
(a) The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing, suspend any permit, license, or certificate
to operate a food service establishment, if the holder of the permit violates the requirements of this article in a
manner which the regulatory authority finds to be an immediate health hazard to the patrons of said establishment
or the community. The regulatory authority may require an immediate cessation of food service operations by
serving a written notice to that effect upon the permit holder or the person in charge of the premises. If the holder of
the permit, license, or certificate desires an immediate hearing on the required cessation of food service operations,
he may appeal to the city manager, or his designee, who will conduct such hearing on the next business day after
the appeal has been filed. At such hearing, the city manager or his designee may:
(1) Uphold the decision of the regulatory authority;
(2) Delay enforcing the decision of the regulatory authority pending a formal hearing as hereinafter
described; or
(3) Take such other action as he deems appropriate under the facts of said case.
(b) If the holder of the permit, license, or certificate desires to appeal the decision of the city manager, he may
follow the following procedure.
(c) An opportunity for a hearing before the city council will be provided if a written request for hearing is filed
with the city manager by the holder of the permit, license, or certificate within ten (10) days after the decision of
the city manager or his designee.
(d) The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for the suspension no longer exist.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.306)
Sec. 6.07.044 Revocation
The regulatory authority may revoke a permit, license, or certificate for serious or repeated violations of any of the
requirements of this article or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of duty. Prior to
revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify, in writing, the holder of the permit, license, or certificate, or the
person in charge, of the specific reason(s) for which the permit, license, or certificate is to be revoked and that
revocation will become final at the end of ten (10) days following service of such notice, unless a written request
for hearing before the city council is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit, license, or
certificate. If a written request is filed, the opportunity for a hearing will be afforded within the following twenty
(20) days. Whenever a revocation of a permit, license, or certificate has become final, the holder of the revoked
permit, license, or certificate may make written application for a new permit, license, or certificate. (1996 Code,
sec. 6.307)
Sec. 6.07.045 Service of notices
A notice provided for in this article is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit, license, or
certificate, or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
last known address of the holder of the permit, license, or certificate. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the
records of the regulatory authority. (1996 Code, sec. 6.308)
Sec. 6.07.046 Hearings
The hearing provided for in this article shall be conducted by the city council at a time and place designated by it.
An oral testimony given at a hearing shall be reported verbatim, and the presiding officer shall make provision for
sufficient copies of the transcript. The regulatory authority shall make a final finding based upon the complete
hearing record and shall sustain, modify, or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report
of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit, license, or certificate by the regulatory
authority. (1996 Code, sec. 6.309)
Sec. 6.07.047 Fee; temporary permit
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/385
An annual fee as established by the master fee resolution of the city will be collected from each permanent food
service establishment for the initial permit and thereafter for the renewal of such permit. The regulatory authority is
authorized to issue temporary health permits as provided herein and in the food establishment rules adopted by this
article. A fee shall be collected from each operator of a temporary food service establishment in an amount
established by the master fee resolution of the city. (1996 Code, sec. 6.315)
ARTICLE 6.08 LIQUID WASTE TRANSPORT
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 6.08.001 Penalty; liability for costs incurred by city
(a) Any person, operator, or owner who shall violate any provision of this article, or who shall fail to comply
with any provision hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine as
provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code, and each violation and each
day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly.
(b) Any person found to be guilty of violating provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any
expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the city for reason of appropriate cleanup and proper disposal of said waste
materials. Additionally, an administrative fee equal to one-half (1/2) of assessed cleanup costs shall be levied by the
city against the guilty person.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.414)
Sec. 6.08.002 Responsibility of corporation or association for acts by agents
In addition to prohibiting certain conduct by natural persons, it is the intent of this article to hold a corporation or
association legally responsible for prohibited conduct performed by an agent acting on behalf of a corporation or
association and within the scope of his office or employment. (1996 Code, sec. 6.413)
Sec. 6.08.003 Rights of city
The city may promulgate rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article and
protect the public from health and safety hazards. The city may undertake immediate actions as may be necessary
to protect the public from health and safety hazards. The city may amend any permit issued hereunder to ensure
compliance with applicable laws and regulations. (1996 Code, sec. 6.410)
Sec. 6.08.004 Maintenance of vehicles; impoundment of vehicles
(a) A liquid waste transporter shall:
(1) Maintain hoses, tanks, valves, pumps, cylinders, diaphragms, pipes, connections, and other
appurtenances on a vehicle in good repair and free from leaks;
(2) Provide a safety plug or cap for each valve of a tank;
(3) Cause a vehicle exterior to be clean and the vehicle odor-free at the beginning of each work day.
(b) The city may cause to be impounded a vehicle which is being operated in violation of this article, and it may
authorize the holding of the vehicle until the violation is corrected. The city may also revoke the permit for an
improperly operated vehicle. If a vehicle is impounded or if a permit is revoked, an appeal may be filed by the
transporter pursuant to section 6.08.044.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.403)
Sec. 6.08.005 Inspection of vehicles; equipment requirements
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/385
A liquid waste transporter's vehicle shall be inspected by the city prior to the issuance of a vehicle permit with
qualifications as follows:
(1) Use a vehicle with a single tank as an integral portion of the vehicle to transport liquid waste;
portable tanks or other containers temporarily installed in vehicles are prohibited;
(2) Piping, valves, and connectors shall be permanently attached to the tank and/or vehicle;
(3) Tank to be liquid tight;
(4) Tank to be constructed so that every interior and exterior portion can be easily cleaned;
(5) Piping, valves, and connections shall be accessible and easy to clean;
(6) Inlet or opening of tank to be constructed so that collected waste will not spill during filling or
transfer, or during transport;
(7) Outlet connections to be constructed so that no liquid waste will leak, run, or spill out from the
vehicle;
(8) Outlets to be of a design and type suitable for the liquid waste handled and capable of controlling
flow or discharge without spillage or undue spray on, or flooding of, immediate surroundings while in
use;
(9) Pumps, valves, cylinders, diaphragms and other appurtenances to be of a design and type suitable
for the type of waste handled, capable of operation without spillage, spray, or leakage, and capable of
being easily disassembled for cleaning.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.404)
Sec. 6.08.006 Responsibilities of transporter; manifest system
(a) Before accepting a load of liquid waste for transportation, a liquid waste transporter shall determine the
nature of the material to be transported and that his equipment is sufficient to properly handle the job without
spillage, leaks, or release of toxic or harmful gases, fumes, liquids, or other substances. Upon delivery of the waste
to the disposer, the transporter shall inform the disposer of the nature of the waste.
(b) A transporter with a city liquid waste transporter permit shall not transport materials that are hazardous in
vehicles permitted by the city for transporting liquid waste.
(c) A transporter holding a city permit must use a disposal site permitted and approved by the city, or the state, or
the federal government.
(d) A manifest system consisting of a four-part trip ticket is used to document the generation, transportation and
disposal of all applicable liquid waste generated in the city and shall be used as follows:
(1) The trip ticket books are purchased by the transporter from the city department of public works
for an established fee;
(2) A transporter will complete one trip ticket for each location serviced, with the exception of
chemical/portable toilet companies servicing their own units. Chemical portable toilet companies
servicing their own units shall be exempt from trip ticket requirements but shall be required to submit a
monthly total of volume disposed and location of disposal to the city;
(3) White copy of the trip ticket signed by the transporter and generator at the time of waste collection
and yellow copy maintained by the generator;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/385
(4) White copy of the trip ticket signed by the disposer at time of disposal and pink copy maintained
by the disposer;
(5) Green copy of the trip ticket maintained by the transporter;
(6) All completed trip ticket books containing the white copy of the trip ticket will be delivered at
least monthly by the transporter to the city department of public works;
(7) A copy of all trip tickets shall be maintained for a period of two (2) years.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.405)
Sec. 6.08.007 Accumulation of waste
A person commits an offense if he allows liquid waste that emits noxious or offensive odors or is unsanitary or
injurious to public health to accumulate upon property under his control. (1996 Code, sec. 6.406)
Sec. 6.08.008 Disposal of waste
(a) A person commits an offense if he unloads or offers for sale or exchanges liquid waste except at a place
permitted by the city, or the state, or the federal government.
(b) A person commits an offense if he deposits or discharges liquid waste onto a street or into a storm or sanitary
sewer or an area that drains into the storm sewer system.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.407)
Sec. 6.08.009 Responsibilities of generator
(a) A generator of liquid waste shall have all liquid waste material picked up from his premises by a liquid waste
transporter who holds a valid permit from the city, and the liquid waste shall be transported to an approved site for
disposal.
(b) A generator of liquid waste shall not have hazardous waste or liquid waste in combination with hazardous
waste removed from his premises by a liquid waste hauler operating under a city permit.
(c) A generator shall sign the trip ticket from the transporter when a load is picked up by the transporter, and the
generator shall keep a copy of all trip tickets for a period of two (2) years. The city may inspect these records
during normal business hours.
(d) A generator shall:
(1) Install or provide a collection device of a size and type specified by the city;
(2) Maintain the collection device in continuous, proper operation;
(3) Supervise proper cleaning of the collection device;
(4) Report spills and accidents involving the collection device to the city within 24 hours;
(5) Clean up all spills and accidents immediately and have material disposed of by a permitted
transporter by proper means.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.408)
Sec. 6.08.010 Responsibilities of disposer
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/385
(a) A liquid waste disposer commits an offense if he allows accumulation of liquid waste on his premises so that
rainfall could carry the material to storm sewers or adjacent property or create a noxious odor or health hazard.
(b) A liquid waste disposer shall:
(1) Obtain and maintain compliance with all licenses and/or permits required by local, state or federal
law;
(2) Accept waste only from a permitted transporter;
(3) Maintain trip ticket copies for a period of two (2) years;
(4) Accept only those classes of waste authorized by license or permit;
(5) Make available all records required to be kept for inspection by the city during normal business
hours.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.409)
Secs. 6.08.011–6.08.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 6.08.041 Generally
(a) A person commits an offense if he operates, or causes to be operated, a vehicle for the purpose of transporting
liquid waste without an applicable permit. A permit shall be issued for transportation of liquid waste, and the
approving authority shall designate on the permit the liquid waste authorized for transportation in the vehicle. A
separate vehicle permit number is issued for each vehicle operated.
(b) A person who desires to obtain a permit must make application on a form provided by the city.
(c) A person who desires to obtain a permit must submit to the city at the time of application a photocopy of the
manager's driver's license. The city shall be notified of manager employment changes during the permit period and
shall be provided a copy of the new manager's driver's license.
(d) The city shall not issue a permit unless the applicant submits for inspection by the city the vehicle the
applicant proposes to use to transport liquid waste and the vehicle is found by the city to be constructed and
equipped in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(e) A permit is not transferable.
(f) A permit issued by the city excludes the hauling of materials that are hazardous in nature.
(g) Transporters transporting hazardous waste must have the applicable state commission on environmental
quality and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) registration number and use the appropriate EPA
manifest system.
(h) Each applicant must specify the disposal site or sites to be used for the authorized disposal of liquid waste.
The city shall be immediately notified of additional disposal sites used during the permit period.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.401)
Sec. 6.08.042 Fee; display of information on vehicle
(a) The city shall not issue a permit to an applicant until the appropriate established fee is paid. A person shall
pay a fee for the first vehicle and an additional fee for each additional vehicle operated by the person. Each permit
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/385
must be renewed annually.
(b) The city shall number permits consecutively, and each permit holder shall cause to be displayed on each side
of each vehicle in a color contrasting with the background, in three-inch letters or larger, the business name, TCEQ
registration number, and the following:
UPT ______
The first three letters (UPT) shall represent the city. The blank space shall contain the permit number. The permit
holder shall place the business name, the TDH registration number and the vehicle permit number on each vehicle
before the vehicle is operated. The permit holder shall keep the permit receipt, or a copy thereof, in the vehicle at
all times.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.402)
Sec. 6.08.043 Denial, suspension or revocation
(a) The city may deny a permit if it is determined that an applicant is not qualified under section 6.08.041 of this
article and may suspend or revoke a permit if it is determined that a permittee:
(1) Is not qualified under section 6.08.041 of this article;
(2) Has violated a provision of this article;
(3) Has failed to pay a required fee;
(4) Has failed to comply with maintenance or inspection requirements;
(5) Has failed to deliver trip tickets to the city.
(b) After suspension under this section, a permittee may file a request for reinstatement of the permit. When the
city determines that the permittee is again qualified, all violations have been corrected, precautions have been taken
to prevent future violations, and all required fees have been paid, it shall reinstate the permit.
(c) The city may revoke for a period of one (1) year or less all permits held by a liquid waste transporter if the
transporter or an employee of the transporter violates any of the provisions of this article, any rule or regulation
promulgated by the city, or applicable provisions of state law.
(d) A permittee whose permit is suspended or revoked shall not collect, transport, or dispose of any waste
materials within the jurisdiction of the city.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.411)
Sec. 6.08.044 Appeals
If the city denies the issuance of a permit, or revokes a permit, it shall send to the applicant, or permit holder,
written notice of its action and the right to an appeal. The applicant, or permit holder, may appeal the decision of
the city in the municipal court of the city. (1996 Code, sec. 6.412)
ARTICLE 6.09 AMBULANCES*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 6.09.001–6.09.030 Reserved
Division 2. Mobile Intensive Care Service
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/385
Sec. 6.09.031 Definitions
Emergency. Any circumstance that calls for immediate action and in which the element of time in transporting the
sick, wounded, or injured for medical treatment is essential to the health or life of the person. Such circumstances
include, but are not limited to, accidents generally, traffic accidents, acts of violence resulting in personal injury and
sudden illness.
Emergency call. The MICU trip to the place where the emergency exists, or from the place of such emergency to a
hospital equipped with an emergency room.
Emergency run. The emergency trip to the place where the emergency exists, or from the place of such emergency
to a hospital equipped with an emergency room.
Fire department. The fire department of the city.
Mobile intensive care unit (MICU). Any motor vehicle especially designed, constructed, equipped and used for
transporting the injured or sick in answer to an emergency call.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.901)
Sec. 6.09.032 Provision of service
The fire department of the city shall provide MICU service within the city or, when requested by proper authority,
within the city limits of Highland Park or the City of Dallas. (1996 Code, sec. 1.902)
Sec. 6.09.033 Fees
(a) A fee shall be charged per trip per person for the transportation by mobile intensive care unit of a person or
persons to a hospital providing emergency medical attention within the boundaries of the county.
(b) The person receiving MICU service and any person contracting for the service shall be responsible for the
payment of the fee. In the event service is received by a minor, the parent or guardian of the minor shall be
responsible for payment of the fee.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.903)
Sec. 6.09.034 False alarms
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully inform the fire department dispatchers, police department dispatcher
or other fire or police officials that an emergency ambulance or more than one (1) emergency ambulance is needed
at a location or address when such person knows that such emergency call and emergency run is false. (1996 Code,
sec. 1.904)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL COURT
ARTICLE 7.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 7.01.001 Created; jurisdiction
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/385
There is hereby created and established in and for the city a municipal court to be known as the “Municipal Court
of the City of University Park, Texas,” which court shall have and exercise such jurisdiction within the territorial
limits as conferred by, Judicial Branch, chapter 29, Municipal Courts, Texas Gov't Code. (1996 Code, sec. 8.801;
Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Municipal court jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.003, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 4.14.
Sec. 7.01.002 Appointment of acting judge in absence of judge
In case of temporary absence, sickness, disqualification, inability to act or the unavailability of the duly appointed
judge, the governing body shall appoint a qualified person or persons who shall discharge the duties of the judge
and receive compensation as approved by such governing body. (1996 Code, sec. 8.802; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 7.01.003 Administrator; clerks
(a) The finance director of the city shall be responsible for the administration of the municipal court. The finance
director shall have the power to employ a court administrator and clerks of the municipal court and supervise the
administrator and clerks. The administrator and clerks for the municipal court shall have authority to administer
oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of the court thereto and otherwise perform all acts necessary in
issuing process of the court and conducting the business thereof.
(b) With assistance of the clerks of the municipal court, the administrator shall be responsible for the proper
administration of the affairs of the municipal court and the clerk's office and shall:
(1) Maintain and keep a record of the business of the court;
(2) Collect and account for all fines and court costs paid in all cases filed in the court;
(3) Maintain and keep a record of all bonds filed with the court; and
(4) Perform such duties as may from time to time be authorized, delegated or required of the
administrator by the charter, this code, the city manager, or the city council.
(1996 Code, sec. 8.803; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Municipal court clerk generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.010.
ARTICLE 7.02 FINES, COSTS AND SPECIAL EXPENSES*
Sec. 7.02.001 Warrant fee; bond fees
(a) In all cases where warrants of arrest are issued for violations of ordinances of the city, in addition to any fine
assessed by the municipal court, there shall be added a fee for the issuance and service of such warrants.
(b) Special fees in regard to the handling of personal bonds may be in accordance with resolution adopted by the
city council.
(1996 Code, art. 1.1600)
Sec. 7.02.002 Special expenses
(a) Warrant of arrest. In addition to fines imposed by the judge of the municipal court, a special expense shall be
assessed against each defendant in a case where the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest is required for an
offense under section 38.10, Penal Code, or under section 149, Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways
(V.T.C.A., Transportation Code), or for failure to appear in response to a written promise contained in a personal
bond given under the provisions of article 17.04, Code of Criminal Procedure, provided that due notice has been
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/385
given to the defendant, prior to the issuance and service of such warrant of arrest, that such special expense will be
imposed.
(b) Driving safety course fee. The municipal court shall also collect a special expense for services performed in
cases in which the defendant is discharged by virtue of having attended, subsequent to the date of the alleged
offense, a defensive driving course in compliance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, chapter
543.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.106(c))
State law references–Dismissal of traffic offenses upon completion of driving safety course, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 543.111
et seq.; additional court fees for driving safety course, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 103.021.
Sec. 7.02.003 Building security fund
(a) There is hereby established a municipal court building security fund to be used only to finance items when
used for the purpose of providing security services for buildings housing a municipal court as specified in V.T.C.A.,
Code of Criminal Procedure, article 102.017, as amended.
(b) A defendant convicted in a trial for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court of the city shall pay
security fee as costs of court.
(c) A person is considered convicted if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(2) The person receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication; or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(d) The clerk of the municipal court shall collect the costs and pay them to the finance director of the city, who
discharges the duties delegated to the municipal treasurer, for deposit in a fund to be known as the municipal court
building security fund.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.106(d); Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Authority to establish municipal court building security fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.017.
Sec. 7.02.004 Technology fund
(a) There is hereby created a municipal court technology fund for the city.
(b) A defendant convicted of a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court in the city shall pay a technology fee
for each conviction as a cost of court.
(c) For purposes of this section, a person is considered convicted if a sentence is imposed on the person, the
person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision, or the court
defers final disposition of the person's case.
(d) The municipal court clerk shall collect the costs and pay the funds to the finance director for deposit in a fund
to be known as the municipal court technology fund.
(e) The municipal court technology fund may be used only for the purposes authorized by V.T.C.A., Code of
Criminal Procedure, article 102.0172, as amended.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.106(e); Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to establish municipal court technology fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.0172.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/385
Sec. 7.02.005 Court cost for parking violations; school crossing guard program; child safety fund
(a) There is hereby assessed a court cost upon a plea of guilty or a finding of guilty in municipal court on each
violation of a parking regulation enacted by an ordinance of the city regulating the stopping, standing, or parking of
vehicles.
(b) The additional court costs assessed by this section shall be collected by the clerk of the municipal court in the
same manner that other fines and court costs in the case are collected.
(c) There is hereby created a school crossing guard program in the city. The money collected as court costs
pursuant to the terms of this section must be used for such program. If the money received from the court costs
assessed by this section exceeds the amount necessary to fund the school crossing guard program, such additional
money shall be deposited in an interest-earning account or expended for programs designed to enhance child safety,
health, or nutrition, including child abuse prevention and intervention and drug and alcohol abuse prevention.
(d) The clerk of the municipal court shall keep separate records of money collected under this section and shall
account for the same to the finance director, who shall restrict the use of such funds to the purposes set out herein.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1212; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Authority to collect court costs for child safety fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.014.
CHAPTER 8
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
ARTICLE 8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 8.01.001 Offensive noise or odor; hours of construction activities
(a) A person commits an offense if he creates any noise or odor which is unreasonably offensive to persons of
ordinary sensibilities who occupy surrounding property. The owner or person in control of property where
unreasonable noise or odor is generated commits an offense if he fails to cause such unreasonable noise or odor to
be abated. (1996 Code, art. 7.300)
(b) Loading, unloading and handling of construction material and the use of any tools or equipment used in
construction, drilling or demolition work shall be permitted only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday, except by special permission given by the community development director. Except in
cases of public emergency or convenience, no such permission shall be given by the community development
director for any construction activities on the following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, July 4th, Labor
Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Eve, and Christmas Day, and no such construction activities shall be engaged in
on such holidays. A person in control of property and the owner of the property commit an offense if they fail to
prevent construction activities on the property in violation of this subsection. (Ordinance 13/12 adopted 3/19/13)
(c) Emergency work done in case of storms, sewer stoppages, water main breaks, municipal and utility
construction, as well as security requirements, are exempted from all of the restrictions. Shingling of
asbestos/asphaltic material may commence at daybreak, Monday through Saturday, during the period of May
through September. (1996 Code, art. 7.300)
Sec. 8.01.002 Offensive glare
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/385
A person commits an offense if he creates any source of light which causes unreasonable discomfort to persons of
ordinary sensibilities who occupy surrounding property. The owner or person in control of property where
unreasonable glare is generated commits an offense if he fails to cause such unreasonable glare to be abated. (1996
Code, art. 7.400)
Sec. 8.01.003 Standing water
An owner, occupier or person in control of property commits an offense if he allows wastewater or rainwater to
accumulate and stand in any open area for any period in excess of twenty-four (24) hours. (1996 Code, art. 7.500)
Sec. 8.01.004 Deposit of waste in street, gutter, storm sewer or watercourse
(a) A person commits an offense if he deposits grass clippings, leaves, brush or similar materials into a street,
gutter, storm sewer or watercourse.
(b) A person commits an offense if he deposits motor oil, transmission fluid, engine wash or similar substances
into a street, gutter, storm sewer or watercourse.
(c) A person commits an offense if he deposits any toxic liquid or semi-liquid in such a manner that it will flow
or be washed into a street, gutter, storm sewer, or watercourse.
(d) A person commits an offense if he dumps or washes out concrete, cement, mortar, asphalt or similar
substances, or residues therefrom, into a street, gutter, storm sewer or watercourse.
(e) A person commits an offense if he permits grease or sand trap drainages under his custody or control to flow
or be washed into a street, gutter, storm sewer or watercourse.
(f) A person commits an offense if he permits wastewater, except clean water, from a cooling tower, compressor
or boiler under his custody or control to flow into a street, gutter, storm sewer, or watercourse.
(1996 Code, art. 7.600)
Sec. 8.01.005 Deposit of fill material on property of another
(a) Fill material shall mean any dirt, sand, gravel, rock or broken concrete.
(b) A person commits an offense if he deposits fill material on real property of another without the express
consent of the owner of such real property.
(1996 Code, art. 7.900)
Sec. 8.01.006 Urinating or defecating in public
(a) A person commits an offense if he urinates or defecates:
(1) In or on a public street, alley, sidewalk, yard, park, building, structure, plaza, public or private
utility right-of-way, or other public place; or
(2) In public view.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under this section if the person was in a restroom.
(Ordinance 13/02 adopted 1/15/13)
ARTICLE 8.02 OFFENSES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
Division 1. Generally
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/385
Sec. 8.02.001 Public property defined
All streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks and public places within the limits of the city, or which may hereafter be
included within the limits of the city, are hereby declared to be public property, and shall be controlled and
regulated by the city council. (1996 Code, sec. 7.101)
Sec. 8.02.002 Reward for conviction of person damaging public property
A reward in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid out of the general fund of the city to the person
responsible for the arrest and conviction of any person guilty of damaging or destroying public property within the
city. The city manager is authorized to post a notice of this reward in any public place within the city. (1996 Code,
sec. 7.108)
Sec. 8.02.003 Fences, steps or other structures
No buttresses, steps, projections, retaining walls or fences shall be allowed to be constructed upon any public
property used as a street or alley in the city. (1996 Code, sec. 7.104)
Sec. 8.02.004 Obstructions or encumbrances
(a) All streets, alley easements, and sidewalks shall be at all times kept open to the public, free and clear of all
obstructions and encumbrances of every kind.
(b) Except as provided otherwise in this code, it shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or encumber any
street, alley, sidewalk, park, or public place with any fence, poles, wires, boxes, rubbish, or other obstructions or
encumbrances.
(1996 Code, sec. 7.105)
Sec. 8.02.005 Removing stones or dirt
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to be removed any stones or dirt from any street or alley,
sidewalk, park or public place, without the consent of the city council. (1996 Code, sec. 7.106)
Sec. 8.02.006 Cutting trees, shrubbery or flowers
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut or injure any tree, shrub or flower in any park or public place, street or
alley, or to deface or injure any property of any kind therein, except that the city, all utilities or any franchise holder
in the city, and abutting property owners, may trim, remove or maintain any trees or shrubbery in alleys and
parkways consistent with the operation of the city or utilities or franchise holders and consistent with the obligation
of the abutting property owners to maintain such trees or shrubbery. Nothing herein shall be construed to negate
any zoning provisions or safety requirements as promulgated by other ordinances of the city. (1996 Code, sec.
7.107)
Sec. 8.02.007 Items prohibited in alleys
(a) All man-made structures, except the equipment and appurtenances of authorized public utilities, are
prohibited in alleys, except as referenced in section 3.01.004.
(b) No vegetation greater than eight inches (8") in height is permitted within one foot (1') of the edge of the alley
pavement and a minimum height clearance of fifteen feet (15') must be maintained over that area.
(c) All prohibited structures or objects within the alley must be relocated to private property within thirty (30)
days of receiving a written notice of such violation, unless otherwise specified in this code. A thirty (30) day
extension may be granted by the code enforcement officer in his sole discretion.
(1996 Code, sec. 7.110; Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/385
Secs. 8.02.008–8.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. Picketing in Residential Areas
Sec. 8.02.041 Definitions
Directed, focused, or targeted. Means that a particular private residence or any of its occupants has been made the
sole object of picketing and that the picketing takes place directly in front of the particular private residence or the
private residence on either side of the targeted residence.
Picket or picketing. The practice of standing, marching, or patrolling by one (1) or more persons inside of, in front
of, or about any premises for the purpose of persuading an occupant of such premises or to protest some action,
attitude or belief.
Private residence. A single-family, duplex, or multifamily dwelling.
Public meeting. A gathering announced in advance to the public, or a portion of the public, which is held to discuss
matters of public interest and which is attended by at least three (3) people who do not reside where the assembly is
held.
Residential zoned district. A section of the city which is zoned for some type of residential district uses.
(1996 Code, sec. 7.109)
Sec. 8.02.042 Targeted picketing prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in picketing which is directed, focused or targeted solely at a
particular private residence located in a residential zoned district and which takes place directly in front of the
particular private residence or the private residence on either side of the targeted residence on any public street,
sidewalk, alley or other public property within two hundred feet (200') of the property line of the premises of a
residence. (1996 Code, sec. 7.109(b))
Sec. 8.02.043 Exemptions
Nothing in this division shall prohibit:
(1) The picketing of a residence which is also used as the occupant's sole place of business;
(2) The picketing of a residence used as a place of public meeting;
(3) A person or group of persons from marching in a residential zoned area without stopping at any
particular private residence; or
(4) A person or group of persons from marching in a residential zoned area on a defined route without
stopping at any particular private residence or residences.
(1996 Code, sec. 7.109(c))
Sec. 8.02.044 Time restrictions
Picketing in residential zoned areas is permitted only during the following hours:
(1) Monday through Friday: 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon; 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.; 7:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m.
(2) Saturday: 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
(3) Sunday: 1:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/385
(1996 Code, sec. 7.109(d))
Sec. 8.02.045 Warning
Before a person may be arrested for violating section 8.02.042, the person must have been ordered to move,
disperse, or otherwise remedy the violation by:
(1) A police officer;
(2) A member of the fire department; or
(3) A person with authority to control the use of the residence which is the focus or target of the
picketing.
(1996 Code, sec. 7.109(e))
Sec. 8.02.046 Defenses
It is a defense to any prosecution under this division that a person:
(1) Was not given a warning as provided in section 8.02.045; or
(2) Promptly obeyed a warning as provided in section 8.02.045.
(1996 Code, sec. 7.109)
ARTICLE 8.03 WEAPONS*
Sec. 8.03.001 Discharge of firearm or air gun
A person commits an offense if he discharges within the city a firearm or air- or gas-operated rifle or pistol. It is a
defense to prosecution under this section that the discharge of such weapon was authorized by a provision of the
Penal Code of the state. (1996 Code, sec. 7.201)
Sec. 8.03.002 Possession of air gun or slingshot by minor
A person under the age of seventeen (17) years commits an offense if he possesses or carries about his person an
air- or gas-operated rifle or pistol, or slingshot, on or about property other than the usual residence of such person.
A parent or legal guardian of a person under the age of seventeen (17) years commits an offense if he/she
knowingly permits such minor person to engage in the conduct prohibited in the preceding sentence. (1996 Code,
sec. 7.202)
ARTICLE 8.04 LITTERING*
Sec. 8.04.001 Definitions
The following words and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings specified, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
Garbage. Putrescible animal or vegetable waste, including but not limited to wastes that are generated from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food.
Litter. Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined herein.
Public place. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, or other public ways and any and all public parks,
squares, spaces, grounds, lakes, streams, and buildings.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/385
Refuse. All solid wastes, including garbage and rubbish.
Rubbish. All nonputrescible solid wastes, including but not limited to paper, metal, cardboard, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery, yard clippings, and similar materials.
(1996 Code, sec. 7.701)
Sec. 8.04.002 Depositing litter in public place
A person commits an offense if he throws or deposits litter in or upon any public place within the city, except in
public or private trash containers. (1996 Code, sec. 7.702)
Sec. 8.04.003 Manner of placing litter in receptacles
Persons placing litter in public or private receptacles shall do so in such a manner so as to prevent it from being
carried or blown out of such receptacle by the elements. (1996 Code, sec. 7.703)
Sec. 8.04.004 Throwing litter from vehicle
A person in a motor vehicle or on a bicycle commits an offense if he throws or deposits litter from such vehicle or
bicycle onto a public place or private property, except in public or private trash containers. (1996 Code, sec. 7.704)
Sec. 8.04.005 Duty to keep sidewalks, parkways and alleys free from litter
A person in control of residential or commercial property commits an offense if he fails to remove litter from the
sidewalks, parkways, and one-half of the alleys abutting his property, within a reasonable time after accumulation.
(1996 Code, sec. 7.705)
ARTICLE 8.05 HANDBILLS*
Sec. 8.05.001 Definitions
Commercial handbill. Any printed or written matter, or any sample, device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper,
booklet or similar item, which directly or indirectly advertises or offers for sale or rent, for the purpose of private
gain or profit, any merchandise, product, commodity, service or thing of value. A newspaper having more than
forty (40) percent news or editorial comment is not a commercial handbill.
Noncommercial handbill. Any printed or written matter, or any sample, device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper,
booklet or similar item, which is not a commercial handbill.
Public place. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks,
squares, spaces, grounds, lakes, streams and buildings.
(1996 Code, sec. 7.801)
Sec. 8.05.002 Posting on public property
A person commits an offense if he places or posts on public property a sign or handbill. The chief of police of the
city is hereby authorized to remove and dispose of such signs or handbills. (1996 Code, sec. 7.802)
Sec. 8.05.003 Distributing in public places
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street, or
other public place in the city, nor shall any person hand out or distribute any handbill in such a manner as to
obstruct or impede the free and direct passage of other persons thereon or create any traffic hazard thereat.
Sec. 8.05.004 Distributing on private property
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/385
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill in or upon private premises:
(1) If requested by any person thereon not to do so;
(2) If there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous position upon or near the entrance thereof a
weather-proof sign, not less than three inches (3") by four inches (4") in size, containing the words “No
Solicitors” or any similar notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of such premises do not
wish to have such handbills left upon their premises; or
(3) In such a manner that the handbill may be dislodged by wind onto the premises or other private
premises, or onto sidewalks, streets or other public places.
(Ordinance 10/23 adopted 7/6/10)
ARTICLE 8.06 SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY*
Sec. 8.06.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, words, and the derivations thereof shall have the meanings
given herein:
Minor. A person younger than seventeen (17) years of age.
Permanent residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive days.
Temporary residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the
aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent residence, or a place where a person
routinely abides, resides, or lodges for a period of 4 or more consecutive days or nonconsecutive days in any month
and which is not the person's permanent residence.
(1996 Code, sec. 7.1101)
Sec. 8.06.002 Penalty
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed the
sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each and every day such violation shall continue shall
be deemed to constitute a separate offense. (1996 Code, sec. 7.1106)
Sec. 8.06.003 Offenses
For each person required to register on the state department of public safety's sex offender database (the
“database”) because of a violation involving a victim who was a minor, it is unlawful for that person to establish a
permanent residence or temporary residence in the city within 2,000 feet of any premises where children commonly
gather, including a public or private school, day care facility, public park, playground, public or private youth
center, public swimming pool, or video arcade facility. For the purposes of this article, planted street medians shall
not be considered public parks. (1996 Code, sec. 7.1102)
Sec. 8.06.004 Evidentiary matters; measurements
(a) It shall be prima facie evidence that this article applies to a person if that person's record, or records
pertaining to that person, appear on the database and the database indicates that the victim was a minor.
(b) For the purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the 2,000-foot requirement shall be
measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the
nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, or, in the case of multiple residences on one
property, measuring from the nearest property line of the property where the multiple residences are situated to the
nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/385
(c) A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be maintained by the city. The city shall review the map at least
annually for changes. The map will be available to the public at the city police department.
(1996 Code, sec. 7.1103)
Sec. 8.06.005 Culpable mental state not required
Neither allegation nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of an offense defined by this
article, and any offense shall be considered a strict liability offense. (1996 Code, sec. 7.1104)
Sec. 8.06.006 Defenses
It is an affirmative defense to the prosecution of an offense under this article that any of the following conditions
apply:
(1) The person required to register on the database established his permanent or temporary residence
in the city prior to the effective date of this article (Ordinance 07/07 adopted April 3, 2007), and has
complied with all sex offender registration laws of the state.
(2) The person required to register on the database is a minor, or was a minor when he committed the
offense requiring such registration and was not convicted as an adult.
(3) The premises where children commonly gather was opened or began to be used as such after the
person established the permanent or temporary residence, and the person has complied with all sex
offender registration laws of the state.
(4) The information in the database pertaining to that person is incorrect and, if corrected, this article
would not apply to that person.
(1996 Code, sec. 7.1105)
ARTICLE 8.07 JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES*
Sec. 8.07.001 Definitions
Antique vehicle. A passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old.
Collector. The owner of one or more antique or special interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires, trades,
or disposes of special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order to restore, preserve, and
maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest.
Demolisher. A person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into processed scrap or scrap metal or to
otherwise wreck or dismantle a motor vehicle.
Junked vehicle. A vehicle that is self-propelled and:
(1) Does not have lawfully attached to it:
(A) An unexpired license plate; and
(B) A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; and
(2) Is:
(A) Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
(B) Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/385
(i) 72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
(ii) 30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
Motor vehicle. A motor vehicle subject to registration under the Certificate of Title Act (V.T.C.A., Transportation
Code, chapter 501).
Police department. The police department of the city.
Special interest vehicle. A motor vehicle of any age that has not been altered or modified from original
manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists.
(1996 Code, sec. 7.1001; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 8.07.002 Penalty; immediate removal of vehicles obstructing traffic
A person who commits an offense under this article is, upon conviction, subject to a fine as provided for in the
general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code for each offense, and each and every day such
violation continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction, the court shall order removal
and abatement of the nuisance. The provisions of this article are cumulative of all other remedies available to the
city. This article does not affect a law authorizing the immediate removal, as an obstruction to traffic, of a vehicle
left on public property. (1996 Code, sec. 7.1006)
Sec. 8.07.003 Declaration of nuisance
(a) A junked vehicle that is located in a place where it is visible from a public place or public right-of-way is
detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce the value of private property, invites
vandalism, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of
minors, and is detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight adverse to the
maintenance and continuing development of the city, and is a public nuisance.
(b) A person commits an offense if that person maintains a public nuisance as determined under this section.
(1996 Code, sec. 7.1002)
Sec. 8.07.004 Abatement procedures
To provide for the abatement and removal of a junked vehicle or a part of a junked vehicle as a public nuisance,
from private property, public property, or public rights-of-way, the city adopts the following procedures:
(1) For a nuisance on private property, not less than ten (10) days' notice, stating the nature of the
public nuisance on private property, must be given. The notice must require that the public nuisance be
removed and abated within ten (10) days, and that a request for a hearing must be made before
expiration of the ten-day period. The notice must be mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return
requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, and any lienholder of record,
and to the owner or occupant of the private premises on which the public nuisance exists.
(2) For a nuisance on public property, not less than ten (10) days' notice, stating the nature of the
public nuisance on public property or on a public right-of-way, must be given. The notice shall require
that the nuisance be removed and abated within ten (10) days, and that a request for a hearing must be
made before expiration of the ten-day period. The notice must be mailed, by certified mail with a fiveday
return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, and any lienholder
of record, and to the owner or occupant of the public premises or to the owner or occupant of the
premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the public nuisance exists.
(3) If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the motor vehicle is unknown,
notice to the last known registered owner may be placed on the motor vehicle, or if the last known
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/385
registered owner is physically located, the notice may be hand-delivered. If any notice is returned
undelivered by the United States post office, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a
date not less than ten (10) days after the date of the return.
(4) Vehicles removed under the provisions of this section may not be reconstructed or made operable
after they have been removed.
(5) A public hearing must be held before the removal of the vehicle or vehicle part as a public
nuisance. The hearing shall be held before the judge of the municipal court if requested by the owner or
occupant of the public or private premises or by the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the
public right-of-way on which the vehicle is located, within ten (10) days after service of notice to abate
the nuisance. At the hearing, it is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, that the
vehicle is inoperable. An order requiring the removal of the vehicle or vehicle part must include a
description of the vehicle or vehicle part and the correct identification number and license number of the
vehicle, if the information is available at the site.
(6) Notice must be given to the state department of transportation not later than the fifth day after the
date of removal of a junked vehicle or vehicle part. The notice must identify the vehicle or vehicle part.
(7) These procedures may not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part that is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property, a
vehicle or vehicle part that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with
the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or an unlicensed operable or inoperable antique or
special interest vehicle stored by a collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle and the outdoor
storage area are maintained in a manner so that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened
from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery, or other appropriate
means.
(8) The procedures of this section shall be administered by regularly salaried, full-time employees of
the city, except that the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part from property may be by any duly
authorized person.
(1996 Code, sec. 7.1003)
Sec. 8.07.005 Disposal
A junked vehicle or vehicle part may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard, demolisher, or any suitable site
operated by the city for processing scrap or salvage. (1996 Code, sec. 7.1004)
Sec. 8.07.006 Enforcement
A person authorized by the city to administer the procedures authorized by this article may enter private property
for the purposes specified in this article to examine a vehicle or vehicle part, obtain information as to identity of the
vehicle, and remove or cause removal of a vehicle or vehicle part that constitutes a nuisance as defined herein. The
municipal court may issue orders necessary to enforce the procedures of this article. If the owner or occupant of the
premises or the owner of the junked motor vehicle or vehicle part shall give written permission to the chief of
police for removal of the junked motor vehicle or vehicle part, the giving of such permission shall be considered
compliance with the provisions of this article if given within the ten (10) days after receipt of the notice. (1996
Code, sec. 7.1005)
CHAPTER 9
PERSONNEL
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/385
ARTICLE 9.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 9.01.001 Appointment of employees
All employees below the rank of department heads shall be appointed by the city manager or his designates. (1996
Code, sec. 8.108)
Sec. 9.01.002 Number of positions
The total number of employee positions shall be approved by the city council in the annual budget. (1996 Code,
sec. 8.109)
Sec. 9.01.003 Bonds
The city manager and finance director, before entering upon their duties of office, shall execute a twenty-five
thousand dollar ($25,000.00) surety company bond, payable to the city and conditioned on the faithful performance
of the duties of office, the premium of such bond to be paid by the city. (1996 Code, sec. 8.110)
State law reference–Official bonds, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 604.
ARTICLE 9.02 DEPARTMENTS†
Sec. 9.02.001 Established
City departments shall be established in accordance with the city charter. Each department shall be supervised by a
director, who shall be appointed by the city manager with the concurrence of the city council. (1996 Code, sec.
8.101; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 9.02.002 Public works department
The public works department shall have the following functions: engineering, facility maintenance, equipment
services, sanitation, streets, traffic, and utilities. The public works director shall be in charge of such functions and
may combine or separate such functions as he/she sees fit. (1996 Code, sec. 8.102; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 9.02.003 Finance department
The finance department shall have the following functions: purchasing, accounting, treasury, tax, warehouse, and
court. The finance director shall be in charge of such functions and may combine or separate such functions as
he/she sees fit. The finance director or his designate shall also be the tax assessor and collector, and shall be
responsible for the functions of the utility office. (1996 Code, sec. 8.103)
Charter reference–Finance department, sec. 8.04.
Sec. 9.02.004 Police and fire departments
(a) Police department. The police department director shall be known as the chief of police. The police
department shall consist of police, emergency communications, animal control, and a reserve officer program.
(b) Fire department. The fire department director shall be known as the fire chief. The fire department shall
consist of the fire suppression and prevention and emergency medical services.
(1996 Code, sec. 8.104)
Charter reference–Police and fire departments, sec. 8.02.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/385
Sec. 9.02.005 Park department
The park department shall have the following functions: parks, street islands, school grounds, tennis courts, and
swimming pool functions. The parks director shall be in charge of such functions and may combine or separate
such functions as he/she sees fit. (1996 Code, sec. 8.105)
Sec. 9.02.006 Human resources department
The human resources department shall have the following functions: personnel and risk management. The human
resources director shall be in charge of such functions and may combine or separate such functions as he/she sees
fit. (1996 Code, sec. 8.106)
Sec. 9.02.007 Information services department
The information services department shall have all data processing functions. The city manager or his/her designee
shall be in charge of such functions and may organize such functions as he/she sees fit. (1996 Code, sec. 8.107)
Sec. 9.02.008 Community development department
The community development department shall have the following functions: building inspection, planning and
zoning, and code enforcement. The community development director shall be in charge of such functions and may
organize such functions as he/she sees fit. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 9.03 COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 9.03.001 Pay plan
A city pay plan to compensate employees of the city will be adopted annually by ordinance of the city council. A
copy of the current pay plan adopted by such ordinance will be available for public inspection at all times during
regular business hours in the office of the city secretary. (1996 Code, art. 8.500)
Sec. 9.03.002 Holidays
(a) (1) The following days shall be officially observed by the officers and employees of the city:
(A) The first day of January in each year.
(B) The last Monday in May, designated as Memorial Day.
(C) The fourth day of July in each year.
(D) The first Monday in September of each year, designated as Labor Day.
(E) The fourth Thursday in each November, designated as Thanksgiving Day.
(F) The Friday following Thanksgiving Day.
(G) The twenty-fourth day of December, designated as Christmas Eve.
(H) The twenty-fifth day of December, designated as Christmas Day.
(I) Two personal holidays each year, to be used at the choice of the employee. Such personal
holidays will not be available to any employee until such employee has been on the payroll of the
city for at least six (6) months.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/385
(2) For payroll purposes, all references to “work day” shall mean eight (8) hours for non-fire
personnel and twelve (12) hours for fire personnel assigned to shifts.
(3) A firefighter is granted the same number of vacation days and holidays as granted to other
municipal employees, provided that one of a firefighter's personal holidays shall hereafter be designated
in remembrance of September 11.
(b) On official employee holidays, none of the offices and departments of the city shall be open for the
transaction of business except the police and fire departments and supporting auxiliary employees. Employees who
are required to work on official employee holidays will be paid at the regular rate of pay for the number of hours
worked, plus they will be paid either: (i) additional pay for the number of hours worked, at the regular rate of pay,
or (ii) compensatory time off for the number of hours worked during the holiday, provided that such compensatory
time off must be taken within six months after the date of the official employee holiday on which the employee
worked and upon approval thereof by the employee's department head. The city manager or his designee shall
maintain an accurate and comprehensive record with regard to employees who are required to work on official
employee holidays, the hours they work, compensation paid, compensatory time off credited, etc.
(c) In order to receive compensation for holidays, employees must be at work the work days before and after the
official holiday, unless absence is approved by the supervisor. If employees call in sick on days before or after
holidays, they will be required to submit proof of illness prior to being paid for said holiday.
(d) Upon termination, employees will not receive compensation for their personal holiday when it has not been
taken during the year.
(1996 Code, art. 8.200; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 9.03.003 Vacation leave
(a) All employees shall be granted paid vacation according to the following schedule:
Length of Service with
City
Vacation Hours Vacation Hours/Week
Regular Firefighters Regular Firefighters
6 mos. - 5 years 88 132 1.69 2.54
6 - 10 years 104 156 2.00 3.00
11 - 15 years 120 180 2.31 3.47
16 - 20 years 136 204 2.62 3.93
21+ years 160 240 3.08 4.62
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/385
(b) Additional vacation days may be gained by employees who do not use their sick leave. Vacation time may be
added according to the following schedule:
(1) Regular employees.
Sick Leave Hours Used in a Year
Regular
Vacation Hours Added
Regular
0 hours 24
Up to 8 hours 16
Over 8 up to 16 hours 8
Over 16 hours 0
(2) Non-firefighters, 10 hour/day personnel.
Sick Leave Hours Used in a Fiscal Year
Non-Firefighters - 10 Hr/Day
Personnel
Vacation Hours Added
0 hours 24
Up to 10 hours 16
Over 10 up to 20 hours 8
Over 20 hours 0
(3) Firefighters.
Sick Leave Hours Used in a Year
Firefighters
Vacation Hours Added
Firefighters
0 hours 36
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/385
Up to 12 hours 24
Over 12 up to 24 hours 12
Over 24 hours 0
(c) All vacation leave shall be approved by the department supervisor prior to its use.
(d) If a holiday occurs during vacation, the employee will be permitted additional hours off with pay (as per
section 9.03.002(a) of this chapter) if taken in conjunction with the vacation.
(e) If an employee has worked for one (1) year prior to resigning and gives notice two (2) weeks before
termination, he/she will be paid accumulated vacation leave as part of compensation to the employee. Employees
will not be paid for accumulated vacation leave if notice of at least two (2) weeks has not been given.
(f) The city manager shall see that complete records of vacation leave accrued and used are kept. Under no
circumstances will an employee be allowed to accumulate more than two (2) times his or her annual accumulation
allowance as described in subsection (a) above.
(g) The city manager and the finance director shall use the latest anniversary date of each employee since
January 1, 1980, to figure the accumulated leave.
(1996 Code, art. 8.300)
Sec. 9.03.004 Sick leave
(a) As part of the compensation for service rendered, each employee who has been employed full time for a
period of no less than six (6) months, when required to be confined to home or hospital because of illness or
disability resulting from accidental injury, shall be paid at a rate of compensation prior to such illness or disability.
Such compensation is for the period of confinement or for the accumulated sick leave, whichever comes sooner.
(b) Sick leave for all employees except firefighters shall be accumulated on the basis of 1.85 hours for each full
week of employment (12 days per year). Accrual of sick leave shall be unlimited.
(c) Sick leave for firefighters shall be accumulated on the basis of 2.59 hours for each full week of employment.
Accrual of sick leave shall be unlimited.
(d) The city manager shall see that a complete and comprehensive sick leave record is kept for each employee
that will accurately reflect the net sick leave accumulated.
(e) The payment of all such sick leave compensation shall be on certification of the employee's department head.
However, prior to the payment of such compensation, either the department supervisor, the department head or city
manager can demand a doctor's certificate of illness in the event of extended illness or unusual circumstances.
(f) The payment of sick leave compensation for maternity leave shall be subject to the allowances set forth in the
Family and Medical Leave Act. The employee's doctor shall determine the starting time of such leave.
(1996 Code, art. 8.400)
Secs. 9.03.005–9.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Texas Municipal Retirement System*
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/385
Sec. 9.03.031 Participation in system
The city hereby exercises its option and elects to participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided
for in the Government Code, V.T.C.A., as amended, which is adopted by reference. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Editor's note–The ordinances pertaining to the Texas Municipal Retirement System are not included in this code. Such ordinances are
specifically saved from repeal and shall be maintained on file in the city secretary's office.
ARTICLE 9.04 POLICE†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 9.04.001 Arrest without warrant
Arrests without warrant may be made by the chief of police or any other police officer of the city when offenses
against the state and federal laws or ordinances of the city are committed in their presence or where persons are
found in suspicious places and under circumstances which reasonably show that such persons have been guilty of
some felony or breach of the peace, or threaten or are about to commit some offense against the law. (1996 Code,
art. 1.1500)
State law reference–Authority to make arrest without warrant, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. sec. 14.01 et seq.
Sec. 9.04.002 Mutual aid law enforcement
The city manager is hereby authorized to direct the chief of police of the city to detail regularly employed law
enforcement officers of the city police department to assist any other county or municipality when, in the opinion
of the mayor or other officer authorized to declare a state of civil emergency in such other county or municipality,
there exists in such other county or municipality a need for the services of additional law enforcement officers to
protect the health, life, and property of such other county or municipality, its inhabitants, and the visitors thereto, by
reason of riot, unlawful assembly characterized by the use of force and violence, or threat thereof, by three (3) or
more persons acting together or without lawful authority, or during the time of natural disaster or man-made
calamity, and a request for additional law enforcement officers is made to the city manager by such mayor or
officer authorized to declare a state of emergency in such other county or municipality. In the absence of the city
manager, the chief of police of the city is authorized to perform the duties of the city manager as provided for in
this section when directed to do so by the mayor pro tem of the city. (1996 Code, art. 1.1300)
State law reference–Law enforcement services provided through cooperation of municipalities, counties and certain other local
governments, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 362.001 et seq.
Secs. 9.04.003–9.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Chief of Police
Sec. 9.04.031 Office created
The office of chief of police is hereby created. (1996 Code, sec. 8.1201)
Sec. 9.04.032 Appointment and removal
The chief of police shall be appointed and removed by the city manager with the concurrence of the city council.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 9.04.033 Oath; bond
Before assuming the duties of his office, the chief of police shall take and subscribe to the oath of office and shall
enter into a bond payable to the city with two (2) or more good and sufficient sureties, to be approved by the city
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/385
council, in the amount prescribed by the city council, conditioned on the faithful performance of his duties as chief
of police and payment over to the city treasurer of all monies belonging to the city and to the several officers their
costs and fees that may come into his hands. (1996 Code, sec. 8.1203)
Sec. 9.04.034 Duties generally
The chief of police shall devote his entire time and attention to the discharge of the duties of his office, be well
informed in the law and ordinances of the city, and be at all times vigilant and active in causing them to be duly
enforced and obeyed throughout the city. (1996 Code, sec. 8.1204)
Sec. 9.04.035 Specific duties
(a) Duties at council meetings. The chief of police shall be ex-officio sergeant-at-arms of the city council and
shall, either in person or by deputy, attend all its meetings.
(b) Attendance and duties at municipal court. The chief of police or his designee shall bring all prisoners for trial
before the court at the opening thereof each day and shall furnish the judge each day, before the hour of opening
court, a statement of the arrests made, by whom made, and the offense charged. He shall insure that all officers
necessary for testimony in cases coming before the court shall be in attendance at trial and shall assist the city
attorney in collecting and preparing testimony in all cases which may come before the court.
(c) City holding facility. The chief of police or his designee shall be the keeper of the city holding facility and
shall keep it in a clean and wholesome condition and safely keep all prisoners confined therein, until legally
discharged.
(1996 Code, sec. 8.1205; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 9.04.036 Authority to take bail
The chief of police or his designee shall have authority to take suitable and sufficient bail for the appearance before
the municipal court of any person charged with a violation of the laws or ordinances of the city or state of which
the municipal court may have jurisdiction. (1996 Code, sec. 8.1206)
Secs. 9.04.037–9.04.060 Reserved
Division 3. Police Reserve Unit*
Sec. 9.04.061 Established
In accordance with the authority granted to this city by section 341.012, Local Government Code, V.T.C.A., there is
hereby established a separate police unit of said department in carrying out the mission of the department. Such
police unit members shall be referred to as peace officers and shall be voluntary and non-salaried. (1996 Code, sec.
8.1301)
Sec. 9.04.062 Qualifications of members
For the purposes of this division, the police unit shall be a limited group of peace officers who are qualified by
either their vocational training or service in another department. Such peace officers shall have at least the same
number of training hours for basic certification required of the full paid uniformed officers in the department or the
peace officers shall earn such hours within a time frame as established by the chief of police for certification as
provided in section 9.04.067 hereof. (1996 Code, sec. 8.1302)
Sec. 9.04.063 Authority of chief of police
The members of the voluntary force of peace officers shall be under the authority, control, and command of the
chief of police, subject to the supervision of the city manager and the approval of the councilors, and subject to
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/385
such rules, regulations, and orders as may be promulgated from time to time by the chief of police in accordance
with the authority vested in the chief of police by ordinances of the city. The chief of police may change such rules,
regulations, and orders from time to time, and he may command members of the police unit to obey the instructions
of regular police officers in carrying out their orders. (1996 Code, sec. 8.1303)
Sec. 9.04.064 Application for membership
Application for membership in the police unit shall be filed with the chief of police of the city. Such application
shall be on a form prescribed by the chief of police and approved by the city manager and shall state the name and
residence of the applicant. The applicant must furnish satisfactory proof of a good character, temperate habits, and
physical ability to perform the duties of the position which he seeks, and must furnish three (3) references and
attach letters of recommendation from local citizens. (1996 Code, sec. 8.1304)
Sec. 9.04.065 Oath
Every person who is selected to take the training and qualify as a member of said police unit of this city shall
subscribe to an oath that in performing the duties sought in such application he will observe and obey the United
States Constitution, the state constitution, and the statutes, laws, and ordinances of the state and the city, and that he
will carry out the duties of a peace officer to the best of his ability. (1996 Code, sec. 8.1305)
Sec. 9.04.066 List of eligible applicants
A list of eligible applicants is to be compiled by the chief of police, which shall include a complete set of
fingerprints of each applicant, which fingerprints will be checked by the identification bureau to ascertain any
criminal record of each person, and such list shall be maintained by the chief of police on a continuous basis. (1996
Code, sec. 8.1306)
Sec. 9.04.067 Training and certification of applicants
Each applicant shall receive training, provided at the expense of the city, in accordance with the requirements of
V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, chapter 1701, Commission on Law Enforcement Officer Standards and Education,
and each applicant shall apply for certification by said council [commission] as a peace officer. An applicant may
request that a council [commission] which was granted while the applicant was a member of another police
department be transferred to him by the commission as a peace officer at the city police department. The training
requirements shall have been satisfied when the applicant is either certified or recertified by the commission. If
qualified, the applicant may apply for a basic certification or a higher classification, but the applicant must be
certified as provided above prior to performing any duties as a peace officer for the city. (1996 Code, sec. 8.1307)
State law reference–Commission on law enforcement officer standards and education, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 1701.
Sec. 9.04.068 Service generally
After being qualified as provided above, the officers of said unit shall serve as peace officers during the discharge
of actual duties of the city, subject at all times to the direction, control, and supervision of the chief of police of the
city. (1996 Code, sec. 8.1308)
Sec. 9.04.069 Composition; number of members
Said unit shall be composed of personnel who have volunteered to serve without pay and whose application for
membership has been accepted by the chief of police, and who have complied with all rules, regulations, and orders
provided for the conduct and control of the members thereof. This unit shall not exceed in number more than ten
(10) officers, which may expand from time to time with the authority of the chief of police at the approval of the
city council. (1996 Code, sec. 8.1309)
Sec. 9.04.070 Carrying weapon
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/385
No person appointed as a peace officer may carry a weapon or otherwise act as a peace officer until he has been
duly approved by the city council. After approval, he may carry a weapon only when authorized by the chief of
police, and when discharging official duties as a duly constituted peace officer. (1996 Code, sec. 8.1310)
Sec. 9.04.071 Call to duty
Members of said unit serve at the discretion of the chief of police and may be called into service at any time the
chief of police considers it necessary to have the additional officers to preserve the peace and enforce the law.
(1996 Code, sec. 8.1311)
Sec. 9.04.072 Compensation of members; uniforms and equipment
The members of said unit shall serve without compensation, but the chief of police may provide uniforms and
equipment for such peace officers from existing supplies or by purchase in the department. Special identification
items as necessary, including shoulder patches, badges, and other items, may be provided under the direction of the
chief of police. (1996 Code, sec. 8.1312)
Sec. 9.04.073 Hospital, medical and death benefits
A peace officer who sustains injury in the course of performing official duties for the city will receive hospital and
medical assistance in the same manner as provided by the governing body for a full-time police officer, and a peace
officer shall be eligible for death benefits as set out in chapter 86, Acts of the 60th Legislature, Regular Session,
1967, as amended, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, section 142.003; provided, however, that nothing in this
section shall be construed to authorize or permit a member of the peace officers' unit to become eligible for
participation in any pension fund pursuant to state statutes to which regular police officers of the city may become
a member by payroll deduction or otherwise. (1996 Code, sec. 8.1313)
State law reference–Hospital and medical assistance and death benefits for police reserve force, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec.
142.003.
Sec. 9.04.074 Term of commissions
All commissions for membership in said unit shall be perpetual in nature, subject to termination as provided in this
article. (1996 Code, sec. 8.1314)
Sec. 9.04.075 Members to serve in supplementary capacity
Officers in said unit shall act only in a supplementary capacity to the regular police force, and shall in no case
assume full-time duties of regular police officers without first complying with all requirements of regular police
officers. (1996 Code, sec. 8.1315)
Sec. 9.04.076 Termination or resignation of member
Any person who is appointed as a peace officer for the city may be terminated by the chief of police at any time for
any cause deemed sufficient by the chief of police, and any peace officer may resign from the unit at any time,
provided he notifies the chief of police in writing of his resignation. (1996 Code, sec. 8.1316)
Sec. 9.04.077 Power of mayor to summon special police force
The creation of the reserve peace officers unit shall not limit the power of the mayor to summons into service a
special police force to enforce the laws of this city or to avert danger or protect life or property in the case of riot or
outbreak or calamity or public disturbance, or when he has reason to fear any serious violation of law or order or
any other danger to the city or the inhabitants thereof, as permitted by section 341.011, Local Government Code,
V.T.C.A. (1996 Code, sec. 8.1317)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/385
CHAPTER 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATION
[This chapter reserved for future use.]
CHAPTER 11
TAXATION
ARTICLE 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 11.02 PROPERTY TAXES†
Sec. 11.02.001 Participation in appraisal district
The city hereby authorizes participation in the Dallas County Appraisal District. The appraisal district shall be
authorized to perform all appraisal and assessment functions required under the state Property Tax Code. The city
shall retain collection functions. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1003)
State law reference–Appraisal districts, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 6.01 et seq.
Sec. 11.02.002 General homestead exemption
In addition to other authorized exemptions, there is hereby authorized a general homestead exemption of twenty
(20) percent of the market value of each resident homestead. Provided, however, no exemption shall be less than
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). (1996 Code, sec. 1.1006)
State law reference–Residence homestead tax exemptions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.13.
Sec. 11.02.003 Homestead exemption for elderly or disabled persons
(a) Pursuant to article VIII, section 1(b), of the state constitution, the city council will establish annually by
ordinance an exemption of a portion of the market value of the residence homestead of persons sixty-five (65) years
of age or older and of disabled persons, and that portion shall be exempt from ad valorem taxation of the city for
that tax year, provided the person qualifies for the exemption through the Dallas Central Appraisal District in the
manner provided by the Tax Code. As used in this section, “disabled” means a person having a disability for
purposes of payment of disability insurance benefits under the Federal Old Age, Survivors and Disability Insurance
Act.
(b) Any person who makes a false affidavit in claiming a homestead exemption shall be subject to all appropriate
criminal penalties provided by law.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.1001)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/385
State law reference–Homestead exemption for disabled persons and persons over 65 authorized, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.13(d), (e).
Sec. 11.02.004 Due date; delinquency
The property taxes levied by the city each year shall become due on the first day of October of each year for which
the levy is made and shall become delinquent on the following first day of February. Penalties and interest for
delinquent taxes shall incur in accordance with section 33.01 of the state Property Tax Code. (1996 Code, sec.
1.1004)
State law reference–Delinquency date for payment of taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 31.02.
Sec. 11.02.005 Split payment
If a person pays one-half (1/2) of the annual city property tax before December 1st, he may pay the remaining onehalf
(1/2) of the taxes without penalty or interest at any time before July 1st of the following year. If a person who
exercises the split payment option fails to make the second payment before July 1st, the second payment shall incur
penalty and interest in accordance with section 33.01 of the state Property Tax Code. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1005)
Sec. 11.02.006 Collection of delinquent taxes
(a) Generally. It is hereby declared to be the duty of the city attorney, an assistant, or a contractual attorney
authorized by contract to prosecute all suits for the city, when it may become necessary in order to collect the
delinquent tax due the city, and the city attorney or his representative shall have power and authority to bring such
suits and to take such steps in connection therewith as to him may appear necessary and shall have such power and
authority in representing the city in such action as is conferred by the statutes of the state upon the district and
county attorneys.
(b) Penalty for collection costs.
(1) Whenever any accounts for delinquent taxes owed the city are given to its tax attorney for
collection on or after July 1st of the year they become delinquent, the city shall be entitled to, and shall
collect, an additional penalty of fifteen (15) percent of the delinquent taxes and penalty (including any
interest owed) due on each delinquent property at the time of collection, either before or after suit and/or
foreclosure sale, as provided by section 33.07 of the Texas Property Tax Code.
(2) In addition to the collection expenses provided for in subsection (1) above, the city shall be
entitled to collect the actual expenses incurred by the city in providing all data and information as to the
name, identity, and location of necessary parties and the legal description of property necessary to the
filing of any suit for delinquent taxes.
(c) Payment of fees. The fees provided for the city attorney or his representative for services in collecting
delinquent taxes shall be taxed as costs in each case, it being expressly provided that in no case shall such fee be in
excess of the fee allowed by state statutes.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.1002)
State law references–Contract with attorney for collection of taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 6.30; imposition of penalty for collection of
delinquent taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, secs. 33.01, 33.07, 33.08.
Sec. 11.02.007 Freeport goods
Under the authority granted to the city by the provisions of article VIII, section 1-j of the Texas Constitution, and
section 11.251(i) of the Texas Property Tax Code, goods, wares, merchandise, and other tangible personal property
and ores, other than oil, natural gas, and other petroleum products, that are (i) acquired in or imported into the state
to be forwarded outside the state, whether or not the intention to forward the property outside the state is formed or
the destination to which the property is forwarded is specified when the property is acquired in or imported into the
state, (ii) detained in the state for assembly, storing, manufacturing, processing or fabricating purposes, or used by
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/385
the person who acquired or imported the property, for the repair or maintenance of aircraft operated by a certified
air carrier, and (iii) transported outside the state not later than one hundred seventy-five (175) days after the date
the person acquired or imported the property into the state, shall be subject to ad valorem taxation by the city,
effective January 1, 1990. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1007)
State law reference–Tangible personal property (freeport goods) tax exemptions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.251.
Sec. 11.02.008 Goods in transit
That beginning in tax year 2012, and continuing thereafter until further action is taken by the city council, goods in
transit, as defined by the Texas Tax Code, section 11.253, shall be subject to property taxation by the city.
(Ordinance 11/27 adopted 11/1/11)
State law reference–Tax exemption for goods in transit, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.253.
ARTICLE 11.03 SALES AND USE TAXES*
Sec. 11.03.001 Tax on telecommunications services
A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the city. For purposes of this section, the
sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications
device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale
is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed. The application of the exemption
provided for in section 321.210, Tax Code, V.T.C.A., is hereby repealed by the city as authorized therein. The rate
of tax imposed by the city shall be the same as the rate imposed for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized
by the legislature of the state. The city secretary shall forward to the comptroller of the state by United States
registered or certified mail a copy of this section along with a copy of the minutes of the city council's vote and
discussion on this section. This section shall be and is hereby declared to be cumulative of all other ordinances of
the city, and this section shall not operate to repeal or affect any of such other ordinances. The tax provided for
hereunder shall not serve as an offset to, be in lieu of or in any way reduce any amount payable to the city pursuant
to any franchise, street use ordinance, charter provision, statute or, without limitation by the foregoing enumeration,
otherwise payable by any provider of telecommunications service, it being the express intent hereof that all such
obligations, impositions and agreements of every kind and nature shall remain in full force and effect without
reduction or limitation hereby. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1101)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on the sale of telecommunications services, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec.
321.210.
CHAPTER 12
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE 12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 12.01.001 State traffic laws adopted
The Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, and any and all other statutes enacted by the legislature of the
state governing the operation and parking of vehicles and the movement of pedestrians, are hereby adopted as part
of this chapter as if the same were included word for word herein, and shall be enforced in this city. (1996 Code,
sec. 10.101)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/385
Sec. 12.01.002 Penalty
Any violation of any portion of the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways or of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine as provided for in section 1.01.009 of this code, as specifically provided by section 143 of the
Uniform Act. (1996 Code, sec. 10.102)
Sec. 12.01.003 Enforcement generally; powers and duties of chief of police
(a) Authority to make traffic regulations. The chief of police is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary
for the effective implementation of the provisions of this chapter and other traffic ordinances and to make and
enforce temporary or experimental regulations as emergencies or special conditions may require. No temporary or
experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than ninety (90) days, nor shall they be effective until
approved by the city manager.
(b) General duties of chief of police. The chief of police of the city shall conduct analysis of traffic accidents and
devise remedial measures, conduct investigations of traffic conditions and cooperate with other city officials in the
development of ways and means to improve the traffic conditions, and carry out the additional powers and duties
imposed by this chapter and other ordinances of the city, and as the city manager may direct.
(c) Duty to enforce traffic laws. It shall be the duty of the chief of police and the officers of the police department
to enforce all traffic laws in the city.
(d) Authority to direct traffic. The chief of police and the officers of the police department or such officers as are
assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance
with traffic laws, or in the event of fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians to direct
traffic contrary to the traffic laws of this city and of this state.
(e) Annual traffic report. The chief of police shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the
city manager. Such report shall contain but not be limited to the following information:
(1) The number of traffic accidents, and the number of persons killed or injured in traffic accidents;
(2) The number of traffic accidents investigated;
(3) Information concerning safety activities conducted by the police department; and
(4) Plans and recommendations for future traffic safety activity.
(f) Civilian parking enforcement official. The chief of police may appoint a civilian parking enforcement official,
who shall be authorized to monitor the parking of motor vehicles in the city, to issue citations for parking violations
to the municipal court of the city, and to direct and supervise the towing and impoundment of motor vehicles where
authorized by law. The parking enforcement official shall be a civilian employee of the city under the supervision
and control of the chief of police or his designee.
(1996 Code, art. 10.300)
Sec. 12.01.004 Temporary traffic regulations in construction or maintenance work zone
(a) For purposes of this section:
Construction or maintenance work zone. A portion of a street where construction or maintenance is being
undertaken, other than mobile operations as defined by the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and
that is marked by one or more signs indicating that it is a construction or maintenance work zone.
Public works director. The person occupying that position as appointed by the city manager.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/385
(b) Authority is hereby delegated to the public works director to establish temporary traffic regulations necessary
for a construction or maintenance work zone. The public works director shall promulgate a list of approved and
required traffic-control devices and warning signs as may be necessary to eliminate or reduce traffic hazards in
such zone during the period of construction or maintenance activities. All such signs shall conform to the Texas
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways as required by section 12.02.001.
(c) The traffic-control devices, regulations and warnings promulgated by the director shall be effective until the
construction or maintenance activities have been completed or until the director determines they are no longer
necessary for the conditions existing.
(d) It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce all such official traffic-control devices as may be
promulgated by the director and erected in accordance with the Uniform Manual.
(e) No such regulations promulgated by the director shall be effective until signs giving notice thereof are posted
on or at the entrance to the street or part of the construction or maintenance zone as may be most appropriate. Once
such signs have been promulgated and erected as required by law, it shall be an offense for any person to perform
an act prohibited or to fail to perform an act required by such traffic-control devices.
(f) The director is specifically authorized hereby to erect signs which require traffic to detour in a certain
direction, require traffic to observe a one-way street or do not enter sign, or regulate speed or traffic in such zone,
or any other official traffic-control device as defined by section 541.304 of the Texas Transportation Code and
authorized by the Uniform Manual.
(g) If a violation of a sign erected by the director under the authority of this section is committed in a
construction or maintenance work zone when workers are present, the minimum fine applicable to the offense may
be twice the minimum fine that would be applicable to the offense if it were committed outside the zone, and the
maximum fine applicable to the offense may be twice the maximum fine that would be applicable if the offense
were committed outside the zone.
(1996 Code, art. 10.301)
Sec. 12.01.005 Traffic records
(a) The police department shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents, arrests, convictions and
complaints, which shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned. Such records shall be
accumulated and maintained for a minimum period of five (5) years.
(b) The police department and judge of the municipal court shall keep a record of all alleged violations of this
chapter and the traffic and motor vehicle statutes of this state, together with a record of the final disposition of such
alleged offenses. Such record shall be maintained so as to show all types of alleged violations and the total of each.
Such records shall be kept for a minimum period of five (5) years. All forms of records for alleged traffic violations
and notices of alleged violations shall be serially numbered. A written record of municipal court complaints and the
disposition of such shall be available for public inspection.
(1996 Code, art. 10.400)
Sec. 12.01.006 Authority of officers of fire department to direct traffic at scene of fire
Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of an actual or suspected fire, are hereby authorized, in the
immediate vicinity, to direct the movement and parking of vehicles and the movement of pedestrians. (1996 Code,
art. 10.500)
Sec. 12.01.007 Compliance with orders of traffic officers
(a) A person commits an offense if he intentionally fails or refuses to comply with a lawful order or direction of a
police officer given to direct or control traffic or pedestrian movement as authorized by this chapter.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/385
(b) A person commits an offense if he intentionally fails or refuses to comply with a lawful order of an officer of
the fire department when lawfully directing the movement or parking of vehicles or the movement of pedestrians.
(1996 Code, art. 10.600)
State law reference–Obedience to lawful order or direction of police officer or school crossing guard, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec.
542.501.
Sec. 12.01.008 Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers
A person commits an offense if he rides in or on any portion of a vehicle not designed or intended for the use of
passengers, except that a person may ride in a truck body space intended for merchandise. (1996 Code, art.
10.1700)
State law reference–Persons under 18 riding in open bed of truck or trailer, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.414.
Sec. 12.01.009 Driving on fresh pavement
A person commits an offense if he operates any vehicle upon any portion of a street that has been freshly paved
unless all barriers or warning lights have been lawfully removed therefrom indicating that the street is ready for
travel. (1996 Code, art. 10.1800)
Sec. 12.01.010 Sports, games or exercises on streets
Any person who shall engage in any sport, game, or exercise on or in any public street or highway within the city
calculated to injure pedestrians or retard and interfere with the passage of vehicles shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor upon conviction thereof. (1996 Code, art. 10.2600)
Sec. 12.01.011 Motor-assisted scooters prohibited on street or sidewalk; exceptions
(a) Prohibition. Subject to the exceptions provided in this section, it shall be unlawful and an offense for any
person to drive or operate a motor-assisted scooter (“scooter”) on a public street, highway or sidewalk in the city.
(Ordinance 18/048 adopted 12/18/18)
(b) Definitions. For purposes of this section:
Motor-assisted scooter. A self-propelled device with:
(1) At least two wheels in contact with the ground during operation;
(2) A braking system capable of stopping the device under typical operating conditions;
(3) A gas or electric motor not exceeding 40 cubic centimeters;
(4) A deck designed to allow a person to stand or sit while operating the device; and
(5) The ability to be propelled by human power alone.
Street. Shall include an alley.
(1996 Code, art. 10.2800)
(c) Exceptions.
(1) The prohibition of subsection (a) above shall not apply to:
(A) A person eighteen (18) years of age or older; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/385
(B) Operating a motor-assisted scooter in a permitted area.
(2) For purposes of this subsection (c), “permitted area” shall mean:
(A) On the street or sidewalks on both sides of Airline Road, from SMU Boulevard to Daniel
Street;
(B) On the street or sidewalks on both sides of SMU Boulevard;
(C) On the street or sidewalks on both sides of Bush Avenue;
(D) On the sidewalk only, on the east side of Hillcrest Avenue, from Daniel Avenue to the south
city limits;
(E) On the sidewalk only, on the south side of Daniel Avenue, from Hillcrest Avenue to Airline
Road; and
(F) On the sidewalks on both sides of Daniel Avenue, from Airline Road to Durham Street.
(3) Additional conditions:
(A) Riders must obey all applicable laws, ordinances and traffic signs, including stop signs and
stop lights;
(B) Helmets are encouraged for all users;
(C) Riders must stay to the right when riding scooters on all roadways, pathways, and
sidewalks;
(D) Riders must park scooters upright on hard surfaces:
(i) In any designated scooter parking area;
(ii) Beside a bicycle rack or in another area specifically designated for bicycle parking, but
not in a manner that will impede or interfere with the reasonable use of any bicycle rack,
pedestrian area, vehicular area, traffic area or access to or from a building; or
(iii) In other areas out of the public right-of-way.
(Ordinance 18/048 adopted 12/18/18)
State law reference–Neighborhood electric vehicles and motor-assisted scooters, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 551.301 et seq.
Sec. 12.01.012 Obstructions to sight line at intersections
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, plant, or maintain any fence, wall, screen,
billboard, sign, structure, or foliage of hedges, trees, bushes, or shrubs in such a position or placed so as to obstruct
or interfere with the minimum sight line standards between the elevations of two and one-half feet (2 1/2') and eight
feet (8') above the top of the street curbline as follows:
(1) Vision at all intersections where streets intersect at or near right angles within a triangular area
formed by extending the curblines to form an intersection and connecting the two points located on said
curblines thirty-five feet (35') from their intersections.
(2) Vision at all intersections of an alley and a street shall be kept free of all obstructions for a
distance of fifteen (15) feet from the intersecting points of the street and alley in both directions, left and
right, as you enter the street from the alley.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/385
(b) If there are no curbs existing, the future curblines that will be set by the engineering department shall be used
for the standard.
(c) It shall be the duty of the chief of police and fire, or his representative, to give notice to any person, firm, or
corporation in violation of this section. The notice shall be in writing and may be served on the person, firm, or
corporation, or their agents, by handing it to him in person, by United States certified mail, return receipt requested,
addressed to such person, firm, or corporation, or their agents, at his post office address, or if the same cannot be
located and the certified letter is returned by the United States Postal Service, then by publication twice within ten
(10) consecutive days in a newspaper.
(d) Upon the failure of said person, firm, or corporation, or agent of same, to comply with said notice as set out
in subsection (c) above, within ten (10) days, the chief of police and fire, or his representative, may file a complaint
in the municipal court, and each and every day shall be a separate offense.
(e) Upon the written request and authorization of such person, firm, or corporation, or their agent, and
acceptance by the city, it shall become the duty of the city to trim or remove, if necessary, such fence, wall, screen,
billboard, sign, structure, or foliage of hedges, trees, bushes, or shrubs. Any and all costs incurred as a result of
action required shall be the responsibility of said person, firm, or corporation, or their agent, and shall be collected
as otherwise provided by this section.
(f) All costs for trimming or removing such fence, wall, screen, billboard, sign, structure, or foliage of hedges,
trees, bushes, or shrubs or any part thereof, including costs for mailing of notice and/or publication, filing of the
statement with the county clerk, and interest, shall be levied, assessed, and collected against such property abutting
or upon which such vision obstruction is located. If any owner of such property shall fail to pay the costs so
assessed within thirty (30) days after being notified of such costs, the city shall file with the county clerk a
statement of said costs signed by the chief of police and fire. The city shall have a privileged lien on the property
and/or the personal obligation of the owner of such property, second only to tax liens, to receive the costs so made
and ten percent (10%) interest on the amount from date payment is due. For any such costs and interest, suit may be
instituted in the name of the city, and the statement of costs, as provided previously, shall be prima facie proof of
the costs expended in such work.
(1996 Code, art. 10.2500)
ARTICLE 12.02 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.02.001 Conformance with state manual
All traffic-control devices, including signs, signals, and pavement or curb markings, installed or used for the
purpose of directing and controlling traffic within the city shall conform with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices (MUTCD) as provided in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 544.001, as amended, which is
published by the state department of transportation. All signs, signals, and markings erected or used by the city
shall be uniform and be located so far as practicable according to the directions shown in the Manual throughout
the city. All existing traffic-control devices, and those erected in the future by the city, being consistent with the
Manual, state law, and this chapter, shall be official traffic-control devices. (1996 Code, art. 10.200; Ordinance
adopting Code)
State law reference–Adoption of sign manual and specifications, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.001.
Sec. 12.02.002 Existing devices ratified
All traffic-control signs, signals, devices, and markings officially placed or erected prior to the adoption of this
code and in use for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and declared
to be official traffic-control devices of the city, provided such traffic-control devices are not inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter or state law. (1996 Code, art. 10.700)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/385
Sec. 12.02.003 Authority of public works director
The public works director is hereby authorized to determine the appropriate placement of official traffic-control
devices in the city in accordance with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), as adopted
and amended from time to time by the Transportation Code of the state. The director shall have authority, after an
engineering or traffic review or study of a situation, to establish written rules regulating traffic by such devices,
including, but not limited to, rules regulating or prohibiting the turning of a vehicle or specified type of vehicle,
designating an intersection as a stop intersection or a yield intersection, and designating school crossing zones. The
director shall supervise the erection or placement of signs or markings as provided by the MUTCD. A person
commits an offense if he disregards or disobeys a sign or marking placed by authority of such a rule promulgated
by the director pursuant to this section. (Ordinance 10/26 adopted 8/24/10)
Sec. 12.02.004 Designation of crosswalks, safety zones and traffic lanes
The public works director is hereby authorized to supervise the designation and maintenance, by appropriate
devices, markings or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at any intersection where, in his opinion,
there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary;
to supervise the establishment of safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem
necessary for the protection of pedestrians; and to supervise the marking of lanes for traffic on the street pavement
at such places as he may deem advisable, consistent with this chapter and state law. (1996 Code, art. 10.1500;
Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.02.005 Designation of intersections controlled by traffic signals
(a) The public works director may designate intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by electronic
traffic-control signals and lights. Whenever any intersection has been so designated, the public works director shall
supervise the erection and maintenance of traffic-control signals or lights as specified by the chief of police. All
traffic-control signals, signs or lights described in this section shall be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices.
(b) The public works director may designate traffic-control signal light intersections at which traffic facing a
steady red traffic-control light shall not turn right. Whenever any intersection has been so designated, the public
works director shall supervise the erection and maintenance of traffic-control signs prohibiting a right turn on red
as specified by the chief of police.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1601; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 12.02.006–12.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. Automated Traffic Signal Enforcement*
Sec. 12.02.041 Definitions
In this division:
Department. The police department of the city.
Intersection. The place or area where two or more streets intersect.
Owner. The owner of a motor vehicle as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the state department of
transportation or the analogous department or agency of another state or country.
Photographic traffic signal enforcement system. A system that:
(1) Consists of a camera system installed to work in conjunction with an electrically operated trafficcontrol
signal; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/385
(2) Is capable of producing at least two recorded images that depict the license plate attached to the
front or rear of a motor vehicle that is not operated in compliance with the instructions of the trafficcontrol
signal.
Recorded image. An image recorded by a photographic traffic monitoring system that depicts the front or rear of a
motor vehicle and is automatically recorded on a photograph or digital image.
System location. The approach to an intersection toward which a photographic traffic monitoring system is directed
and in operation.
Traffic-control signal. A traffic-control device that displays alternating red, amber and green lights that directs
traffic when to stop at or proceed through an intersection, and has the meaning assigned by Texas Transportation
Code section 541.304.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1631)
Sec. 12.02.042 Civil penalty authorized; amount; late payment penalty
(a) The city council finds and determines that a vehicle that proceeds into an intersection when the traffic-control
signal for that vehicle's direction of travel is emitting a steady red signal damages the public health, safety, and
general welfare of the city by endangering motor vehicle operators and pedestrians alike, by decreasing the
efficiency of traffic-control and traffic flow efforts, and by increasing the number of serious accidents to which
public safety agencies must respond at the expense of the taxpayers.
(b) Except as provided in subsection (c) below, the owner of a motor vehicle is liable for a civil penalty of
seventy-five dollars ($75.00) if the motor vehicle proceeds into an intersection at a system location when the
traffic-control signal for that motor vehicle's direction of travel is emitting a steady red signal.
(c) An owner who fails to timely pay the civil penalty shall be subject to a late payment penalty of twenty-five
dollars ($25.00).
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1632)
Sec. 12.02.043 Enforcement generally; notice of violation
(a) The department is responsible for the enforcement and administration of this division.
(b) In order to impose a civil penalty under this division, the department shall mail a notice of violation to the
owner of the motor vehicle liable for the civil penalty not later than the 30th day after the date the violation is
alleged to have occurred to:
(1) The owner's address as shown on the registration records of the state department of transportation;
or
(2) If the vehicle is registered in another state or country, the owner's address as shown on the motor
vehicle registration records of the department or agency of the other state or country analogous to the
state department of transportation.
(c) A notice of violation issued under this division shall contain the following:
(1) A description of the violation alleged;
(2) The date, time, and location of the violation;
(3) The location of the intersection where the violation occurred;
(4) The name and address of the owner of the vehicle involved in the violation;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/385
(5) The registration number displayed on the license plate of the vehicle involved in the violation;
(6) A copy of a recorded image limited solely to a depiction of the area of the registration number
displayed on the license plate of the vehicle involved in the violation;
(7) The amount of the civil penalty for which the owner is liable;
(8) The number of days the person has in which to pay or contest the imposition of the civil penalty
and a statement that the person incurs a late payment penalty of $25.00 if the civil penalty is not paid or
imposition of the penalty is not contested within the period;
(9) A statement that the person named in the notice of violation may pay the civil penalty in lieu of
appearing at an administrative adjudication hearing;
(10) Information that informs the person named in the notice of violation:
(A) Of the right to contest the imposition of the civil penalty in an administrative adjudication;
(B) That imposition of the civil penalty may be contested by submitting a written request for an
administrative adjudication hearing before the expiration of the period specified under subsection
(c)(8); and
(C) That failure to pay the civil penalty or to contest liability for the penalty is an admission of
liability and a waiver of the owner's right to appeal the imposition of the civil penalty;
(11) A statement that a recorded image is evidence in a proceeding for the imposition of a civil
penalty; and
(12) Any other information deemed necessary by the department.
(d) A notice of violation under this division is presumed to have been received on the 5th day after the date the
notice of violation is mailed.
(e) In lieu of issuing a notice of violation, the department may mail a warning notice to the owner.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1633)
Sec. 12.02.044 Presumption that vehicle owner is responsible for violation
(a) It is presumed that the owner of the motor vehicle committed the violation alleged in the notice of violation
mailed to the person if the motor vehicle depicted in a photograph or digital image taken by a photographic traffic
signal enforcement system belongs to the owner of the motor vehicle.
(b) If, at the time of the violation alleged in the notice of violation, the motor vehicle depicted in a photograph or
digital image taken by a photographic traffic signal enforcement system was owned by a person in the business of
selling, renting or leasing motor vehicles or by a person who was not the person named in the notice of violation,
the presumption under subsection (a) is rebutted on the presentation of evidence establishing that the vehicle at the
time was:
(1) Being test-driven by another person;
(2) Being rented or leased by the vehicle's owner to another person; or
(3) Owned by a person who was not the person named in the notice of violation.
(c) Notwithstanding section 12.02.045, the presentation of evidence under subsection (b) by a person who is in
the business of selling, renting or leasing motor vehicles or did not own the vehicle at the time of the violation must
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/385
be made by affidavit, through testimony at the administrative hearing under section 12.02.045, or by written
declaration under penalty of perjury. The affidavit or written declaration may be submitted via mail to the city or
the entity with which the city contracts.
(d) If the presumption established by subsection (a) is rebutted under subsection (b), a civil penalty may not be
imposed on the owner of the vehicle or the person named in the notice of violation, as applicable.
(e) If, at the time of the violation alleged in the notice of violation, the motor vehicle depicted in the photograph
or digital image taken by the photographic traffic signal enforcement system was owned by a person in the business
of renting or leasing motor vehicles and the vehicle was being rented or leased to an individual, the owner of the
motor vehicle shall provide to the city or the entity with which the city contracts the name and address of the
individual who was renting or leasing the motor vehicle depicted in the photograph or digital image and a statement
of the period during which that individual was renting or leasing the vehicle. The owner shall provide the
information required by this subsection not later than the 30th day after the date of violation is received. If the
owner provides the required information, it is presumed that the individual renting or leasing the motor vehicle
committed the violation alleged in the notice of violation and the city or contractor may send a notice of violation
to that individual at the address provided by the owner of the motor vehicle.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1634; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.02.045 Administrative adjudication hearing; defenses
(a) A person who receives a notice of violation may contest the imposition of the civil penalty by requesting in
writing an administrative adjudication of the civil penalty within thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice of
violation. Upon receipt of a timely request, the department shall notify the person of the date and time of the
hearing on the administrative adjudication. Said hearing officer shall have the authority to administer oaths and
issue orders compelling the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents. The administrative
adjudication hearing shall be held before a hearing officer appointed by the city manager.
(b) Failure to pay a civil penalty or to contest liability in a timely manner is an admission of liability in the full
amount of the civil penalty assessed in the notice of violation.
(1) Admit liability for the full amount of the civil penalty stated in the notice of violation mailed to
the person; and
(2) Waive the person's right to appeal the imposition of civil penalty.
(c) The civil penalty shall not be assessed if, after a hearing, the hearing officer enters a finding of no liability.
(d) In an administrative adjudication hearing, the issues must be proved at the hearing by a preponderance of the
evidence. The reliability of the photographic traffic signal enforcement system used to produce the recorded image
of the violation may be attested to in an administrative adjudication hearing by affidavit of an officer or employee
of the city or the entity with which the city contracts to install or operate the system and who is responsible for
inspecting and maintaining the system. An affidavit of an officer or employee of the city that alleges a violation
based on an inspection of the pertinent recorded image is admissible in a proceeding under this division and is
evidence of the facts contained in the affidavit.
(e) A person who is found liable for a civil penalty after an administrative adjudication hearing or who requests
an administrative adjudication hearing and thereafter fails to appear at the time and place of the hearing is liable for
administrative hearing costs in the amount of $25.00 in addition to the amount of the civil penalty assessed for the
violation. A person who is found liable for a civil penalty after an administrative adjudication hearing shall pay the
civil penalty and costs within 10 days of the hearing.
(f) It shall be an affirmative defense to the imposition of civil liability under this division, to be proven by a
preponderance of the evidence, that:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/385
(1) The traffic-control signal was not in proper position and sufficiently legible to an ordinarily
observant person;
(2) The operator of the motor vehicle was acting in compliance with the lawful order or direction of a
police officer;
(3) The operator of the motor vehicle violated the instructions of the traffic-control signal so as to
yield the right-of-way to an immediately approaching authorized emergency vehicle;
(4) The motor vehicle was being operated as an authorized emergency vehicle under chapter 546 of
the Texas Transportation Code and that the operator was acting in compliance with that chapter;
(5) The motor vehicle was a stolen vehicle and being operated by a person other than the owner of the
vehicle without the effective consent of the owner;
(6) The license plate depicted in the recorded image of the violation was a stolen plate and being
displayed on a motor vehicle other than the motor vehicle for which the plate had been issued;
(7) The presence of ice, snow, unusual amounts of rain or other unusually hazardous road conditions
existed that would make compliance with this division more dangerous under the circumstances than
noncompliance; or
(8) The person who received the notice of violation was not the owner of the motor vehicle at the
time of the violation.
(g) To demonstrate that at the time of the violation the motor vehicle was a stolen vehicle or the license plate
displayed on the motor vehicle was a stolen plate, the owner must submit proof acceptable to the hearing officer
that the theft of the vehicle or license plate had been timely reported to the appropriate law enforcement agency.
(h) Notwithstanding anything in this division to the contrary, a person who received a notice of violation under
this division and who fails to pay the amount of a civil penalty or to contest liability in a timely manner is entitled
to an administrative adjudication hearing on the violation if:
(1) The person files an affidavit with the hearing officer stating the date on which the person received
the notice of violation that was mailed to the person; and
(2) Within the same period required by this division for a hearing to be timely requested, but
measured from the date the mailed notice was received as stated in the affidavit filed under subsection
(1), the person requests an administrative adjudication hearing.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1635)
Sec. 12.02.046 Order by hearing officer
(a) The hearing officer at any administrative adjudication hearing under this division shall issue an order stating:
(1) Whether the person charged with the violation is liable for the violation; and
(2) The amount of any civil penalty, late penalty, and administrative adjudication cost assessed
against the person.
(b) The orders issued under subsection (a) may be filed with the office of the hearing examiner. The hearing
examiner shall keep the orders in a separate index and file. The orders may be recorded using microfilm,
microfiche, or data processing techniques.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1636)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/385
Sec. 12.02.047 Appeals
(a) The owner of a motor vehicle determined by a hearing officer to be liable for a penalty may appeal that
determination to a judge by filing an appeal petition with the clerk of the court. The petition must be filed with the
city's municipal court.
(b) The petition must be filed before the 31st day after the date on which the administrative adjudication hearing
officer entered the finding of liability for the civil penalty.
(c) The court clerk shall schedule a hearing and notify the owner of the motor vehicle and the department of the
date, time and place of the hearing.
(d) An appeal stays enforcement and collection of the civil penalty imposed against the owner of the motor
vehicle. The owner shall file a notarized statement of personal financial obligation to perfect the owner's appeal.
(e) An appeal under this section shall be determined by the court of trial de novo.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1637)
Sec. 12.02.048 Effect of civil penalty; exclusion of civil remedy
(a) The imposition of a civil penalty under this division is not a conviction and may not be considered a
conviction for any purpose.
(b) The implementation of a photographic traffic signal enforcement system by the city under this division does
not prohibit a peace officer from arresting a violator of Texas Transportation Code, section 544.007(d), as provided
by chapter 543 of the Transportation Code, if the peace officer personally witnesses the violation, or from issuing
the violator a citation and notice to appear as provided by chapter 543.
(c) The city may not impose a civil penalty under this division on the owner of a motor vehicle if the operator of
the vehicle was arrested or was issued a citation and notice to appear by a peace officer for the same violation of
section 544.004(d) of the Texas Transportation Code recorded by the photographic traffic signal enforcement
system.
(d) If the owner of the motor vehicle fails to timely pay the amount of the civil penalty imposed against the
owner:
(1) An arrest warrant may not be issued for the owner; and
(2) The imposition of the civil penalty may not be recorded on the owner's driving record.
(e) Notice under subsection (d) must be included in the notice of violation required by section 12.02.043.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1638)
Sec. 12.02.049 Disposition of revenue
(a) Not later than the 60th day after the end of the city's fiscal year, after deducting amounts the city is authorized
by subsection (b) to retain, the city shall:
(1) Send 50 percent of the revenue derived from civil or administrative penalties collected by the city
under this division to the comptroller for deposit to the credit of the regional trauma account established
under section 782.002, Texas Health and Safety Code; and
(2) Deposit the remainder of the revenue in a special account in the city's treasury that may be used
only to fund traffic safety programs, including pedestrian safety programs, public safety programs,
intersection improvements, and traffic enforcement.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/385
(b) The city may retain an amount necessary to cover the costs of:
(1) Purchasing or leasing equipment that is part of or used in connection with the photographic traffic
signal enforcement system in the city;
(2) Installing the photographic traffic signal enforcement system at sites in the city, including the
costs of installing cameras, flashes, computer equipment, loop sensors, detectors, utility lines, data lines,
poles and mounts, networking equipment, and associated labor costs;
(3) Operating the photographic traffic signal enforcement system in the city, including the costs of
creating, distributing, and delivering violation notices, review of violations conducted by city
employees, the processing of fine payments and collections, and the costs associated with administrative
adjudications and appeals; and
(4) Maintaining the general upkeep and functioning of the photographic traffic signal enforcement
system.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1639)
Sec. 12.02.050 Reporting
(a) After September 1, 2007, and before installing a photographic traffic signal enforcement system at an
intersection approach, the city shall compile a written report of the number and type of traffic accidents that have
occurred at the intersection for a period of at least 18 months before the date of the report.
(b) For any photographic traffic signal enforcement system installed at an intersection after September 1, 2007,
not later than six months after the date of the installation, the city shall provide the state department of
transportation a copy of the report required by subsection (a) of this section.
(c) Beginning on January 1, 2008, after installing a photographic traffic signal enforcement system at an
intersection approach, the city shall monitor and annually report to the state department of transportation the
number and type of traffic accidents at the intersection to determine whether the system results in a reduction in
accidents or a reduction in the severity of accidents.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1640)
ARTICLE 12.03 IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES
Sec. 12.03.001 Vehicle storage facilities established
The governing body shall select and establish places for the storage of impounded vehicles. As used in this article,
“vehicle storage facility” means a garage, parking lot, or any type of facility owned by a person other than the city
for storing or parking ten (10) or more vehicles a year. (1996 Code, sec. 10.2301)
Sec. 12.03.002 Impoundment authorized; notice to owner; disposal of unclaimed vehicles
(a) The chief of police or his designee is hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from a street or highway to a
vehicle storage facility, or other place of safety, designated or maintained by the city, when the vehicle:
(1) Is unattended and obstructing traffic;
(2) Is unlawfully parked and blocking the entrance to a public or private driveway;
(3) Has been reported or identified as having been stolen;
(4) Is unattended and the officer has reasonable grounds to believe the vehicle has been abandoned
for longer than forty-eight (48) hours;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/385
(5) Is disabled so that normal operation is impossible or impractical and the owner or person in
charge of the vehicle is incapacitated and unable to provide for the vehicle's removal or custody or is not
in the immediate vicinity of the vehicle;
(6) Is disabled so that normal operation is impossible or impractical and the owner or person in
charge of the vehicle does not designate a particular towing or storage company;
(7) Is operated by a person an officer arrests for an alleged offense and the officer is required by law
to take the person into custody;
(8) Is, in the opinion of the officer, a hazard, interferes with a normal function of a governmental
agency, or because of a catastrophe, emergency, or unusual circumstances is imperiled; or
(9) Is illegally parked and left unattended, and on three or more prior occasions municipal court
citations have been attached to such vehicle for alleged parking violations, and the owner of such
vehicle or his agent has failed or refused to appear in the municipal court of the city and answer such
prior citations.
(b) Whenever the chief of police or his designee removes a vehicle from a street to a vehicle storage facility as
authorized in this article, and the name and address of the owner is ascertainable from registration records, and the
owner has not removed the vehicle within twenty-four (24) hours from the time the operator receives the vehicle,
notification shall be given by the vehicle storage facility to the vehicle's last registered owner and all recorded
lienholders by certified or registered mail in the manner required by the current rules and regulations of the state
department of transportation.
(c) The operator of the vehicle storage facility may dispose of a vehicle for which notice was given as required
by this article if before the thirtieth day after the date the notice was mailed the vehicle has not been claimed by a
person entitled to claim the vehicle or taken into custody by a law enforcement agency.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.2302)
State law reference–Removal of unlawfully stopped vehicle, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.305.
Sec. 12.03.003 Records
The chief of police or his designee shall keep a record of impounded vehicles, including the date of impoundment,
date of release, name and address of the person to whom the vehicle was released, and any other information
deemed relevant by the chief of police or his designee. (1996 Code, sec. 10.2303)
Sec. 12.03.004 Fees
(a) The vehicle storage facility operator may charge an owner for the notification required by the current rules
and regulations of the state department of transportation as referenced in this article.
(b) If a vehicle is removed by the owner within twenty-four (24) hours after the date the operator receives the
vehicle, notification is not required, and a notification fee may not be charged to the owner by the vehicle storage
facility operator.
(c) The vehicle storage facility operator may charge for storage of a vehicle impounded under the authority of
this article. A daily storage fee may be charged for a day regardless of whether the vehicle is stored for twenty-four
(24) hours of the day, except that the daily storage fee may not be charged for more than one (1) day if the vehicle
remains at the vehicle storage facility less than twelve (12) hours. A day is considered to begin and end at midnight.
(d) The vehicle storage facility operator shall not charge for more than five (5) days of storage fees until a notice
required by this article is mailed or published.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/385
(e) The vehicle storage facility operator shall charge a daily fee after notice for each day or portion of a day the
vehicle is in storage until the vehicle is removed and all accrued charges are paid.
(f) The vehicle storage facility operator may not charge any additional fees that are similar to notification or
impoundment fees, nor may the operator charge an administrative fee.
(g) The fees authorized by this section shall be set by the city council in the master fee resolution.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.2304; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 12.04 OPERATION OF VEHICLES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.04.001 One-way streets and alleys
The city council may designate any street or alley for movement of vehicular traffic in only one direction. Upon
such designation, the public works director shall supervise the placement and maintenance of signs giving notice
thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective until such signs are in place. A person commits an offense if he
operates a motor vehicle on a one-way street in any direction other than that designated by such signs. (1996 Code,
art. 10.900)
State law reference–One-way roadways, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.059.
Sec. 12.04.002 Stop and yield intersections
The public works director is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where a particular hazard
exists and determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to such intersections, and shall erect a
stop sign at every such place where a stop is required. Stop signs shall be installed only at those locations
determined to meet the “warrants” (criteria) in the current edition of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices. When stop signs have been erected as provided herein, or by state law, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey
the directions of such signs. In addition, the public works director is hereby authorized to determine and designate
intersections where a particular hazard exists and determine whether vehicles on one of the intersecting streets shall
yield the right-of-way to vehicles on the other street and to erect a yield right-of-way sign or a yield sign at every
such place where required. Yield signs shall be installed only at those locations determined to meet the “warrants”
(criteria) established in the current edition of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. When yield
signs have been erected as provided herein, or by state law, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of
such signs. (1996 Code, art. 10.1400)
State law reference–Authority to designate through highways and stop and yield intersections, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, secs.
542.202, 544.003.
Sec. 12.04.003 U-turns
A person commits an offense if he makes a U-turn at an intersection controlled by a stop sign or electronic trafficcontrol
signal, or between intersections. Turning from a parked position to the left between intersections to travel in
the opposite direction is hereby defined as a U-turn. (1996 Code, sec. 10.802)
Secs. 12.04.004–12.04.040 Reserved
Division 2. Speed Limits*
Sec. 12.04.041 Reasonable and prudent speed required
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/385
A person commits an offense if he drives a motor vehicle on a street or highway at a speed greater than is
reasonable or prudent under the conditions then existing, and having regard to the actual or potential hazards then
existing. In every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person,
vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all
persons to use due care. (1996 Code, art. 10.1000(c))
State law reference–Maximum speed requirement, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.351.
Sec. 12.04.042 Speed limits established
A person commits an offense if he drives a vehicle on a street or highway at a speed greater than is reasonable or
prudent under the circumstances then existing. Except when a special hazard exists that requires lower speeds for
compliance with section 12.04.041, the established limits shall be lawful, but any speed in excess of the established
limits shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful.
(1996 Code, art. 10.1000(a); Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 12.04.043–12.04.070 Reserved
Division 3. School Zones
Sec. 12.04.071 Speed limit
A person commits an offense if he operates a vehicle in a school traffic zone at a speed greater than twenty (20)
miles per hour, and any speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is
not reasonable or prudent and is unlawful. The public works director shall supervise the designation of school
traffic zones with appropriate street markings or signs. The speed limit designation for school traffic zones shall be
effective only at the time when appropriate signs advising motorists of the speed limit are placed in conspicuous
places. School traffic zones for elementary schools shall be in effect from 7:15 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and from 2:30 p.m.
to 4:00 p.m. on school days. School traffic zones for the middle school/intermediate school (HPMS/MIS) shall be
in effect from 7:15 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and from 2:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. on school days. School traffic zones for the
high school shall be in effect from 7:30 a.m. to 8:15 a.m. and from 3:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. on school days. (1996
Code, sec. 10.1101(b); Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.04.072 Turning restrictions
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, while operating a motor vehicle eastbound on Binkley Street, to
turn left at its intersection with High School Avenue, between the hours of 2:30 p.m. and 4:30 p.m. on school days.
The public works director is authorized to supervise the erection of appropriate signs at said intersection as
provided by section 12.02.003. (1996 Code, sec. 10.1101(b))
Sec. 12.04.073 Use of hand-held mobile telephone in school zone
(a) For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:
Engaging in a call. Talking into, dialing or listening on a hand-held mobile telephone, but shall not include holding
a mobile telephone to activate or deactivate such telephone.
Hands-free mobile telephone. A mobile telephone that has an internal feature or function, or that is equipped with
an attachment or addition, whether or not permanently part of such mobile telephone, or is a part of the motor
vehicle, by which a user engages in a call without the use of either hand (or prosthetic device or aid in the case of a
physically disabled person), whether or not the use of either hand (or prosthetic device) is necessary to activate,
deactivate or initiate a function of such telephone.
Hand-held mobile telephone. A mobile telephone with which a user engages in a call using at least one hand (or
prosthetic device or aid in the case of a physically disabled person).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/385
Mobile telephone. The device used by subscribers and other users of wireless telephone service to access such
service, and shall include personal digital assistants.
Personal digital assistant. A device operated using a wireless telecommunications service that provides for data
communication other than by voice.
Wireless telephone service. Two-way real-time voice telecommunications service that is interconnected to a public
switched telephone network and commonly referred to as cellular service or personal communication service.
(b) Except as otherwise provided below, it shall be unlawful for a person to drive or operate a motor vehicle in a
school zone, as designated pursuant to section 12.04.071, on official school days, during the hours when school
zones are in effect, and when school zone signs and signs prohibiting hand-held mobile telephone use are posted in
place, while using a hand-held mobile telephone to engage in a call or to create, send or read messages.
(c) An operator of a motor vehicle who holds a mobile telephone to or in the immediate proximity of his or her
ear while such vehicle is in motion is presumed to be engaging in a call within the meaning of this section.
“Immediate proximity” shall mean that distance as permits the operator of a mobile telephone to hear
telecommunications transmitted over such mobile telephone, but shall not require physical contact with such
operator's ear.
(d) Subsection (b) shall not apply to:
(1) The use of a mobile telephone for the sole purpose of communicating with any of the following
regarding an emergency situation: an emergency response operator; a hospital, physician's office or
health clinic; or a public safety department;
(2) Any law enforcement or police officer, emergency services official, first aid, emergency medical
technician and personnel, or any fire safety official in the performance of duties arising out of and in the
course of his or her employment as such; or
(3) The use of a hands-free mobile telephone when being used in a hands-free manner.
(e) The violation of this section is a strict liability offense.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1102)
State law reference–Use of wireless communication device in school crossing zone, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.425.
ARTICLE 12.05 PARKING*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.05.001 Enactment of regulations
The city council may enact parking regulations for the various streets in the city. (1996 Code, sec. 10.1201)
Sec. 12.05.002 Signs and markings
Whenever parking regulations are enacted by the city council, the public works director shall supervise the erection
and maintenance of appropriate signs and markings indicating the regulation or prohibition. (1996 Code, sec.
10.1202)
Sec. 12.05.003 Prohibited parking
(a) Parking on streets generally.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/385
(1) Parking for certain purposes prohibited. A person commits an offense if he stands or parks a
vehicle upon any street or highway for the principal purpose of displaying it for sale, or washing,
greasing, filling with gas or oil, or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1203)
(2) Mobile homes, recreational vehicles and other vehicles and accessories. A person commits an
offense if he parks or leaves unattended on a public street a mobile home, motor home, recreational
vehicle, bus, limousine, travel trailer, boat trailer, stock trailer or any other type of trailer, other than for
the immediate loading or unloading of such vehicle; provided, however, that recreational vehicles over
one (1) ton in weight may be parked on a public street or on other public or private property for a
maximum of eight (8) hours for the purposes of loading or unloading or for the preparation for removal
to another location. (1996 Code, sec. 10.1203; Ordinance 15/018 adopted 9/15/15)
(3) Parking for longer than 24 hours. A person commits an offense if he parks, or leaves unattended, a
vehicle on a public street for a continuous period of longer than twenty-four (24) hours. (1996 Code,
sec. 10.1203)
(4) Parking in front of or adjacent to a driveway. The parking of a vehicle adjacent to an area of a
public street which is painted yellow and marked “no parking” is prohibited. An operator may not stand
or park an occupied or unoccupied vehicle in front of a public or private driveway. In this section
“driveway” shall mean an improved surface which provides vehicular ingress and egress from and to an
adjacent street or alley and which is connected to the street or alley by a drive approach. “Driveway”
shall include the area of the drive approach or alley approach between the paved portion of the street or
alley and the edge of the public right-of-way. The area included in a “driveway” is illustrated in exhibit
A attached to Ordinance 12/14. If any part of a vehicle is adjacent to the painted area, or between the
street or alley and the adjacent public or private property, or in front of the driveway, it is in violation of
this section. (Ordinance 12/14 adopted 7/3/12)
(b) Parking where prohibited by signs or markings. A person commits an offense if he parks, or leaves
unattended, a vehicle at a location where signs or markings prohibit parking. (1996 Code, sec. 10.1203)
(c) Parking in alleys or alley rights-of-way. A person commits an offense if he parks, or leaves unattended, a
vehicle within an alley or alley right-of-way at any time. (Ordinance 12/04, sec. 2, adopted 2/21/12)
(d) Parking on sidewalk or parkway. A person commits an offense if he parks or leaves unattended any vehicle
or trailer on a public sidewalk or parkway. Construction vehicles may park on the parkway during a six (6) month
period, if such parking does not create a sight hazard and if the chief of police and the building official both agree
to such parking. (1996 Code, sec. 10.1203)
State law reference–Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in certain places, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.302.
Sec. 12.05.004 Overtime parking
The public works director is hereby authorized to supervise the erection and maintenance of signs, markings or
meters regulating the time in which a vehicle may be parked in various locations within the city, in accordance with
the applicable ordinances. A person commits an offense if he parks or leaves unattended a vehicle for a period of
time longer than that authorized by signs, markings or parking meters. (1996 Code, sec. 10.1204)
Sec. 12.05.005 Angle parking
(a) The public works director shall determine upon which streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark
or sign such streets accordingly.
(b) Where individual parking spaces are marked on the pavement, a person commits an offense if he parks or
leaves unattended a vehicle which is not wholly within the lines of a marked parking place. The prohibition
contained in the preceding sentence shall not apply to private parking lots or areas.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/385
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1205)
State law reference–Authority to permit angle parking, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.303(c).
Sec. 12.05.006 Parking mobile home, recreational vehicle, boat or trailer on private property
Except as provided in section 12.05.003(a)(2), in a residential zoning district, as defined by the comprehensive
zoning ordinance of the city, a person commits an offense if he parks or leaves unattended a mobile home, motor
home, travel trailer, recreational vehicle, boat, boat trailer, stock trailer, or any other type of trailer or similar motor
vehicle for a continuous period longer than twenty-four (24) hours in front of the front building line of such
property, as the term “front building line” is defined by the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city. In a
residential zoning district, as defined by the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city, a person commits an
offense if he parks or leaves unattended a mobile home, motor home, travel trailer, recreational vehicle, boat, boat
trailer, stock trailer, or any other type of trailer or similar motor vehicle on any surface other than concrete, asphalt,
or other hard-surfaced durable material approved by the city engineer. (1996 Code, sec. 10.1206)
Sec. 12.05.007 Parking truck or commercial vehicle on residential street
A person commits an offense if he parks, or leaves unattended, a truck tractor, road tractor, truck trailer, semitrailer,
or any commercial vehicle with a rated capacity in excess of one (1) ton according to the manufacturer's
classification upon any public street within a residential zoning district as defined in the comprehensive zoning
ordinance of the city, except for the immediate loading or unloading of such vehicle. (1996 Code, sec. 10.1207)
Sec. 12.05.008 Parking for disabled persons
(a) The city or a person who owns or controls property used for parking may designate one or more parking
spaces or a parking area for the exclusive use of vehicles transporting persons with disabilities.
(b) The city must designate a parking space or area by conforming to the standards and specifications adopted by
the state commission of licensing and regulation relating to the identification and dimensions of parking spaces for
persons with disabilities.
(c) A person who owns or controls private property used for parking must designate a parking space or area by
conforming to those standards and specifications referred to in subsection (b) above.
(d) A private property owner or private person who controls property used for parking and who designates one or
more uncovered parking spaces for the exclusive use of vehicles transporting persons with disabilities shall assign
at least half of those spaces for the exclusive use of vehicles displaying a white-on-blue shield disabled parking
placard, except that, if an odd number of spaces is designated, only the number of spaces that is the largest whole
number less than half of the number of designated spaces must be assigned for the exclusive use of vehicles
displaying a white-on-blue placard. Van-accessible parking spaces shall be counted as assigned spaces under this
subsection. These assigned spaces must be the spaces located closest to an accessible route to an entrance
accessible to a person with a disability. The remaining designated parking spaces may be used by vehicles
displaying a white-on-blue shield disabled parking placard or red shield disabled parking placard, or license plates
issued by the state to persons with disabilities. This subsection applies only to property used for parking that serves
a building or other facility required to be accessible to persons with disabilities and which was completed on or
after September 1, 1999.
(e) Each accessible parking space shall be designated as reserved by a vertically mounted or suspended sign
showing the symbol of accessibility provided in the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. For
appropriate spaces, an additional sign “Van-Accessible” shall be mounted below the symbol of accessibility.
Characters and symbols on such signs shall be located a minimum of sixty inches above the ground, floor or paving
surface, so they cannot be obscured by a vehicle parked in the space.
(f) The provisions of section 681.011 of the Transportation Code shall apply to a parking space or area for
persons with disabilities on private property that is designated in compliance with the identification requirements
referred to herein. Parking spaces assigned as handicapped or disabled parking spaces may be supplemented with
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/385
pavement markings where there is a suitable pavement surface. Such markings shall be in compliance with the
manual.
(g) A vehicle bearing a license plate or placard bearing the international symbol of accessibility and issued by the
state may be parked in any parking area or space designated for parking by persons with disabilities at any time
when such vehicle is being operated by or for the transportation of a disabled person.
(h) The owner of a vehicle displaying a license plate or placard bearing the international symbol of accessibility
and issued by the state, while being operated by or for the transportation of a disabled person, shall be exempt from
payment of fees or penalties imposed by the city for parking at a meter or in a space with a limitation on the length
of time for parking.
(i) A person commits an offense if the person leaves, stands, or parks a vehicle on which a license plate or
placard bearing the international symbol of accessibility and issued by the state is not displayed in a parking space
or area designated specifically for individuals with disabilities by the city or the private property owner who owns
or controls property used for parking.
(j) A person commits an offense if the person stands a vehicle so that the vehicle blocks an architectural
improvement designed to aid persons with disabilities, including an access aisle or curb ramp.
(k) A person commits an offense if the person stands a vehicle on which is displayed license plates or a disabled
placard issued by the state in a parking space or area for which there is an exemption under this section, but the
person does not have a disability, is not transporting a person with a disability, and does not pay the applicable fee
related to use of the space or area or exceeds a limitation on the length of time for standing in the space or area.
(l) In a prosecution under this section, it is presumed that the registered owner of the motor vehicle is the person
who left the vehicle standing at the time and place the offense occurred.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1208)
(m) An offense under this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine as provided in section 681.011(g)–(k) of
the Texas Transportation Code, as amended. (Ordinance 11/06 adopted 4/5/11)
State law reference–Privileged parking for disabled persons, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch. 681.
Sec. 12.05.009 Enforcement of parking regulations on private property
The owner of a shopping center, office center, or medical center containing parking areas may designate a suitable
person, subject to the approval of the chief of police, to enforce the provisions of this article as applied to such
private property. Such person, when approved, shall be issued a private guard commission, as provided in article
4.04 of this code, and such person shall be authorized to issue citations for alleged parking violations committed on
such private property, and authority to issue such citations is limited to parking regulations on such private property
only. (1996 Code, sec. 10.1209)
Sec. 12.05.010 Presumption that vehicle owner is responsible for violation
In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle,
proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any law or regulation,
together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such parking or standing, the
registered owner or actual owner of such vehicle, shall constitute proof that such defendant was the person who
parked such vehicle. (1996 Code, sec. 10.1210)
State law reference–Presumption that owner of vehicle is responsible for offense, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.308.
Sec. 12.05.011 Interference with overtime parking enforcement
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/385
A person commits an offense if he or she removes or obliterates the chalk or other marking from the tire of a
vehicle parked on public property in an area which limits parking by signs, markings, or parking meters, when such
chalk or other marking has been placed on the tire of such vehicle by a police officer or designated person in the
enforcement of parking regulations. A person commits an offense if he applies a chalk or other marking to the tire
of a vehicle which is parked on public property in an area which limits parking by signs, markings, or parking
meters, with the intent to interfere with the lawful enforcement of parking regulations. (1996 Code, sec. 10.1211)
Secs. 12.05.012–12.05.040 Reserved
Division 2. Resident-Only Permit Parking
Sec. 12.05.041 Definitions
Chief. The chief of police of the city, authorized to enforce and administer this division, or the chief's authorized
representative.
Permit. A resident-parking-only permit issued by the chief under this division.
Residence. Each dwelling unit of a single-family, duplex, or multifamily use.
Resident-parking-only zone. One or more blocks of a residential street designated by the chief under this section,
upon which on-street stopping, standing, or parking is limited to residents' motor vehicles properly displaying a
valid permit during certain hours.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1213(a))
Sec. 12.05.042 Zones designated; issuance of permits
(a) The following are designated as resident-parking-only zones, to wit:
(1) The area of the 4100 block of Lovers Lane abutting 4125 Lovers Lane and 4149 Lovers Lane;
(Ordinance 17/012 adopted 5/16/17)
(2) The 4100 block of Hyer and the north side of the 4300 block of Hyer; (Ordinance 14/026 adopted
10/7/14)
(3) The 4100 and 4300 blocks of Grassmere;
(4) The north side of the 4100 block of Druid;
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1213(b))
(5) The 4300 and 4400 blocks of Druid and Glenwick; (Ordinance 12/11 adopted 5/15/12)
(6) The east side of the 6600 block of Westchester, from Emerson to the alley south of the HPHS
parking garage, and the east side of the 6800 and 6900 blocks of Westchester; (1996 Code, sec.
10.1213(b))
(7) The 4100 and 4300 blocks of Emerson and the south side of the 4200 block of Emerson; and the
4400 block of Emerson, Monday through Friday, school days, from 6:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.; (Ordinance
19/012 adopted 4/16/19)
(8) The 6600 and 6700 blocks of Airline Road;
(9) Both sides of the 3400 block of Asbury, and the north side only of the 3500 block of Asbury;
(10) The 5900 and 6000 blocks of Auburndale;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/385
(11) The 3400 block of Binkley from the north/south alley west of Hillcrest to Key Street;
(Ordinance 11/05 adopted 3/15/11)
(12) That portion of the north side of the 2900 block of Daniel Avenue from 2916 Daniel Avenue
west to Dublin, and on the south side of the 2900 block of Daniel Avenue from 2933 Daniel Avenue
west to Dublin, and the 3000 and 3100 blocks of Daniel Avenue; (Ordinance 15/002 adopted 2/3/15)
(13) The 2800 and 2900 blocks of Dyer Street from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily; (Ordinance 13/19,
sec. 1, adopted 5/21/13)
(14) The 2900 of Fondren Street from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily; (Ordinance 14/026 adopted
10/7/14)
(15) The 3400 block of Granada from the north/south alley west of Hillcrest to Key Street;
(16) The 3400 block of Haynie;
(17) The 5900–6100 blocks of Hillcrest;
(Ordinance 11/05 adopted 3/15/11)
(18) The 3400, 3500 and 3600 blocks of McFarlin Boulevard;
(18A) The 2800–3000 blocks of McFarlin Boulevard from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily;
(Ordinance 13/19, sec. 1, adopted 5/21/13)
(19) The 3000, 3100, 3200 and 3300 blocks of Milton; (Ordinance 11/23 adopted 9/20/11)
(20) The 3400 block of Normandy Avenue, except the south side, west from Hillcrest a distance of
215 feet; the south side of Normandy Avenue abutting 4005–4007 Normandy Avenue; and the east side
Normandy Avenue from Connerly Drive to St. Andrews Drive, provided that the resident-parking-only
restriction for 4005–4007 Normandy Avenue, and the east side of Normandy Avenue from Connerly
Drive to St. Andrews Drive shall be effective from 12:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Saturday, from 2:00 p.m.
to 5:00 p.m. on Sunday, and at all times on Monday through Friday; (Ordinance 16/017, sec. 1, adopted
8/16/16)
(21) (A) The 3000 block of Rosedale and the west side of Dublin Street from the point of its
intersection with the alley north of Rosedale to the point of its intersection with the alley south of
Rosedale, effective from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily; (Ordinance 17/035 adopted 11/7/17)
(B) The 3100–3300 blocks of Rosedale, effective from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday; (Ordinance 17/029 adopted 9/5/17)
(22) The 3400 block of Shenandoah; the north side of the 4000 block of Shenandoah, provided that
the resident-parking-only restriction for north side of the 4000 block of Shenandoah shall be effective
from 12:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Saturday, from 2:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Sunday, and at all times on
Monday through Friday; (Ordinance 16/017, sec. 1, adopted 8/16/16)
(23) The 2900–3100 and 3400 blocks of University Blvd.; (Ordinance 11/05 adopted 3/15/11)
(24) On the south side of the 4100 block of Glenwick, from Preston Road west a distance of two
hundred twenty feet (220'). (Ordinance 11/16 adopted 9/6/11)
(25) The 3200 block of Rankin, provided that the resident-parking-only restriction for the 3200 block
of Rankin shall be effective from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday–Friday; (Ordinance 16/001 adopted
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/385
1/19/16)
(26) The west side of the 6100 block of St. Andrews Drive and 6205 St. Andrews Drive, effective
from 12:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Saturday, from 2:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Sunday, and at all times on
Monday through Friday;
(27) The east side of the 6000 block of Connerly Drive effective from 12:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on
Saturday, from 2:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Sunday, and at all times on Monday through Friday;
(Ordinance 16/017, sec. 1, adopted 8/16/16)
(28) Reserved. (Ordinance 16/023 adopted 10/4/16)
(b) Exception. The First Unitarian Church may request a suspension of the resident-parking-only requirements
provided for herein in subsections (a)(20), (22), (26), (27) and (28) in the vicinity of the church (the
“requirements”) in accordance with the following procedure:
(1) The request for suspension must be scheduled, with no less than three (3) days' advance notice to
the city;
(2) Suspension of the requirements will be limited to ten (10) special events per calendar year, with a
maximum duration of four (4) hours per event;
(3) The requirements shall be suspended on the following holidays, provided a minimum of three
days' advance notice is provided to the city:
(A) Maundy Thursday;
(B) Good Friday;
(C) Easter Sunday;
(D) Christmas Eve;
(E) Christmas Day;
(4) The requirements may be suspended with less than three (3) days' advance notice for funerals or
other local tragedies, provided the city is notified as soon as possible;
(5) Upon suspension of the requirements:
(A) The city will notify residents via the city's “group” e-mail;
(B) The city will cover/uncover signs during normal working hours (Monday–Friday, 7:00
a.m.–5:00 p.m.), at the city's expense;
(C) The First Unitarian Church will cover/uncover signs outside of the city's normal working
hours, at the church's expense.
(Ordinance 16/017, sec. 3, adopted 8/16/16)
(c) The chief shall, upon application and payment of all applicable permit fees, issue resident-parking-only
permits, up to a maximum of two (2) permits per residence, to any person who is eligible for a permit. An applicant
is eligible for a resident-parking-only permit if:
(1) The applicant owns or occupies a residence located within the resident-parking-only zone; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/385
(2) The applicant and every other person owning or occupying the same residence as the applicant
complies with all other requirements of this division.
(d) The application for a permit must contain:
(1) The applicant's name and Texas driver's license number;
(2) The name of every other licensed driver who owns or occupies the same residence as the applicant
and each such person's Texas driver's license number;
(3) The address of the applicant's residence located within the resident-parking-only zone;
(4) The make, model, registration, and license plate numbers of each motor vehicle to be parked in
the resident-parking-only zone;
(5) Any other information the chief determines necessary to prove that an applicant owns or occupies
a residence located within a resident-parking-only zone, including, but not limited to, examination of a
valid Texas driver's license showing the applicant's current home address, a utility bill at the same
address, and proof of automobile liability insurance for each motor vehicle to be parked in a residentparking-
only zone, in the minimum amounts required by state law.
(e) Upon receipt of a permit application, the chief shall collect a permit fee to be established by an appropriate
resolution of the city council as provided in section 1.06.002 of this code.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1213(b))
Sec. 12.05.043 Parking restrictions
(a) That except as specifically provided in a subsection of section 12.05.042(a), on any block of the streets
described in section 12.05.042(a)(1)–(7) as resident-only zones, no person shall stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on public school days; on any block of the streets described in section
12.05.042(a)(8)–(24) as resident-parking-only zones, no person shall stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Monday–Friday. The holder of a resident-parking-only permit who resides
on property immediately adjacent to the street which is a part of a designated zone and who has affixed to such
vehicle a valid permit issued pursuant to this division shall not be prohibited from parking thereat. Provided,
however, that it shall be an exception to this division that any person has stopped or parked a vehicle to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the law or the directions of a police officer or a traffic-control
device or due to a mechanical or other emergency and was unable to move the vehicle to a lawful parking space.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1213(c); Ordinance 11/05 adopted 3/15/11; Ordinance 13/19, sec. 2, adopted 5/21/13)
(b) When a vehicle is parked in violation of the provisions of this division, such fact shall be prima facie
evidence that the person in whose name said vehicle is registered is guilty of a violation of the parking prohibition
contained herein.
(c) The chief is hereby authorized and directed to erect appropriate signs and markings within the residentparking-
only zones to give notice of the requirements of this section. Such signs shall be erected in conformance
with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices authorized and published by the state department of
transportation.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1213(c))
Sec. 12.05.044 Temporary permits and placards
(a) A resident of the resident-parking-only zone may be issued temporary parking permits for the use of visitors
attending a party or special event at the residence. An application for one or more temporary parking permits must
be made to the police department, on a form provided by the police department, not less than twenty-four hours nor
more than seventy-two hours before the party or event is scheduled to begin. Such temporary parking permit shall
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/385
be valid for a period not to exceed five days. There shall be no cost or fee associated with the issuance of a
temporary parking permit under this subsection.
(b) A temporary parking permit may be displayed on a motor vehicle owned or leased by a visitor to the
residence. The temporary permit must be conspicuously displayed on or in the vehicle in a manner and location
approved by the police department.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1213(d))
(c) Residents of a resident-parking-only zone may be issued two temporary parking placards per household at no
cost. Temporary parking placards must be renewed annually, provided that placards issued in the Hillcrest East and
Hillcrest West zones shall expire December 31st of the year in which they were issued, and placards for the high
school zone shall expire on June 30th. Application for temporary parking placards shall be made to the police
department on a form provided by the department. Placards must be conspicuously displayed, in a manner and
location in the motor vehicle approved by the police department, so as to be clearly visible from the street.
(Ordinance 14/020 adopted 8/15/14)
Sec. 12.05.045 Effect of permit; display; expiration; replacement
(a) When a motor vehicle is parked in a resident-parking-only zone, the permit must be conspicuously displayed
in a manner and location approved by the police department. A permit may only be displayed on a motor vehicle
listed in the permit application.
(b) A permit authorizes the holder to stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle at any time in a resident-parking-only
zone unless such stopping, standing, or parking is prohibited or restricted by regulations other than those
established under this division. A permit does not guarantee or reserve to the holder a parking space within the zone
and does not exempt the holder from other applicable parking and traffic regulations.
(c) A permit expires one year from the date of its issuance and may be renewed by applying in accordance with
this division.
(d) A lost, destroyed, or stolen permit may be replaced for a fee to be established by appropriate resolution of the
city council. The permit holder must sign an affidavit stating that the permit was lost, destroyed, or stolen.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1213(e))
Sec. 12.05.046 Offenses; revocation of permit
(a) A person commits an offense if he stops, stands, or parks a motor vehicle in a resident-parking-only zone
during the times set out herein without displaying a valid permit on the vehicle as required by this division.
(b) A person commits an offense if he displays or allows the display of a permit on a motor vehicle that is not
listed in the permit application.
(c) A person commits an offense if he falsely represents himself as being eligible for a resident-parking-only
permit, submits false documents, or otherwise makes a false statement of a material fact on an application for a
permit.
(d) It shall be a defense to prosecution under this division that the person was expeditiously loading or unloading
passengers or property, was providing a maintenance, repair, delivery, or lawn service to a residence located within
the zone, was in the performance of official duties as a law enforcement officer, government employee or
contractor or utility company employee or contractor, or was operating an authorized emergency vehicle in the
performance of official duties.
(e) The chief may revoke the resident-parking-only permit of any person who violates any provision of this
section, who has an unresolved parking citation issued by the city, who stops, stands, or parks or allows the
stopping, standing, or parking of a motor vehicle, other than the one owned or leased by a visitor to the residence,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/385
in a resident-parking-only zone without a valid Texas license plate, valid inspection sticker, or automobile liability
insurance coverage in at least the minimum amounts required by state law.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1213(f))
ARTICLE 12.06 TRUCKS AND HEAVY EQUIPMENT*
Sec. 12.06.001 Truck routes; load restrictions
(a) Truck routes.
(1) When signs have been placed designating truck routes and when the major thoroughfares have
been signed indicating a prohibition of truck traffic, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or
operate any truck, tractor, trailer, bus or other commercial vehicle with a rated carrying capacity in
excess of five thousand pounds on, along, or over any streets of the city, or any portion thereof, except
the following designated truck routes:
Street Extent
Preston Road From the north city limits to the south city
limits.
Hillcrest Avenue From the north city limits to the south city
limits.
Lovers Lane Only from the west city limits east to Preston
Road.
Frontage roads, Central
Expressway
All of the frontage roads abutting the city limits.
For the purposes of this article, “bus” shall mean a bus or passenger conveyance vehicle designed
to carry more than fifteen (15) seated passengers.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.2001; Ordinance 14/029 adopted 11/18/14)
(2) It shall be the duty of the city manager to procure and cause to be erected, placed and maintained
on all streets designated in subsection (1) above, and at all intersections on such streets giving access to
such streets, signs bearing the inscription “Truck Route” or an international sign indicating the same. On
all thoroughfares not a part of the truck route designation signs shall be erected, placed and maintained
bearing the inscription “Not A Truck Route,” “Trucks, Tractors, Trailers, and Commercial Motor
Vehicles Prohibited,” or similar words or, in the alternative, the international sign indicating trucks
prohibited.
(3) It shall not be unlawful for any truck, tractor, trailer, or other commercial vehicle with a rated
capacity in excess of five thousand (5,000) pounds to enter into and be operated on, along, and over a
street or portion of a street not designated a truck route for the purpose of making a delivery or
performing a service for a residential or noncommercial property, including Southern Methodist
University.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/385
(4) Excepted from the provisions of this section are passenger motor buses operated by Dallas Area
Rapid Transit, trucks over 5,000 pounds operated by the city for municipal services, trucks operated by
any franchised utility company of the city, and vehicles of contractors, subcontractors and suppliers on
projects under contract for the city provided such vehicles use a route approved by the public works
director or his designee to and from the city project.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.2001)
(b) Load restrictions on University Boulevard.
(1) A person commits an offense if he drives or operates a truck, tractor, trailer, bus or other
commercial vehicle with a rated carrying capacity in excess of five thousand (5,000) pounds on
University Boulevard from Preston Road to Hillcrest Avenue or from Dublin to North Central
Expressway (U.S. 75).
(Ordinance 14/029 adopted 11/18/14)
(2) The chief of police is hereby directed to supervise the installation and maintenance of signs at
such location indicating that such vehicles are prohibited. (1996 Code, sec. 10.2001)
(3) The prohibition contained in the preceding sentences shall not apply to vehicles picking up or
delivering passengers, goods or merchandise from or to property abutting University Boulevard from
Preston Road to Hillcrest Avenue or from Dublin to North Central Expressway (U.S. 75), nor to
vehicles operated by the city for municipal purposes or trucks operated by the franchised utility
companies of the city. (Ordinance 14/029 adopted 11/18/14)
Sec. 12.06.002 Loading and unloading trucks on street
A person commits an offense if he loads or unloads a truck or trailer on a street if it is reasonably possible to load
or unload such truck or trailer from an alley. (1996 Code, sec. 10.2002)
Sec. 12.06.003 Operation of heavy equipment on street
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any tractor, cement mixer, mower, heavy truck, or any other
machinery, vehicle or contrivance calculated to injure or destroy or impair the streets, sidewalks, or curbs of the
city without first obtaining a permit from the city clerk and making a bond or other good assurance to repair any
damage caused by such vehicle. (1996 Code, sec. 10.2003)
Sec. 12.06.004 Use of residential alleys
(a) Except for repair vehicles of utilities and municipal service vehicles, no concrete truck or any truck exceeding
two and one-half (2-1/2) tons (or 5,000 lbs. load capacity) shall use any of the residential alleys of the city. A
residential alley is defined as an alley which abuts a residential zoned area (SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-4, SF-A, D-1, D-
2, MF-1, MF-2 or MF-3) on both sides.
(b) The city manager shall have placed on all major thoroughfares a sign designating the prohibition on the use
of said alleys.
(c) All projects requiring concrete shall utilize pumping equipment or concrete “buggies.”
(d) Swimming pool contractors may, upon approval of the community development department, transport an
excavator to the job site, provided specified protection methods as approved by the public works director are used
to prevent damage to the area abutting the alley pavement.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive any truck in violation of subsection (a) above.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.2004)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/385
Sec. 12.06.005 Truck idling
(a) Definitions. Unless specifically defined herein, the terms used in this section have the meanings commonly
ascribed to them in the field of air pollution control, unless the context provides otherwise.
Idle. The operation of an engine in the operating mode where the engine is not engaged in gear, where the engine
operates at a speed at the revolutions per minute specified by the engine or vehicle manufacturer for when the
accelerator is fully released, and there is no load on the engine.
Motor vehicle. Any self-propelled device powered by an internal combustion engine and designed to operate with
four or more wheels in contact with the ground, in or by which a person or property is or may be transported, and is
required to be registered under Texas Transportation Code, section 502.002, excluding vehicles registered under
section 502.006(c).
Primary propulsion engine. A gasoline- or diesel-fueled internal combustion engine attached to a motor vehicle
that provides the power to propel the motor vehicle into motion and maintain motion.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.2005)
(b) Time limit. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle
to idle for more than five (5) consecutive minutes when the motor vehicle is not in motion.
(c) Exemptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to:
(1) A motor vehicle that has a gross vehicle weight rating of 14,000 pounds or less;
(2) A motor vehicle having a gross vehicle weight rating greater than 14,000 pounds and that is
equipped with a 2008 or subsequent model year heavy-duty diesel engine or liquefied or compressed
natural gas engine that has been certified by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or
another state environmental agency to emit no more than 30 grams of nitrogen oxides emissions per
hour when idling;
(Ordinance 13/03 adopted 2/5/13)
(3) A motor vehicle being used by the United States military, National Guard, or reserve forces, or as
an emergency or law enforcement motor vehicle;
(4) The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle providing a power source necessary for
mechanical operation other than propulsion, passenger compartment heating or air conditioning;
(5) The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle being operated for maintenance or diagnostic
purposes;
(6) The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle being operated solely to defrost a windshield;
(7) The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle that is being used to supply heat or air
conditioning necessary for passenger comfort/safety in those vehicles intended for commercial or public
passenger transportation, or passenger transit operations, in which case idling up to a maximum of thirty
(30) minutes is allowed;
(8) The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle that is being used to supply heat or air
conditioning necessary for employee health or safety while the employee is using the vehicle to perform
an essential job function related to roadway construction or maintenance;
(9) The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle being used as airport ground support
equipment;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/385
(10) The owner of a motor vehicle rented or leased to a person who operates the vehicle and is not
employed by the owner;
(11) A motor vehicle when idling is necessary to power a heater or air conditioner while a driver is
using the vehicle's sleeper berth for a government-mandated rest period and is not within two miles of a
facility offering external heating and air conditioning connections at a time when those connections are
available; or
(1996 Code, sec. 10.2005)
(12) The primary propulsion engine of a motor vehicle being used to provide air conditioning or
heating necessary for employee health or safety in an armored vehicle while the employee remains
inside the vehicle to guard the contents or while the vehicle is being loaded or unloaded. (Ordinance
13/03 adopted 2/5/13)
(d) Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a class C
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in an amount not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. (1996 Code, sec. 10.2005)
ARTICLE 12.07 PARADES AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.07.001 Definitions
City manager. The city manager, or the manager's designee, and for the determination of certain issues involved
with the issuance of a permit may include the chief of police, the public works director, or such other city employee
that the manager designates, provided that the applicant for a permit is always able to obtain information as to a
final determination from the city manager.
Parade. Any march, demonstration, procession or motorcade consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles or a
combination thereof upon the streets, parks or other public grounds within the city with an intent of attracting
public attention that interferes with the normal flow or regulation of traffic upon the streets, parks or other public
grounds and which does not otherwise constitute residential picketing as set forth in article 8.02, division 2.
Parade or public assembly permit. A permit as required by this article.
Person. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
Public assembly. Any meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally or gathering for a common purpose as a result of
prior planning that interferes with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or occupies any
public area in a place open to the general public.
Sidewalk. Any area or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes of pedestrian traffic, whether or not
it is paved.
Street. Any place or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes of vehicular traffic, including any
berm or shoulder parkway, right-of-way, or median strip thereof.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1903)
Sec. 12.07.002 Exceptions
This article shall not apply to the following:
(1) Funeral processions;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/385
(2) Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided that
such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities;
(3) A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions; and
(4) Organized events occasioned by news or affairs coming into public knowledge within three (3)
days of such event, provided that the organizer thereof gives written notice to the city manager at least
twenty-four (24) hours prior to such event.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1905)
Sec. 12.07.003 Prohibited acts
The following prohibitions shall apply to all parades and public assemblies:
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, present, or conduct any parade or public assembly
without first having obtained a permit as required in this article;
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a parade or public assembly for which the
person knows that a permit has not been granted;
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a parade or public assembly for which the
person knows that a permit has been revoked;
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person to continue to participate in a parade or public assembly after
being informed by a law enforcement officer that a permit for the event has not been granted;
(5) It shall be unlawful for any person to continue to participate in a parade or public assembly after
being informed by a law enforcement officer that a permit for the event has been revoked;
(6) It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of or responsible for the conduct of a duly permitted
parade or public assembly to knowingly fail to comply with any condition of the permit;
(7) It shall be unlawful for any person who participates in any parade or public assembly activity to
carry or possess any length of lumber, or wood, or other nonmetallic material, for purposes of displaying
a sign, poster, plaque or notice unless such material is rounded on the ends, is one-fourth inch or less in
thickness, and is two inches (2") or less in width;
(8) It shall be unlawful for any person who participates in any parade or public assembly activity to
carry or possess any length of metal for purposes of displaying a sign, poster, plaque or notice;
(9) It shall be unlawful for any person to carry any sign, poster, plaque, or notice, whether [or not]
mounted on a length of material as set forth in subsections (7) and (8) immediately above, unless such
sign, poster, plaque or notice is constructed or made of cloth, paper, or cardboard material;
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1915)
(10) It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive, or cause to be ridden or driven any animal or
any animal-drawn vehicle upon any public street as a part of a parade or public assembly unless such
transportation is specifically authorized by the permit;
(11) It shall be unlawful for any person to wear any mask, hood, costume, disguise or device whereby
any portion of his or her face is hidden, concealed or covered so as to conceal the identity of the wearer,
within three hundred feet (300') of any parade or public assembly, provided that this subsection shall not
apply to governmental employees engaged in the performance of their official duties or any authorized
person participating in a parade permitted by the city as provided by this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/385
(Ordinance 12/36 adopted 12/18/12)
Sec. 12.07.004 Interference; driving through parade or assembly; parking restrictions
(a) No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or public assembly or
with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade or public assembly.
(b) No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade or public assembly
when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade or public assembly;
provided that this provision shall not prevent a law enforcement officer to permit traffic to pass through such an
assembly if, in the judgment of the officer, such action can be taken without any danger to the driver and the
persons participating in the parade or public assembly.
(c) The city manager shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of
vehicles along a street constituting a part of the route of a parade or public assembly. The city manager shall direct
that signs be posted to that effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in
violation of such posting. No person whose vehicle is otherwise legally parked shall be liable for parking on a
street posted pursuant to this subsection that was not posted at the time the person parked the vehicle.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1916)
Secs. 12.07.005–12.07.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 12.07.031 Required
No person shall engage in or conduct any parade or public assembly unless a permit is issued by the city manager.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1904)
Sec. 12.07.032 Application
(a) A person seeking a parade or public assembly permit shall file an application with the city manager on forms
provided by the city, and the application shall be signed by the applicant.
(b) For single, nonrecurring parades or public assemblies, an application for a permit shall be filed with the city
manager at least five (5) and not more than one hundred eighty (180) days before the parade or public assembly is
proposed to commence. The city manager may waive the minimum ten-day filing period and accept an application
filed within a shorter period if, after due consideration of the date, time, place, and nature of the parade or public
assembly, the anticipated number of participants, and the city services required in connection with the event, the
chief of police determines that the waiver will not present a hazard to public safety.
(c) For parades or public assemblies held on a regular or recurring basis at the same location, an application for a
permit covering all such parades or assemblies during that calendar year may be filed with the city manager at least
thirty (30) and not more than one hundred eighty (180) days before the date and time at which the first such parade
or public assembly is proposed to commence. The city manager may waive the minimum thirty-day period after
due consideration of the factors specified in subsection (b) above.
(d) The application for a parade or public assembly permit shall set forth the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number, if available, a pager number, mobile telephone number,
and e-mail address of the person seeking to conduct such parade or public assembly;
(2) The names, addresses and telephone numbers and, if available, e-mail addresses of the
headquarters of the organization for which the parade or public assembly is to be conducted, if any, and
the authorized and responsible heads of the organization;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/385
(3) The requested date of the parade or public assembly;
(4) The route to be traveled, including the starting point and the termination point;
(5) The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such
parade or public assembly, and the type of animals and description of the vehicles;
(6) A statement as to whether the parade or public assembly will occupy all or only a portion of the
width of the streets proposed to be traversed;
(7) The location by street of any assembly areas for such parade or public assembly;
(8) The time at which units of the parade or public assembly will begin to assemble at any such area;
(9) The intervals of space to be maintained between units of such parade or public assembly;
(10) If the parade or public assembly is designed to be held by, or on behalf of, any person other than
the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file a letter from that person with the chief of police
authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf;
(11) The type of public assembly, including a description of activities planned during the event;
(12) A description of any recording equipment, sound amplification equipment, banners, signs, or
other attention-getting devices to be used in connection with the parade or public assembly;
(13) The approximate number of participants expected to attend the parade or public assembly;
(14) The approximate number of spectators expected to be in attendance, understanding that a
participant is not to be counted as a spectator;
(15) A designation of any public facilities or equipment, other than the public streets, that are
expected to be utilized;
(16) Any additional information that the applicant reasonably believes would be helpful to the city
manager in order to plan for any city services that may be required;
(17) Any additional information the city manager reasonably believes is necessary in order for the
city to plan for any city services that may be required.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1906)
Sec. 12.07.033 Fee
A nonrefundable fee set by the master fee resolution to cover the administrative costs of processing the permit shall
be paid to the city manager or his designee by the applicant at the time the application is filed. (1996 Code, sec.
10.1907)
Sec. 12.07.034 Standards for issuance
(a) The city manager shall issue a permit pursuant to this article as requested by the applicant if, after
consideration of the information contained in the permit, and such other information as [may] otherwise be
obtained, it is determined that:
(1) The conduct of the parade or public assembly will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly
movement of other pedestrian or vehicular traffic contiguous to its route or location;
(2) The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at public assembly points of the parade or
public assembly will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/385
to, areas contiguous to such public assembly areas;
(3) The parade or public assembly is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of
termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route;
(4) Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities are or will be made available in or adjacent
to any public assembly area;
(5) There is sufficient parking available near the site of the parade or public assembly to
accommodate the number of vehicles reasonably expected at the time of the event;
(6) No parade or public assembly permit application for the same time and location has already been
granted, or was previously received and will be granted;
(7) No parade or public assembly permit application for the same date, or within a time frame within
twenty-four (24) hours of the same date, has been previously received and will be granted, which will
require the use and deployment of public resources in such a manner that, when combined with the
subsequent application, it is reasonably determined that there would be an adverse effect upon the city's
ability to provide such resources and to protect the welfare and safety of persons and property; provided
that the mere expenditure of public funds for overtime payments for public employees shall not be
deemed an adverse effect upon the city's ability to provide public services;
(8) No event is scheduled elsewhere in the city where the public resources required for that event are
so great that the deployment of public services would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the
welfare and safety of persons and property.
(b) No permit shall be granted that allows for the erection or placement of any structure, whether permanent or
temporary, on a city street, sidewalk, or right-of-way unless advance approval for the erection or placement of the
structure is obtained from the city manager.
(c) The city manager shall not deny any application for a permit upon the basis of race, creed, color, national
origin, political viewpoint, disability, or gender.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1908)
Sec. 12.07.035 Notice of denial
The city manager shall act promptly upon a timely filed application for a parade or public assembly permit, but in
no event shall grant or deny a permit less than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the event. If the city manager
disapproves the application, the applicant shall be notified in writing as soon as possible, but in no event less than
forty-eight (48) hours prior to the event, and shall be provided the reasons for such denial. Notification in writing
shall be deemed to have occurred when a letter is delivered in person, by facsimile with verification of delivery, by
mail with some form of return receipt, or by e-mail with some indication that the message has been read. (1996
Code, sec. 10.1909)
Sec. 12.07.036 Alternative permit
(a) The city manager, in denying an application for a parade or public assembly permit, may authorize the
conduct of the parade or public assembly at a date, time, location, or route different from that named by the
applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five (5) days after notice of the action by
the city manager, submit a written notice of acceptance with the city manager.
(b) An alternate parade or public assembly permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect
of, a parade or public assembly permit issued pursuant to this article.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1910)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/385
Sec. 12.07.037 Appeals
(a) Any applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade or public assembly permit to the city
council. The denied applicant shall make the appeal within five (5) days after receipt of the denial by filing a
written notice with the city manager. If there are less than five (5) days prior to the requested date for the parade or
public assembly permit, the applicant shall make the appeal by filing as soon as possible before the scheduled date
a written notice with the city manager. The city council shall act upon the appeal at the next scheduled meeting
following receipt of the notice of appeal; provided that, if no scheduled meeting or agenda session will occur prior
to the requested date of the parade or public assembly, the city council shall call a special meeting to decide the
appeal.
(b) The issue on appeal shall be whether the application meets the criteria set forth in this article for the issuance
of a permit for a parade or public assembly. The city council shall consider the information provided in the permit
application.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1911)
Sec. 12.07.038 Notice to public officials
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade or public assembly permit, the city manager shall have a copy of the
permit sent to the following:
(1) The mayor;
(2) The city attorney;
(3) The heads of the city's respective emergency services departments, including police, fire and
ambulance;
(4) The public works director;
(5) The manager or responsible head of each public transportation agency, or utility, the regular routes
of whose vehicles will be affected by the route of the proposed parade or public assembly;
(6) The directors of other governmental entities, or law enforcement agencies, whose departments
may be affected by the attendance of persons at the proposed parade or public assembly.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1912)
Sec. 12.07.039 Contents
Each parade or public assembly permit shall state the following information:
(1) The scheduled starting and the anticipated ending time of the parade or public assembly;
(2) The proposed minimum speed of parade units if vehicles are used to transport any participants in
the parade or public assembly;
(3) The maximum speed that will be allowed for parade units if vehicles are used to transport any
participants in the parade or public assembly;
(4) The maximum interval of space to be maintained between units of the parade or public assembly;
(5) The portions of the streets that will be occupied by the parade or the public assembly;
(6) The maximum anticipated length of the parade in miles or fractions of miles;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/385
(7) Such other information as the city manager shall find necessary for the enforcement of the
provisions of this article.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1913)
Sec. 12.07.040 Duties of permittee
(a) A recipient of a permit for a parade or public assembly shall comply with all permit directions and conditions
and with all applicable laws and ordinances.
(b) The recipient of a permit for a parade or public assembly shall designate a person who shall be in immediate
possession of the parade or public assembly permit at all times during the parade or public assembly. The recipient
of the permit shall provide the name of this person in writing to the city manager no less than three (3) hours prior
to the start of the parade or public assembly.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.1914)
Sec. 12.07.041 Revocation
The city manager shall have the authority to revoke a parade or public assembly permit instantly upon violation of
the conditions or standards for issuance as set forth in this article, or when a public emergency arises where the
emergency services resources required for that emergency are so great that deployment of similar services for the
parade or public assembly would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons or
property; provided that if such revocation occurs through no fault or misconduct of the applicant for the permit, or
the persons participating in the parade or public assembly that is the subject of the permit, then the city manager
shall issue a new permit, subject to the same conditions of the revoked permit, for a date acceptable to the applicant
that is within a reasonable period of time after the public emergency has subsided. (1996 Code, sec. 10.1917)
ARTICLE 12.08 BICYCLES
Sec. 12.08.001 Definitions
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise:
Customer. A person who rents and uses a bicycle from a bike share operator.
Dockless bike share system. A system which provides bicycles for short-term rentals for point-to-point trips and
which may be locked and unlocked without the requirement of a bicycle rack or other docking station within the
city.
Dockless bike share operator or operator. A corporation, firm, joint venture, limited liability company, partnership,
person, or other organized entity that operates a dockless bike share system, whether for profit or not for profit.
Director. The director, or his or her designee, of the community development department.
Geo-fence platform. An interactive geographic spatial layer or map controlled by the city to quickly and effectively
detect and manage connected devices, liked shared bicycles, in the city's public spaces.
Geo-fence zone. A zone defined by GPS or RFID that registers when a mobile device like a bicycle enters or leaves
that zone.
Geo-fence zone plan for cities and bike share. A program to serve both the city and its citizens to regulate the use
of shared bicycles and the functioning conditions for the operators.
Permittee. A dockless bike share operator that holds a current and valid permit issued pursuant to this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/385
Public right-of-way or right-of-way. A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription, deed or
condemnation and intended to use by the public as a street, alley, or other public way.
Sec. 12.08.002 Application for permit
(a) A pilot program is hereby created to allow a nine-month permit for companies which desire to operate a
dockless bike share system or business within the city limits (“operators”).
(b) To participate in the pilot program, operators must submit a permit application to the community
development director in accordance with these regulations.
(c) The permit application shall include these items:
(1) Completed application;
(2) Company/operator name and local, primary contact information;
(3) Insurance and indemnification documentation;
(4) Images and description of bicycles and mobile application;
(5) Size of fleet, including any planned fleet expansion over the year;
(6) Service area, including any planned expansions over the year;
(7) Plan for educating users on proper bicycle parking;
(8) Permit fee in the amount applicable to the operator as specified in this article.
Sec. 12.08.003 Safety regulations
(a) All bicycles used by operators issued a permit under this article shall meet the standards outlined in the Code
of Federal Regulations (CFR) under title 16, chapter II, subchapter C, part 1512 - regulations for bicycles.
Additionally, permitted systems shall meet the safety standards outlined in ISO 43.150 - Cycles, subsection 4210.
(b) All bicycles shall meet the Texas Transportation Code requirement for lights during nighttime, described in
Texas Transportation Code Title 7, subtitle C., chapter 551, subchapter B sec. 551.104.
(c) All operators permitted under this program shall provide a mechanism for customers to notify the operator
that there is a safety or maintenance issue with the bicycle, to include a telephone number, web address, and email
address.
(d) All permitted systems shall have visible language that notifies the user that:
(1) Helmet use is encouraged while riding the bicycle.
(2) Bicyclists shall yield to pedestrians on sidewalks.
(3) When riding on a street, bicyclists must follow the rules of the road as one would in a motor
vehicle.
(e) Permitted bicycle share operators agree that the city is not responsible for educating users regarding bicycle
laws. Neither is the city responsible for educating users on how to ride or operate a bicycle. Permitted operators
agree to educate users regarding laws applicable to riding and operating a bicycle in the city and to instruct users to
comply with applicable laws.
Sec. 12.08.004 Parking and use of bicycles
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/385
(a) Bicycle share operators shall inform customers on how and where to use and park a bicycle properly.
(b) Bicycle share operators shall have the capability to create geo-fence zones as established by the city.
(c) Bicycle share operators shall provide and maintain a geo-fence platform operable on six (6) workstations
simultaneously, compatible with the city GIS system.
(d) Restrictions to eligible bicycle parking zones on sidewalks include:
(1) Bicycles shall not be parked in the required sight triangle at an intersection, as defined by this
code.
(2) Bicycles shall not be parked against trees or within the landscape planting beds.
(3) The city reserves the right to determine certain block faces where dockless bicycle share parking
is prohibited.
(4) Bicycles shall not be parked or stationed in such a way that will inhibit pedestrian movement or
ADA accessibility on sidewalks or pedestrian ways.
(5) Bicycles shall not be parked adjacent to or within:
(A) An area not within a geo-fence zone (reference map or geo-fence platform);
(B) Transit zones, including bus stops and shelters;
(C) Loading zones;
(D) ADA handicap parking zones;
(E) Street furniture that requires pedestrian access;
(F) Curb ramps; or
(G) Entryways and driveways.
(e) This permit is only valid for operations within the city right-of-way. Additional zones may be established; for
example, locations within parks, on-street parking spaces, off-street parking lots/garages, or campuses may be
established. However, permission to do so shall require coordination with the appropriate city department and/or
property owner and shall be communicated to the customer through signage approved by the respective entity
and/or through the mobile web application.
(f) Any dockless bicycle that is parked in one location for more than seven (7) consecutive days without moving
must be evaluated and moved to a new location by the bicycle share system provider. If the bicycle remains in the
same location for the first two (2) hours of the eighth day, it may be removed by the city and taken to a facility for
storage at the expense of the bicycle share operator. The city shall invoice the violating operator (see operations
section for more information).
(g) All permitted bicycle share operators shall provide, on every bicycle, contact information for bicycle
relocation requests, including a telephone number, web address, and email address.
(h) Bicycles shall be upright when parked.
(i) Any bicycle that is parked incorrectly shall be re-parked in a correct manner or shall be removed by the
operator based on these times:
(1) 8:00 a.m.–8:00 p.m. Monday–Friday (holidays excluded) - within two (2) hours of receiving
notice.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/385
(2) All other times - by 10:00 a.m. the following calendar day (holidays included).
(j) A rider of a dockless shared bike shall ride and operate or park and leave the bike only within the geo-fence
zones established in red on the map attached to Ordinance 18/019 as exhibit A. Shaded or cross-hatched areas on
the map indicate areas where bike-share units may not legally be parked-rental fees cannot be stopped and bikes
cannot be locked in those areas.
Sec. 12.08.005 Special events
For special events in the city that require street closure and/or booths to set up on a street or the sidewalk, removal
of bike share bikes will be handled by the bike share operator.
(1) Two weeks prior to the event city staff will contact all permitted bike share operators alerting
them to the upcoming event.
(2) Permitted bike share operators will be required to remove bikes at least three hours prior to street
closures or event set up.
(3) It is the responsibility of the permitted bike share operator to ensure users are aware of the
restricted parking areas.
Sec. 12.08.006 Operations of bicycle share operators
(a) All permitted bicycle share operators under the permit program shall have a 24-hour customer service phone
number for customers and others to report safety concerns, complaints, or ask questions.
(b) All permitted bicycle share operators under the permit program shall provide the city with a direct contact for
bicycle share operator staff that are capable of rebalancing bicycles. In addition, operators will provide a
rebalancing management plan to the city.
(c) In the event city staff identifies or receives a nuisance complaint, all permitted bicycle share operators under
the permit program shall relocate or rebalance bicycles based on these times:
(1) 8:00 a.m.–8:00 p.m. Monday–Friday (holidays excluded) - within two (2) hours of receiving
notice.
(2) All other times - by 10:00 a.m. the following calendar day (holidays included).
(d) Any inoperable bicycle, or any bicycle deemed not safe to operate either by a user or the company, shall be
removed from the ROW within 24 hours of notice by any means to the operator by an individual or entity, and shall
be repaired before returning the bicycle into revenue service.
(e) All permitted operators shall have a minimum bicycle fleet of 50 bicycles if using standard (nonelectric)
bicycles; operators shall meet this fleet size within four weeks of permit approval.
(f) During this pilot stage of the bicycle share permit program, the city will limit the number of bikes per bike
share company to no more than 150 bikes. If ridership reports demonstrate a need for more and operators are
meeting responsible rebalancing/relocation requirements, the bike limit may be reassessed.
(g) Every bicycle shall have a unique identifier, such as a unit number, that is visible to the user on the bicycle.
(h) Escrow accounts: The operator must provide two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) in cash per one
thousand (1,000) bicycles (not prorated) that the city will hold in escrow for the term of this permit to cover direct
costs incurred by the city due to violations of the permit. Should the escrow account be debited and drop to an
amount below five hundred dollars ($500.00), operator shall provide additional funds to raise the amount back to
two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per one thousand (1,000) bicycles.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/385
(i) If the city incurs any costs addressing or abating any violations of these requirements, or incurs any costs of
repair or maintenance of public property, upon receiving written notice of the city costs, the permitted operator
shall reimburse the city for such costs within thirty days. If reimbursement is not paid, the city may withdraw the
funds from the escrow account provided in subsection (h), above.
(j) Permits may be revoked for lack of customer service response to include but not limited to safety concerns,
failure to actively manage rebalancing plan, documented history of violating components outlined in this policy
and/or any of the following:
(1) If an operator has five (5) or more bicycles impounded by the city at any one time;
(2) If an operator has had ten (10) or more bicycles impounded within 30 days; or
(3) If an operator leaves a bicycle impounded for five (5) or more consecutive days.
(k) Appeal:
(1) An operator may appeal the following decisions of the city if it requests an appeal in writing and
delivers it to the city manager not more than ten (10) business days after receiving notice of the action:
(A) A denial of an application for permit under this program; or
(B) A revocation of a permit under this program.
(2) The city manager or his designee shall act as the appeal hearing officer in an appeal hearing under
this section. The hearing officer shall give the appealing party an opportunity to present evidence and
make argument in its behalf. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an appeal hearing under this
section, and the hearing officer shall make his ruling on a preponderance of the evidence presented at
the hearing. The hearing officer may affirm, modify, or reverse all or part of the action being appealed.
The decision of the hearing officer is final.
Sec. 12.08.007 Data sharing
(a) Permitted bicycle share operators will report data to the bicycle and pedestrian coordinator or the traffic
engineer for reporting and analysis purposes.
(b) Permitted bicycle share operators are required to report monthly information regarding their fleet and
membership. The goal of these reports is to better understand how the entire bicycle share system is being utilized
and to better inform future policy changes. Operators will work with the city to provide the following information
on their company's operations in the city:
(1) Number of bicycles in system;
(2) Origin and destination data;
(3) Usage (total trips, per timeframe, per location, per bicycle);
(4) Total number of members;
(5) Member survey and general demographics (if available); and
(6) Reported collisions.
Sec. 12.08.008 Insurance requirements
(a) All insurance policies proposed or obtained in satisfaction of these requirements shall comply with the
following general specifications, and shall be maintained in compliance with these general specifications through
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/385
the duration of the permit, or longer, as so noted:
(1) Each policy shall be issued by a company authorized to do business in the state with an A.M. Best
Company rating of at least A- or better.
(2) Any deductibles or self-insured retentions shall be declared in the proposal. If requested by the
city, the insurer shall reduce or eliminate such deductibles or self-insured retentions with respect to the
city, its officials, agents, employees, and volunteers; or, the contractor shall procure a bond guaranteeing
payment of losses and related investigations, claim administration, and defense expenses.
(3) All liability policies shall be endorsed to provide the following:
(A) Name as additional insured the city, its officials, agents, employees, and volunteers.
(B) That such insurance is primary to any other insurance available to the additional insured
with respect to claims covered under the policy and that this insurance applies separately to each
insured against whom claim is made or suit is brought. The inclusion of more than one insured
shall not operate to increase the insurer's limit of liability.
(C) Provide a waiver of subrogation in favor of the city, its officials, agents, employees, and
volunteers.
(i) Cancellation: City requires 30 days' written notice should any of the policies described
on the certificate be cancelled or materially changed before the expiration date.
(ii) Should any of the required insurance be provided under a form of coverage that
includes a general annual aggregate limit providing for claims investigation or legal defense
costs to be included in the general annual aggregate limit, the contractor shall either double
the occurrence limits or obtain owners and contractors protective liability insurance.
(iii) Should any required insurance lapse during the contract term, requests for payments
originating after such lapse shall not be processed until the city receives satisfactory
evidence of reinstated coverage as required by this contract, effective as of the lapse date. If
insurance is not reinstated, city may, at its sole option, terminate this agreement effective on
the date of the lapse.
(b) General liability insurance. General liability insurance with combined single limits of not less than
$1,000,000.00 shall be provided and maintained by the permittee. The policy shall be written on an occurrence
basis either in a single policy or in a combination of underlying and umbrella or excess policies.
(1) If the commercial general liability form (ISO form CG 0001 current edition) is used:
(A) Coverage A shall include premises, operations, products, and completed operations,
independent contractors, contractual liability covering this contract and broad form property
damage coverage.
(B) Coverage B shall include personal injury.
(C) Coverage C, medical payments, is not required.
(2) If the comprehensive general liability form (ISO form GL 0002 current edition and ISO form GL
0404) is used, it shall include at least:
(A) Bodily injury and property damage liability for premises, operations, products and
completed operations, independent contractors and property damage resulting from explosion,
collapse or underground (XCU) exposures.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/385
(c) Automobile liability insurance. Permittee shall provide commercial automobile liability insurance with
combined single limits (CSL) of not less than $500,000.00 either in a single policy or in a combination of basic and
umbrella or excess policies. The policy will include bodily injury and property damage liability arising out of the
operation, maintenance and use of all automobiles and mobile equipment used in conjunction with this contract.
Satisfaction of the above requirement shall be in the form of a policy endorsement for:
(1) Any auto; or
(2) All owner, hired, and nonowned autos.
Sec. 12.08.009 Pilot program permit fees
The pilot program permit fees shall be applied to approved bicycle share permit holders based on the size of the
operator's fleet and shall be set by an appropriate resolution of the city council establishing a master fee schedule.
(Ordinance 18/019 adopted 3/20/18)
ARTICLE 12.09 MOTOR-ASSISTED SCOOTERS
Sec. 12.09.001 Definitions
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise:
Customer. A person who rents and uses a motor-assisted scooter (“scooter”) from a scooter operator.
Geo-fence zone. A zone defined by GPS or RFID that registers when a mobile device like a scooter enters or leaves
that zone.
Public right-of-way or right-of-way. A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription, deed or
condemnation and intended to use by the public as a street, alley, or other public way.
Scooter operator or operator. A corporation, firm, joint venture, limited liability company, partnership, person, or
other organized entity that operates a scooter share system, whether for profit or not for profit.
Scooter share system. A system which provides scooters for short-term rentals for point-to-point trips and which
may be locked and unlocked without the requirement of a scooter rack or other docking station within the city.
Sec. 12.09.002 Safety regulations
(a) All scooters made available by an operator and used in the city by any person shall meet the standards
outlined in this article.
(b) All scooters shall meet the Texas Transportation Code requirement for lights during nighttime operation.
(c) All operators shall maintain a 24-hour customer service phone number to report safety concerns, complaints
or questions; scooters shall be made unavailable in the event of report of a safety or maintenance issue, until the
issue is resolved.
(d) All scooter users must abide by the following regulations:
(1) Riders must obey all applicable laws, ordinances and traffic signs, including stop signs and stop
lights. Except on private property (e. g. SMU Main Campus), scooters may be operated only in the
public right-of-way locations authorized by section 12.01.011 of this code;
(2) Helmets are encouraged for all users;
(3) Riders must stay to the right when riding scooters on all roadways, pathways, and sidewalks; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/385
(4) Riders must park scooters upright on hard surfaces:
(A) In any designated scooter parking area;
(B) Beside a bicycle rack or in another area specifically designated for bicycle parking, but not
in a manner that will impede or interfere with the reasonable use of any bicycle rack, pedestrian
area, vehicular area, traffic area or access to or from a building; or
(C) In other areas out of the public right-of-way with permission of the owner.
(e) The city is not responsible for educating users regarding scooter laws. Neither is the city responsible for
educating users on how to ride or operate a scooter. Operators should educate users regarding laws applicable to
riding and operating a scooter in the city and instruct users to comply with applicable laws.
(f) Every scooter will be equipped with geofence ability (global positioning system (“GPS”) technology). Every
operator will draw a geofence in accordance with the parameters of section 12.01.011 of this code.
(g) Operators will limit the speed of scooters to not more than 10 miles per hour. Operators will offer riders an
opportunity to obtain a helmet for use while riding a scooter.
(Ordinance 18/049 adopted 12/18/18)
CHAPTER 13
UTILITIES
ARTICLE 13.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 13.01.001 Use of fire hydrants
(a) Fire hydrants are provided for the sole purpose of use to extinguish fire and are to be used and opened only
by the water and fire departments or such person as may be given written authority by the manager of the public
works director [department] or his designee.
(b) To insure the safety and protection of fire hydrants for fire protection, any person or persons authorized to
open fire hydrants shall use only an approved spanner wrench and shall replace the caps on the outlet when the
same are not in use; failure to do so shall be sufficient cause to prohibit further use of the hydrants and the refusal
to grant subsequent permits for the use of fire hydrants, in addition to other penalties provided herein.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or carry away any water from any fire hydrant without a
written permit from the utility billing manager or the community development department.
(1996 Code, art. 5.500(a)–(c); Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 13.01.002 Obstruction of fire hydrant, meter or other waterworks facilities
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to place upon or about any fire hydrant, gate valve, manhole, curb
cock, meter or meter box connected with any water pipe of the city waterworks system any object, material, debris,
or structure of any kind so as to prevent free access to the same at all times. (1996 Code, art. 5.500(d))
Sec. 13.01.003 Water service charges
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/385
Water rates shall be established by appropriate resolution of the city council enacted after public notice and a public
meeting at which the city council shall discuss such rates. Such rates, when established by such resolution, shall be
collected by the manager of the utility billing office within the city. (1996 Code, art. 11.400)
Sec. 13.01.004 Sewer service charges
(a) Sewer service charges shall be established by appropriate resolution of the city council enacted after public
notice and a public meeting at which the city council shall discuss such charges.
(b) The sewer charge for each single-family, duplex or multifamily dwelling shall be included in the water bill
and calculated as follows:
(1) All sewer charges are based on the use of water passing through the water meter or meters. All
single-family units having more than one meter shall have the usage of meters added together for the
purposes of this section; however, if separate bills are rendered for a lawn sprinkler such consumption
shall not be considered for sewer charges.
(2) Any duplex or multifamily dwelling which is served by a single water meter shall be billed a
minimum charge for each unit, occupied or vacant, and any usage over the minimum shall be averaged
over each unit of the dwelling as though each unit consumed the water the average indicates.
(3) Any duplex or multifamily dwelling having individual water meters for each unit shall be treated,
for sewer billing purposes, as though each were a single-family dwelling.
(4) The sewer bill shall be based on the average billing of water over the three-month period as listed
below:
(A) Cycle I: The water used during the months of November, December and January;
(B) Cycle II: The water used during the period of November 15 to February 15.
(5) Once each year, the sewer bill will be changed to reflect the averages above, which shall be used
for all subsequent bills. The average billing and sewer bill is an element of the living unit and remains
with the unit regardless of the occupant.
(6) In the event an occupant has not occupied his premises during the preceding months of November,
December, and January, the sewer service charges set out in this section shall be based upon the average
billing of water to the premises during the preceding months of November, December, and January, until
such occupant shall have had water service for the months of November, December, and January, at
which time the sewer bill shall be based upon the average billing over such three-month period as set
out above in this subsection; provided, however, that if the occupant's water usage during the first three
(3) full months' service results in an average billing lower than the average billing to the premises for
the preceding November, December, and January, the sewer service charges shall be adjusted and based
upon such lower amount.
(7) The manager of the utility billing office will make estimates in those situations where the average
water consumption cannot be determined because of dead meters, inaccessible meters, and other related
problems. If the consumer feels that such estimates made by the manager of the utility billing
department are incorrect, he may appeal the estimated reading to the city manager and ultimately the
city council.
(c) The sewer service charges for each business or commercial establishment of any nature, plus public
institutions such as schools and churches, shall also be established by such resolution as provided in this section.
(d) Service charges to Southern Methodist University shall be as provided in such resolution.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/385
(e) The charges for sewer service shall be rendered monthly on each bill for water service to the consumer, and
failure on the part of the consumer to pay such charge for sewer service shall be deemed notice to the manager to
disconnect water service to such customer and to disconnect such consumer from the sewer main, and the manager
is hereby authorized to discontinue such services.
(f) In cases where the sewer charge for the current year exceeds the charge for the previous year, the previous
year's charge may be used for the months remaining in the current year providing the following requirements are
met:
(1) The sewer charge for the current year must exceed the previous year's charge by at least 50
percent;
(2) The customer must apply to the city's utility office for the change;
(3) The customer pays the appropriate fee; and
(4) The customer must have received service at the same location during both the current and
immediately preceding year.
Such change is available once per customer address per year. Only the most immediate preceding year's winter
quarter average, determined as provided in subsection (b)(4) above, may be used. The recalculation will only apply
to the months remaining until the next following February billing year.
(1996 Code, art. 11.500; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 13.01.005 Utility service construction fees
For services performed by the city as denoted in this chapter, charges will be made in accordance with the
resolution adopted as provided in section 13.01.004. (1996 Code, art. 11.600)
ARTICLE 13.02 UTILITY OFFICE MANAGER
Sec. 13.02.001 Office created
There is hereby created the position of manager of the utility office, who shall hold the office at the will of the city
manager. Such manager shall be directly responsible to the finance director. (1996 Code, sec. 11.201)
Sec. 13.02.002 Employees
The manager of the utility office may employ such other employees as are necessary to assist the manager in
running the office. Such employees shall be responsible for the billing and collection system. The maintenance of
the distribution system shall be the responsibility of the public works department. (1996 Code, sec. 11.202)
Sec. 13.02.003 Duties
(a) It shall be the duty of the manager of the utility office to obtain the necessary prerequisites and arrange for
the providing of water and sewer service for all consumers in the city.
(b) It is the duty of the manager to assure that all consumers receive a monthly statement of charges for water,
sewer, and garbage collection services.
(c) It is the duty of the manager of the utility office to collect all water, sewer, and sanitation charges and keep a
record thereof.
(d) It shall be the duty of the manager of the utility office to assure that the utility office is operated in
accordance with the various sections comprising this chapter.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.203)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/385
ARTICLE 13.03 UTILITY SYSTEM SERVICE POLICIES
Sec. 13.03.001 Unlawful use of water
It shall be unlawful for any person to take or use water from the system of the city waterworks except under the
terms and conditions specified in this article. All owners and occupants of property are hereby prohibited from
furnishing water to any person for any purpose other than is specified herein without the written consent of the
manager of the utility office. (1996 Code, sec. 11.301)
Sec. 13.03.002 Application for water service
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to use water from any service connection until application for such service
has been filed as provided in this section. Before water shall be supplied to any person or premises by the city, the
owner or occupant of the property shall make an application in writing for such service upon a form furnished by
the manager of the utility office, which application shall contain a contract on the part of the applicant to pay the
stipulated water rate and sewer fees in the time and manner provided for in this article. The city reserves the right to
collect all charges in the manner provided for in this article; to change rates and temporarily discontinue service
without notice to the consumer; and to further provide that the city and the manager of the utility office shall not be
responsible for any damage by water or otherwise resulting from defective plumbing, broken or faulty services or
water mains, or from any condition of the water itself of any substance that may be mixed with or be in the water as
delivered to the consumer.
(b) Such application shall state whether the property is occupied by the owner or tenant and shall give the
address where bills should be mailed.
(c) If such application is for service to a residence, the name of the head of the family in control of such premises
shall be given, and if for service other than a residence, the name or names of the person or persons in control of
the premises or of the business shall be given. The application shall also show in whose name the account has been
carried for water heretofore furnished for any such family or business.
(d) If any person shall make any false statement in such application, he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.302; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 13.03.003 Water deposit
(a) Before water service is furnished to a consumer at any address, the consumer shall be required, upon making
application for such service, to deposit with the manager of the utility office, deposits in accordance with a
resolution of the city council establishing such amounts.
(b) In the case of apartments or business institutions, the city council resolution may require a deposit equal to
two (2) times the average monthly bill on such premises or may require some other reasonable deposit.
(c) Property owners with a water deposit currently on file with the city and who have a satisfactory payment
record may be allowed to begin water service at a second property before a second deposit is made, provided that
the request is made in writing to the utility manager within five (5) days and the deposit is posted with the utility
office manager within five (5) days of service start. If the written request or deposit is not posted within five (5)
days, the water will be turned off at the expense of the property owner. All installation and hook-up charges apply.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.303)
Sec. 13.03.004 Requirements for installation of water or sewer service
Before any water or sewer service shall be supplied to any person or premises, such person, occupant, or owner of
such premises shall apply to the community development department for a permit for installation of water and/or
sewer service and shall pay all fees as set out in this article. (1996 Code, sec. 11.304)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/385
Sec. 13.03.005 Monthly statements
(a) It shall be the duty of the manager of the utility office to mail monthly statements to all consumers showing
the amount of charges under this chapter for water, sewer and garbage collection service for the approximate thirty
(30) day period prior to the mailing of such statements. Such statements may be mailed in two (2) cycles. One (1)
cycle shall be mailed as near the 1st of the month as practicable. The second shall be mailed as near the 15th of the
month as practicable. Consumers will have twenty (20) days from the date of mailing of the statement to pay the
amount of such statement without penalty. Payments made after the twenty (20) day period shall bear a penalty
equal to ten (10) percent of the combined water and sewer service bill. The manager of the utility office may waive
such penalty for good and sufficient cause; however, only one penalty may be waived during a twelve (12) month
billing period.
(b) If the consumer has not paid the bill within twenty-five (25) days after the date of mailing thereof, it shall be
the duty of the manager of the utility office to notify the consumer in writing that the water is to be cut off and
service discontinued at the end of a ten (10) day period if payment has not been received in the office.
(c) The consumer may ask for an administrative hearing with the finance director and/or city manager to present
valid reasons why the water should not be cut off and service discontinued. This may be done at any time during
the ten (10) day period after notice of discontinuance is given. Should the finance director and/or city manager
decide that the customer does indeed have a valid reason for not paying the bill at this time, water service may be
continued. The customer will be advised at this time when payment is expected and conditions thereof.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.305; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 13.03.006 Reinstatement of service when water cut off for nonpayment of bills
When water is cut off from any consumer or from any premises on account of nonpayment for water and sewer
services furnished, the manager of the utility office shall not permit the water or sewer services to be furnished to
said premises or consumer until the full amount delinquent, the ten percent (10%) penalty and a collection or
reconnection charge is paid. Such amount shall be paid at the utility office if the service is reconnected during
normal office hours. (1996 Code, sec. 11.306)
Sec. 13.03.007 Fee when water cut off at customer's request
Whenever any consumer, owner or occupant of premises shall request the city to cut off his water service at the
meter for his convenience or due to the fact that his stop and waste or house cut-off is either nonfunctional or
cannot be found, then the manager of the utility office shall add a service fee to his bill for each cut-off. (1996
Code, sec. 11.307)
Sec. 13.03.008 Examination and test of meters
(a) Any consumer shall have the right to demand that the meter through which water is being furnished be
examined and tested by the waterworks for the purpose of ascertaining whether it is or is not registering correctly
the amount of water which is being delivered through it to such consumer. When a consumer desires to have any
meter so examined and tested, he shall make application in writing to the manager of the utility office, and deposit
with such application an amount charged in accordance with the size of the meter.
(b) When such application and deposit is made, it shall be the duty of the manager of the utility office to cause
such meter to be examined and tested for the purpose of ascertaining whether it is registering correctly the amount
of water being delivered through it. If, on such examination and test, any meter of one inch (1") or smaller in size
shall be found to register over two (2) percent more water than actually passes through it, another meter will be
substituted therefor, and the fee charged in the application for such test shall be repaid to the person making such
application. If any meter larger than one (1) inch in size, upon such examination and test, shall be found to register
over three (3) percent more water than actually passes through it, the fee charged in the application for the test shall
be repaid to the person making the application, and the applicant shall be advised as to what repairs or replacements
are necessary to secure correct registration through such meter.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/385
(c) Whenever any meter is found to be out of order and not registering correctly, the consumer shall be charged
with an average daily consumption as shown by the meter when registering correctly.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.308)
Sec. 13.03.009 Meter re-reads
Any consumer who feels that their measured water consumption is excessive may request that the meter be re-read.
Two (2) free re-reads are allowed within each calendar year and any re-reads in excess thereof will be conducted
for a fee; provided that, if there is an error on the part of the city, or the meter is faulty, there will be no additional
charge. (1996 Code, sec. 11.309)
Sec. 13.03.010 Notification of change of address
In case any consumer shall change his place of residence or business, he shall give notice thereof within twentyfour
(24) hours after such change to the manager of the utility office. (1996 Code, sec. 11.310)
Sec. 13.03.011 Duty of owner to report when service is no longer desired
It shall be the duty of the owners of property to which water is furnished by the city to cooperate with the utility
office by promptly giving notice when such property becomes vacant or service is no longer desired, and if such
notice is not given the owners of the property shall be liable for all water and sewer charges against such property
until such notice is given or a new application for services to such premises is filed. (1996 Code, sec. 11.311)
Sec. 13.03.012 Waste of water; water conservation; irrigation restrictions
(a) Plans adopted.
(1) Water conservation plan. The 2019 water conservation plan for the city is hereby adopted by
reference and a true copy of such plan shall be retained by the city secretary and director of public
works and be available for public inspection during all business hours of the city. (Ordinance 19/010
adopted 3/19/19)
(2) Drought contingency plan. The 2019 drought contingency plan for the city is hereby adopted by
reference and a true copy of such plan shall be retained by the city secretary and director of public
works and be available for public inspection during all business hours of the city. (Ordinance 19/011
adopted 4/2/19)
(b) Compliance with water conservation and drought contingency plan. It shall be unlawful and an offense for
any person, firm, or corporation to violate any of the provisions or terms of this section or the water conservation
and drought contingency plan as implemented hereby and by specific order of the city manager.
(c) Penalty for violation of water conservation and drought contingency plan. Upon occurrence of the conditions
listed in the water conservation and drought contingency plan between the city, the Town of Highland Park, and the
Dallas Park Cities Municipal Utility District, the city manager is authorized to implement all of the elements of the
water conservation and drought contingency plan and is directed to publish notice of such implementation in the
city's official newspaper or by direct mail to water customers of the city and, in addition to the penalty of fine not to
exceed the sum of $2,000.00 for each offense for each and every day any such violation continues, if any such
person, firm or corporation has previously violated any requirement of the plan as implemented by the city
manager, the city manager shall have authority, after written notice and opportunity for hearing with such person,
firm or corporation, to order that water services to such person, firm or corporation be discontinued during the
period of the water emergency.
(d) Implementation of conservation measures. The city manager is authorized to implement the conservation
measures set out in the plan consistent with the conditions set out in the plan upon notification by the district that
such conditions exist. The plan requires the district to inform the city and the town by written notice of supply side
or demand side conditions requiring the various conservation means.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/385
(e) Excessive water runoff. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any customer and/or occupant of premises
served with water to cause or permit to be caused excessive water runoff of city water from that customer's
premises onto the streets, alleys, easements, or public rights-of-way of the city. Runoff of city water is excessive
when it extends for a distance of greater than twenty feet (20') from the premises, and/or extends directly into a
storm sewer located in a public right-of-way. In the event of a prohibited waste of water, the city shall serve the
customer or occupant with a written notice of the nature of the violation and provide a 72-hour time limit for
satisfactory compliance. Notice is properly served when it is delivered to the customer, or the occupant of the
premises, in the form of a door hanger, or when it is hand delivered or sent by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the last known address of the customer and the person occupying the premises at the time of
the violation. A person who has received such notice and who fails to comply with the provisions hereof shall be
guilty of a violation of the provisions or the terms of this section.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.312)
(f) Irrigation restrictions.
(1) Except as provided herein, a person commits an offense if, during the period from April 1st
through October 31st of any year and between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day, with
water from the city water system, the person irrigates, waters, or causes or permits the irrigation or
watering of any lawn or landscape material located on premises owned, leased, or managed by the
person or under the person's control.
(2) A person commits an offense if, at any time during the year, the person irrigates, waters, or causes
or permits the irrigation or watering of any lawn or landscape material located on premises owned,
leased, or managed by the person or under the person's control with a hose-end sprinkler or automatic
irrigation system on a day other than a designated outdoor water use day for the property address.
(3) Designated outdoor water use days means Sundays and Thursdays for a customer with a street
address ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6, or 8) or with no street address number, and Saturdays and
Wednesdays for a customer with a street address ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7, or 9). A
multifamily development, office building or other property containing multiple street addresses must
use the lowest street address number for the designated outdoor water use days for the property.
(4) It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that the person was:
(A) Using a handheld hose, drip irrigation device or system, soaker hose, or handheld bucket;
(B) Irrigating during the repair or testing of a new or existing automatic irrigation system;
(C) Only using water from a source other than the city's water system;
(D) Irrigating public rights-of-way, public parks and public property to preserve and protect
community amenities, such irrigating to be done for one-half the sites on Tuesdays and Fridays,
and one-half the sites on Mondays and Thursdays due to mowing schedule;
(E) Irrigating newly planted landscape material within thirty (30) days after the date it was
installed, provided the person was watering only the newly planted landscape material. For
purposes of this section, newly planted landscape material does not include the over-seeding of
established turf with rye or other seed; or
(F) Irrigating athletic fields used for organized sports practice, competition, or exhibition events
as necessary to protect the health and safety of the players, staff or officials present for athletic
events.
(Ordinance 14/017 adopted 6/17/14)
State law reference–Drought contingency plans, V.T.C.A., Water Code, sec. 11.1272.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/385
Sec. 13.03.013 Inspections; impersonating utility personnel
No person other than an authorized officer or employee of the utilities department shall have, wear, or exhibit any
badge or credential of the waterworks department. All inspections shall be made only by persons authorized and
employed by the city for that purpose. Any such officer, inspector, foreman, or authorized employee of the utilities
department shall, upon presentation of his badge or other credentials provided for, have free access at all reasonable
hours to any premises supplied with city water for the purpose of making any inspection thereof or reading meters.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.313; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 13.03.014 Interference with utility personnel
In case any such authorized employee be refused admittance to any premises, or being admitted shall be hindered
or prevented in making such examination or reading meters, the manager of the utility office may cause the water
to be turned off from such premises after giving twenty-four (24) hours' notice to such owner or occupant of such
premises. (1996 Code, sec. 11.314)
ARTICLE 13.04 UTILITY SYSTEM OPERATIONAL POLICIES
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.04.001 Maintenance of meters and other equipment
(a) All water meters furnished by the city shall remain at all times the property of the city and shall be
maintained and repaired when rendered unserviceable through ordinary wear and tear. When replacements, repairs,
or adjustments of any meter are rendered necessary by the act, neglect, or carelessness of the owner or occupant of
any premises, any expenses caused to the waterworks thereby shall be charged against and collected from the
owner of the premises and, if not paid, services shall be discontinued.
(b) All meters, curb cocks, valves, and meter boxes furnished by the city shall be the property of the city. All
service pipes connected with the city waterworks, including those furnished at the expense of the consumers or
property owners, shall remain under the direct control of the manager of the utilities department and it shall be
unlawful for any person or persons other than those authorized by the manager to connect, disconnect, move, or
tamper with any such meter, or to turn on or off water at the curb cock, valve, or meter, or to open, move, or tamper
with any meter box. All meters and meter boxes shall remain the property of the city and may be removed at any
time by the city.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.701; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 13.04.002 Tampering with or injuring equipment
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, damage, or tamper with any water meter placed on any service
pipe by the city or its authority, or for any person to make any connection with any service pipe without first having
obtained a permit from the city or to change any service connection so as to avoid the registration of water used by
such consumer, or to remove any meter placed by the city or to substitute any meter for the city's meter.
(b) Any person who unlawfully, willfully, or maliciously injures, defaces, or destroys any reservoir, machinery,
pipe, hydrants, or other fixtures belonging to the city waterworks or sewerage system or uses or takes from the city
waterworks any water, except in accordance with the rules and regulations, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.702)
Sec. 13.04.003 Authority to cut off water supply
An authorized representative or representatives of the city may, at any time, order the water cut off from any
premises connected with the city mains for repairs, extensions, or other necessary purposes. (1996 Code, sec.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/385
11.704)
Sec. 13.04.004 Connections to water and sewer lines to be made by authorized plumbers
Permits for connections with either the sewer or water mains shall be issued only to plumbers authorized to do
business in the city under the ordinances regulating plumbing work. (1996 Code, sec. 11.705)
Sec. 13.04.005 Water pipes laid in streets to be city property
All water pipes laid in the streets, alleys, or public thoroughfares within the city shall thereupon become the
property of the city. (1996 Code, sec. 11.706)
Sec. 13.04.006 Failure to maintain fixtures to prevent waste of water
The refusal or neglect of the owner or occupant to equip and maintain the premises with service pipe connections,
utilities, or fixtures of approved character and quality to prevent waste of water shall be sufficient grounds for the
refusal of the manager of the utility office to connect the premises with the city water supply or to continue such
connection after having given two (2) days' written notice of intention to shut off water pending repairs because of
water waste. (1996 Code, sec. 11.707)
Sec. 13.04.007 Installation of “stop and waste” inside property line
Consumers shall install an approved “stop and waste” inside the property line, at a location accessible in case of
emergency, and shall not use the curb cock at the meter in lieu thereof. (1996 Code, sec. 11.708)
Sec. 13.04.008 Installation of check valve
If, in the judgment of the manager of the utility office, the placing of an approved check valve on the property side
of a water meter serving any consumer is considered necessary for the safety of the water system, such approved
check valve shall be immediately installed at the expense of the consumer, after due notice in writing shall have
been given to the consumer by the manager. (1996 Code, sec. 11.709)
Sec. 13.04.009 Responsibilities of plumbers
No person other than a plumber licensed and operating under the plumbing ordinance of the city shall connect any
water service on the property or outlet side of the meter box. Whenever such plumber may use the water for testing
the pipes or fixing fixtures, he shall in every instance, before leaving the premises, see that the curb cock is left in
the position he found it when he first opened the meter box, and it shall be the duty of such plumber to notify the
manager of the utility office in every instance where he finds or has reason to believe that any meter, meter box, or
other waterworks equipment has been improperly tampered with. Such plumber shall in no event disconnect a
meter or any fitting in the meter box, nor shall he change the level or location of such meter or meter box. Before
leaving the premises, it shall be his duty to see that the meter box cover is securely in place and locked. Failure to
comply with these instructions shall render such plumber subject to penalties provided for in this code. (1996 Code,
sec. 11.710)
Sec. 13.04.010 Replacement of sewer tap
A new sewer tap connecting the sewer line on private property with the city's sanitary sewer main on public
property shall be made at the owner's expense when the sewer line on private property is replaced or when it is
determined by the city engineer that the existing tap is defective. In no case shall a new sewer line connection be
made to an old sewer tap. However, any sewer tap that was installed twelve (12) months or less prior to the
replacement of the sewer line may be used if, in the opinion of the city engineer, it meets city specifications.
Sec. 13.04.011 Responsibility for maintaining sewer lines
(a) Lines on public property. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain in a healthful state
and in working order the sewer line from the point of origin on private property to the point of juncture with the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/385
city sanitary sewer main on public property, hereinafter referred to as the “sewer tap.” Any sewer line and/or sewer
tap that has become defective or is unsafe or hazardous is hereby declared a nuisance and shall be repaired or
replaced to city specifications at the expense of the property owner.
(b) Lines on private property. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain in a healthful state
and in good repair and serviceable condition the sewer line on private property from the point of origin within a
structure to the point of juncture at the property line. Any sewer line on private property which, in the opinion of
the building official, is deemed to be defective and is unsafe and/or unsuitable for continued use or service is
hereby declared a nuisance and shall be replaced at the property owner's expense. Further, in the event fifty percent
(50%) or more of a sewer line on private property is replaced, relayed, and/or relocated for any reason, the entire
sewer line on private property and the sewer tap, as denoted in subsection (a) above, shall be replaced at the
property owner's expense.
Sec. 13.04.012 Work on sewer system to be done by city employees
Only persons employed by the city and approved by the city engineer shall install sewer taps and work on any part
of the city sanitary sewer system on public property. However, a licensed plumber registered with the city may
connect a sewer line at the property line providing the new or replaced sewer line and double cleanout at the
property line is approved by the plumbing inspector.
(Ordinance 17/018 adopted 6/6/17)
Sec. 13.04.013 Capping off abandoned sewer taps
Whenever a new or replacement sewer tap is made, the old or abandoned tap shall be capped off or plugged at the
expense of the property owner. (1996 Code, sec. 11.714)
Sec. 13.04.014 Sewer cleanouts
(a) A double cleanout fitting shall be installed at the owner's expense both at the rear of the structure from which
the sewer system originates and also at the property line on private property on all new or replacement sewer lines.
Further, in sewer line lengths of one hundred feet (100') or over, an additional cleanout fitting shall be installed at
the midpoint of the line. However, cleanout fittings need not be spaced closer than thirty feet (30') apart, and where
only one (1) double cleanout fitting is required, such fitting shall be located at the property line.
(b) When installing a double cleanout fitting, it shall be the responsibility of the building contractor or the
plumbing contractor to ascertain the grade of the adjacent area before making the installation so that the top of the
fitting, including the cap, when installed, will be flush with the surrounding area. Only screw-type close-out plugs
may be used in the fittings, and under no circumstances will it be permissible to reduce the height of the fitting by
cutting off the top, nor shall it be permissible to use a jim-cap or other close-out device other than a screw-in type
plug. Further, in installations where the fitting is located in a driveway, patio, or other concrete surface, the cleanout
fitting must be positioned in such a manner that the cleanout plug will be countersunk below the surface and the
cleanout plug must be made of brass. Cleanout fittings that are hit or run over by trucks must be excavated to assess
any damage to the sewer line, and in the event the sewer line has been forced out of line, the fitting and affected
portion of the sewer line will have to be reset to prevent leakage and to provide the required fall of the line.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.715)
Sec. 13.04.015 Water wells
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig or drill a well in the city. (1996 Code, sec. 11.716)
Sec. 13.04.016 Limitation on use of water in emergencies
(a) The city council may, by resolution, declare that an emergency exists which imperils the water supply of the
city and the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens thereof, and the declaration of such an emergency and the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/385
publication of such declaration in any newspaper of local circulation shall immediately invoke the provisions of
this section and continue their effect until the emergency is declared to be averted.
(b) Upon declaration of the existence of any emergency under this section, the city council may prohibit the use
of water to any extent deemed necessary to preserve an adequate supply of water for human consumption and
sanitation, including the prohibition of the use of water for sprinkling of lawns, shrubbery, and gardens, flushing of
business areas, washing of vehicles, or any other use which, in light of the then-existing water supply, may imperil
the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city, and not excluding the prohibition of the use of the public
water supply for industrial purposes, if the emergency is such that such prohibition is necessary.
(c) The city council or any of its members, or any authorized agent of the city council, is herewith empowered,
upon declaration of an emergency under this section, to investigate the use of water from the city water supply in
any premises, whether residential, commercial, or industrial, in order to ascertain the use and necessity for water
consumption and to prevent waste.
(d) Any person violating the provisions of this section or failing to comply with this section to the extent
prescribed by the city council in its declaration of the existence of an emergency shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.717)
State law reference–Drought contingency plans, V.T.C.A., Water Code, sec. 11.1272.
Sec. 13.04.017 Damage to city's plastic sewer line from use of rotary cutters
(a) It shall be the responsibility of any plumber or any other person or agency employing an internal rotary cutter
or router, commonly referred to as a roto-rooter, or equivalent, to purge, ream out, or cut out any blockage or
obstacle in any sewer line to reimburse the city for any cost or damages to the city's plastic sewer lines resulting
from the operation of such cutters or routers. It shall also be the responsibility of the plumber or any other person or
agency employing the use of such devices to first determine the length or linear distance of the point of entry of
such cutter into the sewer line to the point of juncture with the city plastic sewer line and to limit the length of cable
inserted in the sewer line to drive the rotary cutter to this amount so as to prevent the rotary cutter from entering
into the city main.
(b) Any plumber or any other person or agency failing to observe such precautions or failing to reimburse the
city for damages to the city's plastic sewer line resulting from the use of rotary cutters shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be liable to a fine as provided for in section 1.01.009 of this code, and
each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The payment of a fine shall
not relieve a plumber or any other person or agency from the responsibility or obligation for payment of damages
or repair cost to city plastic sewer lines resulting from the use by the plumber and others of rotary cutters to purge
or remove obstacles in any sewer line.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.718)
Secs. 13.04.018–13.04.060 Reserved
Division 2. Cross-Connection Control and Backflow Prevention*
Sec. 13.04.061 Purpose
(a) The purpose of the city cross-connection control program is to protect the public potable water supply from
the possibility of contamination or pollution which might result from the physical cross-connection between the
water service and any other source of supply by isolating, within the customer's internal distribution system, such
contaminants or pollutants which could backflow or backsiphon into the public water system.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/385
(b) The program will promote the elimination or control of the existing cross-connections, actual or potential,
between the potable water system and the nonpotable systems.
(c) The program will provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which
will effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems by cross-connection.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.703(a))
Sec. 13.04.062 Authority
The authority for such program is the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974 and the various statutes and codes
of the state which require that the water purveyor has the primary responsibility for preventing water from
unapproved sources or from any other substances from entering the public potable water system. Further authority
is the code and ordinances of the city together with the rules and regulations adopted by the water department.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.703(b))
Sec. 13.04.063 Responsibility of public works director; notice to install backflow prevention device
The public works director shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system of
the city. The director shall protect the system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow or
backsiphonage of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. If, under the codes and
ordinances of the city, an approved backflow device is required at the city's water service connection to any
customer's premises, the director or his designated representative shall give notice in writing to the customer to
install an approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to his premises. The customer shall,
within ninety (90) days, install such approved device or devices at his own expense, and failure or refusal on the
part of the customer to install said device or devices within ninety (90) days shall constitute grounds for
discontinuance of water service to the premises until such device or devices have been properly installed. (1996
Code, sec. 11.703(c))
Sec. 13.04.064 Cross-connections prohibited
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any customer or consumer of water in the city to maintain any physical
cross-connection between the water service received from the city and any other source of water or water supply.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.703(d))
Sec. 13.04.065 Definitions
Air gap. A physical separation sufficient to prevent backflow between the free-flowing discharge end of the potable
water system and any other system. It is physically defined as a distance equal to twice the diameter of the supply
side pipe diameter, but never less than one (1) inch.
Approved. Accepted by the public works director as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this
division or as suitable for the proposed use.
Atmospheric vacuum breaker. A device which prevents backsiphonage by creating an atmospheric vent when there
is either a negative pressure or subatmospheric pressure in a water system.
Auxiliary water supply. Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the city's approved public
potable water supply.
Backflow. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under positive or reduced pressure in the
distribution pipes of the potable water supply from any source other than its intended source.
Backflow preventer. A device or means designed to prevent backflow or backsiphonage. Most commonly
categorized as air gap, reduced pressure principle device, double check valve assembly, pressure vacuum breaker,
atmospheric vacuum breaker, hose bibb vacuum breaker, residential dual check, double check with intermediate
atmospheric vent, and barometric loop.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/385
Backpressure. A condition in which the owner's system pressure is greater than the supplier's system pressure.
Backsiphonage. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable
water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by the sudden reduction of pressure in
the potable water supply system.
Barometric loop. A fabricated piping arrangement rising at least thirty-five (35) feet at its topmost point above the
highest fixture it supplies. It is utilized in water supply systems to protect against backsiphonage.
Commission. The state commission on environmental quality.
Containment. A method of backflow prevention which requires a backflow prevention device at the water service
entrance.
Contaminant. A substance that will impair the quality of the water to a degree that it creates a serious health hazard
to the public leading to poisoning or the spread of disease.
Cross-connection. Any actual or potential connection between the public water supply and a source of
contamination or pollution.
Department. The city park water department.
Municipal services director. The director in charge of the department of public works or his designated
representative.
Double check valve assembly. An assembly of two (2) independently operating spring-loaded check valves with
tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of
each check valve.
Double check valve with intermediate atmosphere vent. A device having two (2) spring-loaded check valves
separated by an atmospheric vent chamber.
Fixture isolation. A method of backflow prevention in which a backflow preventer is located to correct a crossconnection
at an in-plant location rather than at a water service entrance.
Hose bibb vacuum breaker. A device which is permanently attached to a hose bibb and which acts as an
atmospheric vacuum breaker.
Owner. Any person who has legal title to, or a license to operate or inhabit, a property upon which a crossconnection
inspection is to be made or upon which a cross-connection is present.
Permit. A document issued by the department which allows the use of a backflow preventer.
Person. Any individual, partnership, company, public or private corporation, political subdivision or agency of the
state, or any department, agency or instrumentality of the United States, or any other legal entity.
Pollutant. A foreign substance that, if permitted to get into the public water system, will degrade its quality so as to
constitute a moderate hazard, or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an
actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably effect such water for domestic use.
Pressure vacuum breaker. A device containing one (1) or two (2) independently operated spring-loaded check
valves and an independently operated spring-loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check or
checks. The device includes tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valves and properly located
each side of the check valves [sic] and containing properly located test cocks for the testing of the check valves.
Reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. An assembly consisting of two (2) independently operating
approved check valves with an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two (2) check
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/385
valves, tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the
testing of the check valves and the relief valve.
Residential dual check. An assembly of two (2) spring-loaded, independently operating check valves without
tightly closing shut-off valves and test cocks. It is generally employed immediately downstream of the water meter
to act as a containment device.
Water service entrance. That point in the owner's water system beyond the sanitary control of the city, generally
considered to be the outlet end of the water meter and always before any unprotected branch.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.703(e))
Sec. 13.04.066 Administration
(a) The municipal services director is vested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of the
cross-connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this division.
(b) The department will operate a cross-connection control program, to include the keeping of necessary records
which fulfill the requirements of the city council's regulations and are approved by the city council.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.703(f))
(c) The owner of property suspected to have an illicit connection or cross connection (“connection”) to the city's
public water supply system or to the sanitary or storm sewer system is maintaining a public nuisance and shall
allow the property to be inspected by a duly authorized city inspector upon due notice and at a reasonable time. If
there is a permitted connection present, the owner shall follow all ordinances and regulations of the city with regard
thereto. If the city's inspector determines that there is an illicit connection present on the property:
(1) The inspector shall prepare and hand deliver or mail to the owner by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a written notice to remove or remedy the illicit connection within fifteen (15) days from the
date of the notice;
(2) If the owner fails to comply with the notice, the department will inform the owner by letter that
the water service to the owner's premises will be terminated within five (5) days of the date of the letter,
provided such time may be extended as provided in section 13.04.067(d);
(3) In the alternative, if the owner fails to correct the illicit connection within the time permitted by
the inspector, the city or its contractor may go on the premises, do the work or make the improvements
necessary to correct the illicit connection and eliminate the public nuisance, pay for the work done or
improvements made and charge the expenses to the owner of the property. If, after due notice, the
charges are not paid by the owner, notice shall be given in writing to the owner and all lien holders of
record that a statement of expenses will be prepared in a form of lien claim allowing it to be recorded in
the real property records of the county, signed by the director of public works on behalf of the city and
filed if the expenses are not paid in full within ten (10) days after the date of the notice. The filing of the
statement of expenses and the lien for collection of the expenses shall be handled in the same manner as
provided in sections 6.05.004 and 6.05.005 of this code.
(Ordinance 11/13 adopted 7/19/11)
(d) If the department requires that the public supply be protected by containment, the owner shall be responsible
for water quality beyond the outlet end of the containment device and should utilize fixture outlet protection for
that purpose.
(e) The owner may utilize public health officials or personnel from the department, or their designated
representatives, to assist him in the survey of his facilities and to assist him in the selection of proper fixture outlet
devices, and the proper installation of these devices.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/385
(1996 Code, sec. 11.703(f))
Sec. 13.04.067 Evaluations and inspections; notice of noncompliance
(a) On new installations, the department will provide on-site evaluation and/or inspection of plans in order to
determine the type of backflow preventer, if any, that will be required, will issue a permit, and perform inspection
and testing. In any case, a minimum of a dual check valve will be required in any new construction.
(b) For premises existing prior to the start of this program, the department will perform evaluations and
inspections of plans and/or premises and inform the owner by letter of any corrective action deemed necessary, the
method of achieving the correction, and the time allowed for the correction to be made. Ninety (90) days will be
allowed for the correction; however, this time period may be shortened depending upon the degree of hazard
involved and the history of the device(s) in question.
(c) The department will not allow any cross-connection to remain unless it is protected by an approved backflow
preventer for which a permit has been issued and which will be regularly tested to insure satisfactory operation.
(d) The department shall inform the owner by letter of any failure to comply, by the time of the first reinspection.
The department will allow an additional fifteen (15) days for the correction. In the event the owner fails to comply
with the necessary correction by the time of the second reinspection, the department will inform the owner by letter
that the water service to the owner's premises will be terminated within a period not to exceed five (5) days from
the date such letter is sent to the owner. In the event that the owner informs the department of extenuating
circumstances as to why the correction has not been made, a time extension may be granted by the department, but
in no case will such extension exceed an additional thirty (30) days.
(e) If the department determines at any time that a serious threat to the public health exists, the water service may
be terminated immediately.
(f) The department shall have on file a list of private contractors who are certified backflow device testers. All
charges for these tests will be paid by the owner of the building or property.
(g) The department will begin initial premises inspections to determine the nature of existing or potential hazard
during the calendar year 1991.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.703(g))
Sec. 13.04.068 Responsibilities of owner
(a) The owner shall be responsible for the elimination or protection of all cross-connections on his premises.
(b) The owner, after having been informed by a letter from the department, shall, at his expense, install, maintain,
and test, or have tested, any and all backflow preventers on his premises.
(c) The owner shall correct any malfunction of the backflow preventer which is revealed by periodic testing.
(d) The owner shall inform the department of any proposed or modified cross-connections and also any existing
cross-connections of which the owner is aware but which have not been found by the department.
(e) The owner shall not install a bypass around any backflow preventer unless there is a backflow preventer of
the same type on the bypass. Owners who cannot shut down operation for testing of the device(s) must supply
additional devices necessary to allow testing to take place.
(f) The owner shall install backflow preventers in a manner approved by the department.
(g) The owner shall install only backflow preventers approved by the department.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/385
(h) Any owner having a private well or other private water source must have a permit if the well or source is
cross-connected to the department's system. Permission to cross-connect may be denied by the department. The
owner may be required to install a backflow preventer at the service entrance if a private water source is maintained
even if it is not cross-connected to the department's system.
(i) In the event the owner installs plumbing to provide potable water for domestic purposes which is on the
department's side of the backflow preventer, such plumbing must have its own backflow preventer.
(j) The owner shall be responsible for the payment of all fees for permits, annual or semi-annual device testing,
retesting in the case that the device fails to operate correctly, and second reinstallations for noncompliance with
department or city council requirements.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.703)
Sec. 13.04.069 Threats to public water system
The department recognizes the threat to the public water system arising from cross-connections. All threats will be
classified by degree of hazard and will require the installation of approved reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention devices or double check valves. (1996 Code, sec. 11.703(i))
Sec. 13.04.070 Use of existing backflow prevention devices
Any existing backflow preventer shall be allowed by the department to continue in service unless the degree of
hazard is such as to supersede the effectiveness of the present backflow preventer or result in an unreasonable risk
to the public health. Where the degree of hazard has increased, as in the case of a residential installation converting
to a business establishment, any existing backflow preventer must be upgraded to a reduced pressure principle
device, or a reduced pressure principle device must be installed in the event that no backflow device was present.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.703(j))
Sec. 13.04.071 Testing of backflow prevention devices
(a) All reduced pressure principle backflow devices and any backflow preventer protecting a fire sprinkler
system shall be tested and inspected at least annually.
(b) All required device testing shall be performed at the owner's expense by a tester licensed by the state and
registered with the city.
(c) The owner shall submit test reports to the city or its designee in accordance with applicable state regulations.
The filing fee for such test report shall be set by the city council in the city's master fee schedule by appropriate
resolution.
(Ordinance 18/013 adopted 3/6/18)
(d) Any backflow preventer which fails during a periodic test will be repaired or replaced by the owner. When
repairs are necessary, upon completion of the repair the device will be retested at the owner's expense to insure
correct operation. High-hazard situations will not be allowed to continue unprotected if the backflow preventer fails
the test and cannot be repaired immediately. In other situations, a compliance date of not more than thirty (30) days
after the test date will be established. The owner is responsible for spare parts, repair tools, or a replacement device.
Parallel installation of two (2) devices is an effective means of the owner insuring that uninterrupted water service
[is available] during testing or repair of devices and is strongly recommended when the owner desires such
continuity.
(e) Backflow prevention devices will be tested more frequently than specified in subsection (a) of this section in
cases where there is a history of test failures and the department feels that, due to the degree of hazard involved,
additional testing is warranted. Cost of the additional tests will be borne by the owner.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.703(k))
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/385
Sec. 13.04.072 Records and reports
(a) Records. The department will initiate and maintain the following:
(1) Master files on customer cross-connection tests and/or inspections.
(2) Copies of lists and summaries supplied to the city commission.
(b) Reports. The department will submit the following to the city commission:
(1) Initial listing of low-hazard cross-connections.
(2) Initial listing of high-hazard cross-connections.
(3) Annual update lists of items (1) and (2) above.
(4) Annual summary of cross-connection inspections.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.703(l))
ARTICLE 13.05 SOLID WASTE*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 13.05.001–13.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Collection Policies
Sec. 13.05.031 Definitions
The terms used in this division shall have the following meanings:
Approved container or container. A container constructed of metal or plastic or other substantial material, with
handles sufficiently strong for workers to empty the garbage or trash from the container conveniently. The
container shall not exceed a capacity of thirty-two (32) gallons or a weight of fifty (50) pounds when filled and
shall be equipped with a tightfitting lid or cover. Where trash is placed adjacent to the alley for collection, the lid
shall be attached to a rack, pole, fence or other permanent structure by a metal cable, chain or other means so it
remains at the storage place for the container.
City-authorized yard waste bag. A biodegradable paper bag marked with the city identification. These bags may be
sold at city hall or by authorized area merchants.
Director. The public works director of the city or his designee.
Garbage. All animal or vegetable matter, waste, refuse and other deleterious substances from kitchens, residences,
grocery stores, butcher shops, restaurants, cafes, hotels, and rooming and boarding houses.
Recyclable materials. Materials that are commercially recyclable, including steel-clad cans, glass, plastics,
newspaper, magazines, aluminum, etc.
Trash. Rubbish, including paper, cardboard, and other dry materials, except recyclable materials.
Yard waste. Grass, grass clippings, leaves, tree trimmings, and yard cleanings.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.101)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/385
Sec. 13.05.032 Containers required
Every owner, occupant, tenant, lessee, or person in charge of any premises using or occupying any building, house
or structure within the corporate limits of the city as a residence, church, school, college, lodge, commercial
business or other purpose shall provide and maintain one or more approved containers to hold the garbage and trash
that normally accumulates on the premises. If the quantity of garbage or trash exceeds the capacity of the
container(s) on a particular day, the customer may utilize plastic bags for that excess. These bags may only be
placed out for collection on the day of collection, and they shall be of all-weather construction and of sufficient
strength to hold the garbage or trash they contain. Any container determined by a city sanitation supervisor to be in
a deteriorated condition or unable to meet the definition of approved container may be discarded by the supervisor.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.102)
Sec. 13.05.033 Use of city-authorized yard waste bags
Any person disposing of yard waste in the city shall use only biodegradable, 2-ply, moisture resistant, Kraft paper
yard waste bags for such disposal and such bags, when filled with yard waste, shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds in
weight. (Ordinance 12/30 adopted 10/2/12)
Sec. 13.05.034 Container lids to be securely fastened
The lids or covers of all containers shall at all times be kept secure and fastened so that flies, insects, and other
pests or animals may not have access to the contents thereof, and said lids or covers shall only be removed while
the containers are being filled or emptied. (1996 Code, sec. 11.104)
Sec. 13.05.035 Persons authorized to collect and transport waste
No one except the duly authorized agents and employees of the city shall empty approved containers, bags, cityauthorized
yard waste bags or trash receptacles of any kind, or convey or transport garbage, trash or yard waste on
the streets, alleys and public thoroughfares of the city, without a written permit granted and issued by the city
manager. (1996 Code, sec. 11.105)
Sec. 13.05.036 Placement of containers for collection
(a) If the house, building, or premises from which municipal solid waste is to be collected and removed is
adjacent to an alley, the garbage or trash containers shall, whenever possible, be placed for collection on the
abutting private property by the owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee of the premises in the following manner:
(1) An area dedicated for the storage and placement of approved trash containers must be provided
parallel to and abutting the alley, and must be used for that purpose;
(2) Trash receptacles shall be placed on a level surface not more than one foot (1') above the grade of
the alley pavement;
(3) Trash containers shall be completely unobstructed and easily accessible for collection from the
alley; and
(4) Trash containers and racks in place as of the effective date of this subsection must be removed
from the alley easement and this subsection complied with by the abutting property owner upon
issuance by the city of a permit to such owner to construct, replace, repair, or alter a fence abutting the
alley easement on private property or upon issuance of a building permit valued in excess of $10,000.00
for any work on the abutting private property.
(b) When the director finds that existing structures for garbage and trash containers or the containers themselves
cause an obstruction to traffic in an alley or cause undue hardship to abutting neighbors on the opposite side of the
alley, the director may require that such structures or containers be placed on private property by requiring existing
fences to be either set back a sufficient distance from the property line to accommodate the containers without
encroachment on city property or that such fence be reconfigured or constructed with an inset or indenture to
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/385
provide such requirements, and the director may require that the actual structures on public right-of-way be
removed if the director feels such action is necessary for the free flow of vehicles along the alley. All actions of the
director in regard thereto can be appealed to the city council provided such an appeal is instigated within ten (10)
days of the receipt of the official notice given by the director.
(c) If it is not practical to collect and remove the garbage and trash from the alley right-of-way, the owner,
occupant, tenant, lessee, or person in control of premises shall place the container, bag, or yard waste bag at such
point along the street right-of-way as is designated by the director or his designee, provided that such placement
shall be made not earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the day before the scheduled pickup day nor later than 7:00 a.m. on the
scheduled pickup day, unless collection has not yet occurred for that scheduled pickup day. Containers shall be
removed from the curbline no later than 10:00 p.m. on the scheduled pickup day. Yard waste, large brush, and large
items may be placed out at any time for collection. In lieu of having garbage and trash collected at the street or
alley, residents may elect to have collection done on their premises, at a point approved by the director or his
designee, and pay a rate established by appropriate resolution of the city council for “pack-out” service.
(d) The approved container, bag or yard waste bag shall be placed at the point found and designated by the
director as the most accessible for collection and removal. In the event brush, limbs, and similar yard waste is of
such a size or nature that it can not be put in a yard waste bag, it shall be arranged in bundles not exceeding fifty
(50) pounds in weight and placed on the parkway adjacent to the premises for collection.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.106)
Sec. 13.05.037 Items prohibited in containers
No person shall deposit, place or leave, in any waste receptacle designated and intended for ordinary residential or
commercial garbage and trash, any car or truck batteries, tires, solvents, fuels, oils, toxic chemicals (pesticides,
herbicides, paint, etc.), asbestos, products reactive to water, construction materials or yard waste. (1996 Code, sec.
11.107)
Sec. 13.05.038 Residential collection fees
(a) Generally. The city shall charge for its services in removing garbage and trash from residences, two-family
houses, and apartment houses in accordance with a resolution passed by the city council to establish such fees,
provided that such resolution shall not be enacted until the city council shall have given public notice and shall
have discussed such fees in a public meeting. The sanitation department shall determine equitable charges for
containers placed at residences, but in no event shall such charge be less than the minimum commercial charge
established by resolution of the city council.
(b) Brush tied in bundles. Brush left in alleys shall be securely tied in bundles not to exceed four (4) feet in
length or two (2) feet in diameter and shall not weigh more than forty (40) pounds. There will be no extra charge
for bundles of this type, and they shall be picked up with normal garbage collection.
(c) Bulky brush and tree limbs; leaves or grass clippings. Brush and tree limbs which are too bulky to be tied in
bundles shall be stacked on the parkway to be picked up. An extra charge shall be assessed for this service on the
regular billing in accordance with city's comprehensive fee resolution. Leaves or grass clippings in biodegradable
bags shall be picked up on a regular route in the alley unless the number of bags exceeds ten (10) bags, in which
case the bags shall be placed on the parkway to be picked up.
(d) Appliances. The city shall charge for the removal of ranges, refrigerators, washers, dryers, window air
conditioners, water heaters, and similar appliances when placed on the parkway on a “call-in” basis only. The fee
for such removal shall be as established by the resolution enacted under the provisions of subsection (a) above.
(e) Sale of yard waste bags. The city may recover part or all of the cost of yard waste collection through the sale
of biodegradable yard waste bags. The price of said bags may be changed from year to year and shall be established
by the comprehensive fee resolution of the city.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.108)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/385
Sec. 13.05.039 Commercial collection fees
(a) The city shall, for its services in removing garbage and trash from all businesses, lodging houses, boarding
houses, commercial institutions, individual businesses, firms or corporations, churches, schools, office buildings
and properties, charge for containers placed at any of such establishments based on a schedule to be set by
resolution of the city council. Nothing in this schedule shall prevent the superintendent of sanitation from
calculating rates which are lower or which exceed the schedule as long as the time, volume and number of pickups
are the basis for such calculation.
(b) Any rates calculated by the superintendent of sanitation which exceed the schedule set out in this section and
which are charged and assessed against the owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee of such commercial premises shall be
subject to approval by the public works director. Should any customer believe such rates calculated, charged, and
assessed are inequitable, he may appeal the rate decision to the city manager for final determination.
(c) Collection fees shall be effective as provided by the resolution of the city council adopted in accordance with
subsection (a) above.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.109)
Sec. 13.05.040 Billing procedure; late payment penalty; failure to pay charges
The charges for garbage and trash removal shall be added to and made a part of the water bill for water users within
the city and shall be paid in the same manner and at the same time as the water bill for services furnished by the
water department. A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added on all garbage collection bills which are not paid
by the date on which such water bills become due. Failure on the part of the consumer of water to pay the garbage
removal charge shall be considered notice to the water department to discontinue water service to such consumer,
and to disconnect such consumer from the city's water mains, and the manager of the water department is hereby
authorized to discontinue such water service on the failure of the user to pay such charges. (1996 Code, sec. 11.110)
Sec. 13.05.041 Duty to report non-collection
Every owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of a house or building used for residential, business or commercial
purposes is required to maintain constant supervision and surveillance over the garbage can and trash receptacle on
his premises, and if either the garbage can or trash receptacle should not be emptied and the contents removed by
an agent or representative of the city, or other duly authorized person, for a period of five (5) days, he must notify
the health officer, in writing, of this fact within five (5) days. (1996 Code, sec. 11.111)
Sec. 13.05.042 Containers prohibited on streets; obstruction of alley
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to place or allow to remain any garbage container or receptacle upon any
public street, and it shall be unlawful for any person to place garbage cans, receptacles or bags upon a public alley
so as to impede the flow of traffic.
(b) It shall be the duty of the director and of every employee of the sanitation department to cause to be
impounded all garbage containers and receptacles of every kind and description found in any public alley or street
in the city in violation of this section.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.112)
Sec. 13.05.043 Redemption of impounded containers
The owner of any container impounded under the provisions of this division shall have the right to redeem the same
upon calling therefor and describing the same and paying to the director or his designee the amount set in the
master fee resolution within ten (10) days of the date of impounding thereof. The director or his designee shall
cause notice to be given of such impoundment if the location or ownership of the container can be determined upon
reasonable investigation. Funds received from redemption shall be deposited in the sanitation fund. Any container
not redeemed within ten (10) days of the notice provided by this section shall be destroyed. This provision shall not
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/385
apply to any container which is deteriorated to the extent that it cannot be classified as an approved container under
the provisions of this division. (1996 Code, sec. 11.113)
Sec. 13.05.044 Use of container by persons other than owner
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to place or allow garbage or trash to be placed in any container not owned
or assigned to such person.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any nonresident of the city to place, or allow to be placed, garbage or trash in any
containers in the city.
(c) It shall be the duty of the director to enforce, using whatever assistance is necessary from other departments
of the city, the restrictions and prohibitions of this division.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.114)
Secs. 13.05.045–13.05.080 Reserved
Division 3. Franchise for Collection from Commercial Establishments and
Construction Sites*
Sec. 13.05.081 Generally
For and in consideration of compliance by the franchisee with the covenants and conditions herein set forth, and the
ordinances and regulations of the city governing the collecting and disposing of commercial stationary compactor
containers, discarded tire containers, portable toilets, and construction roll-off containers, and upon application and
approval as provided herein, the city hereby agrees to grant to a select applicant a franchise to use the public streets
and thoroughfares within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of engaging in a limited business of
collecting and disposing of waste generated within the corporate limits of the city. (Ordinance 12/32 adopted
10/16/12)
Sec. 13.05.082 Application; term
Prospective franchisees shall make application to the city manager, or his designee, to be considered for a franchise
under the covenants of this division. Said franchise, if granted, shall remain in effect for one (1) year, or until the
next succeeding January 1st, when each franchisee is eligible to renew its said franchise. No fee shall be charged
for the application and franchise process. Each application shall provide information including, but not limited to,
company name, operation address, client listing, and standard operating procedures. Filing deadline for either
original service or renewal shall be November 1st preceding the applicable January 1st. (1996 Code, sec. 6.702)
Sec. 13.05.083 Rights of city
This franchise shall not be taken or held to imply the relinquishment or waiver by the city of its power to make
reasonable requirements or regulations, and the city hereby expressly reserves the right to make all regulations
which may be necessary to properly secure, in the most ample manner, the safety, welfare, and accommodation of
the public, including, among other things, the right to adopt and enforce regulations to protect and promote the
health and general welfare of the public from danger and inconvenience in the management and operation of waste
collection, and to provide such service as contemplated by this franchise. (Ordinance 12/32 adopted 10/16/12)
Sec. 13.05.084 Applicability of other regulations
Nothing herein contained shall constitute a waiver of any of the requirements of the rules and regulations
heretofore adopted by the city, including the right to make such changes and amendments of said rules and
regulations as the city may deem to be advisable and necessary to protect the public health and general welfare of
its inhabitants. (1996 Code, sec. 6.704)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/385
Sec. 13.05.085 Service requirements
It is expressly agreed and understood that the franchisee shall collect and deliver for disposal all garbage, brush,
limbs, bulky items, building materials, and portable toilets from commercial establishments and construction sites
which are contracted by the franchisee, with the sole exception of hazardous wastes or other prohibited waste as
defined by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and the department of state health services. The
franchisee shall, at its own expense, furnish personnel to collect garbage, solid waste, and portable toilets and will
establish and maintain, in an efficient and business-like manner, such scheduled routes and special schedules as
may be necessary to fulfill the waste service requirements of the city. Unless otherwise established by ordinance,
collection schedules shall be determined by the franchisee based upon negotiations with the customers. Information
on customer locations, routes and schedules shall be supplied to the city as part of the annual application filing.
Sec. 13.05.086 Award of franchise; performance standards
The franchisee shall submit with its application a standard operating procedure for review, The city council shall
review the application and procedure and award a franchise if a vacancy exists and the applicant meets the
requirements of this division. The city council shall act on the proposed procedure and application within sixty (60)
days after filing.
(Ordinance 12/32 adopted 10/16/12)
Sec. 13.05.087 Rates
The franchisee shall have sole discretion regarding setting and implementation of rates. This franchise is not
designed to dictate to the franchisee what rates should be charged to its customers, but rates shall not be in excess
of those charged in adjoining cities. (1996 Code, sec. 6.707)
Sec. 13.05.088 Billing and collection of charges; payments to city
The franchisee shall be responsible for billing its commercial accounts and collecting payments from its customers.
The billing methods and arrangements may, from time to time, be changed by the franchisee, but, in any event, the
franchisee agrees to bill customers within fifteen (15) days after the franchisee provides the customer with the
service. The franchisee agrees to remit the city's portion of the collections (street use fees) within twenty (20) days
following each billing. (1996 Code, sec. 6.708)
Sec. 13.05.089 Street use fees
In consideration of the grant contained in section 13.05.081 above, the franchisee agrees to pay monthly to the city
seven percent (7%) of the gross receipts billed to contracted waste accounts for services rendered under the
provisions of this franchise to customers within the city limits. The city reserves the right to audit company's
records at any time with seven (7) days' prior notice. (Ordinance 16/003 adopted 2/2/16)
Sec. 13.05.090 Complaint handling
The franchisee shall, at its own expense, provide a telephone answering service, or office, to answer calls from 8:00
a.m. until 5:00 p.m. daily, Monday through Friday, excluding such holidays as may be approved by city, for the
purpose of handling complaints and other calls regarding collection services provided by the franchisee. (1996
Code, sec. 6.710)
Sec. 13.05.091 Vehicle identification
All vehicles and equipment used by the franchisee for the collection and transportation of commercial garbage,
solid waste, or portable toilets shall be clearly marked with the franchisee's name in letters not less than two (2)
inches in height. In the event the city shall at any time require, the franchisee shall also assign to each of its
vehicles an identifying number and shall mark the same upon said vehicles in figures not less than two (2) inches in
height. (1996 Code, sec. 6.711; Ordinance 12/32 adopted 10/16/12)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/385
Sec. 13.05.092 Containers
(a) The franchisee shall provide, at its own expense, containers to the owner or occupant of any premises
wherein it contracts for commercial storage collection of solid waste or portable toilets, subject to the following
requirements:
(1) All such containers shall be constructed according to reasonable specifications which are
acceptable in the industry.
(2) All such containers shall be enclosed or equipped with suitable covers to prevent blowing or
scattering of refuse or garbage which is being transported for disposal.
(3) All such containers shall be maintained by the franchisee so as to be in good repair. The owner or
occupant shall be responsible for odor, insect, rodent and scattered waste control in or about containers.
(4) All such containers shall be clearly marked with the franchisee's name and telephone number in
letters not less than two (2) inches in height.
(5) The above conditions do not apply to temporary container service.
(b) Each customer, at his option, may purchase a compactor and the disposal rates will be adjusted appropriately.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.712; Ordinance 12/32 adopted 10/16/12)
Sec. 13.05.093 Disposal of waste
The franchisee agrees to dispose of all waste collected within the city at a site approved by the state. The franchisee
will be responsible for payment of all disposal fees. (Ordinance 12/32 adopted 10/16/12)
Sec. 13.05.094 Revocation
If at any time the franchisee shall fail to perform any of the terms, covenants or conditions herein set forth,
provided such failure is not due to war, insurrection, riot, strike, natural disaster, or any other cause beyond the
franchisee's control, the city may, after a hearing as described herein, revoke and cancel the grant given in section
13.05.081 hereof and the franchise shall be null and void. The hearing prerequisite to such revocation shall not be
held until notice of such hearing has been given to the franchisee by registered or certified mail, addressed to the
franchisee at the address shown on the records of the city, and a period of at least ten (10) days has elapsed since
the receipt of such notice. The notice shall specify the time and place of the hearing and shall include the specific
reasons for revocation of such franchise. The hearing shall be conducted in public by the city council, and the
franchisee shall be allowed to be present and given full opportunity to answer such charges and allegations as are
set out against him in the notice. If, after the hearing is concluded, the city council shall determine that the charges
and allegations set forth in the notice are affirmed by the facts presented at the hearing, they may, by a two-thirds
vote of all councilmembers, revoke and cancel the franchise, and the same shall be null and void thirty (30) days
thereafter. (1996 Code, sec. 6.714; Ordinance 12/32 adopted 10/16/12)
Sec. 13.05.095 Records
The city and the franchisee shall maintain, at their respective places of business, adequate books and records
relating to the performance of their respective duties under the provisions of the franchise. The records applicable
to the performance of the franchise shall and will be available when wanted for inspection at any time during
normal working hours. The franchisee may, at any time, and at the city's option, be required to cause a formal audit
to be made of that portion of such franchisee's books and records representing the city's operation or any portion of
its other operations which may be allocated or charged to the city operation. The expense of such audit will be paid
for by the city, if such audit is required by the city. The city may also appoint a supervisor to overview the
franchisee operation. (1996 Code, sec. 6.715)
Sec. 13.05.096 Indemnification of city; insurance
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/385
(a) The franchisee assumes the risk of loss or injury to property or persons arising from any of its operations
under the franchise, with the exception of public streets and alleys to be traveled by the franchisee's vehicles in the
normal course of business, and agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city from all claims, demands, suits,
judgments, costs or expenses, including expenses of litigation and attorney's fees, arising from any such loss or
injury. It is expressly understood that the foregoing provisions shall not in any way limit the liability of the
franchisee. The franchisee agrees to carry insurance during the entire term of the franchise as follows:
(1) Workers' compensation covering all employees of such franchisee engaged in any operation
covered by the franchise.
(2) Automobile and public liability insurance in amounts not less than those established as maximum
recovery limits under the Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code.
(b) Such policies of insurance shall be issued by companies authorized to conduct business in the state, and shall
name the city as an additional insured. Certificates evidencing such insurance contracts shall be deposited with the
city. The policy limits provided herein shall change in accordance with the provisions for maximum liability under
the Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code and the laws of the state relating to workers' compensation insurance.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.716)
Sec. 13.05.097 Right to require performance
The failure of the city at any time to require performance by the franchisee of any provision hereof shall in no way
affect the rights of the city, nor shall any breach of any provisions hereof be taken or held to be a waiver of any
provision itself. (1996 Code, sec. 6.717)
ARTICLE 13.06 MUNICIPAL DRAINAGE UTILITY*
Sec. 13.06.001 Adoption of state law
The provisions of subchapter C of chapter 552 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, the Municipal
Drainage Utility Systems Act, are hereby adopted by the city. Accordingly, the municipal drainage utility system of
the city is hereby declared to be a “public utility” as defined therein. Terms not otherwise defined herein shall be
read and construed in accordance with the definitions contained in chapter 552, subchapter C, of the Texas Local
Government Code, as it may be amended from time to time. (1996 Code, art. 11.1000(a))
Sec. 13.06.002 Availability of service
The city shall not require a deposit for drainage charges as a precondition to accepting surface flow from benefited
property into the city's drainage utility system. All real property of the city will be provided with drainage service
on payment of drainage charges. (1996 Code, art. 11.1000(b))
Sec. 13.06.003 Billing; exemptions
All billings, credits, and other procedures, including penalties for delinquent payments, shall be as specified and as
set forth in subchapter C of chapter 552 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. The following entities
are exempt from the provisions of this article:
(1) State of Texas;
(2) County of Dallas;
(3) City of University Park; and
(4) Highland Park Independent School District.
(1996 Code, art. 11.1000(c))
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/385
Sec. 13.06.004 Schedule of charges
Drainage charges for all real property in the city shall be in accordance with a schedule of charges adopted by
resolution of the city council following a public hearing as required by section 552.045 of the Texas Local
Government Code, as amended. Said resolution shall be an amendment to the master fee resolution and shall be
placed on file at the office of the city secretary following passage and made available upon request to the public.
Such charges may be changed, adjusted or readjusted by city council resolution as required, and a current copy of
such drainage charges shall be kept available at the office of the city secretary. (1996 Code, art. 11.1000(d))
Sec. 13.06.005 Existing facilities incorporated into system
Existing drainage facilities, materials, and supplies are incorporated into the drainage utility system. (1996 Code,
art. 11.1000(e))
Sec. 13.06.006 Provision of service
Drainage service will be provided on nondiscriminatory, reasonable, and equitable terms. (1996 Code, art.
11.1000(f))
Sec. 13.06.007 Collection of unpaid charges; right of entry
Any charge due hereunder which is not paid when due may be recovered in an action at law by the city. In addition
to any other remedies or penalties provided by law, failure of a user of the drainage utility to pay the charges
promptly when due shall subject such user to discontinuance of any utility services provided by the city. City
employees shall have access, at all reasonable times, to any benefited property served by the drainage utility for
inspection or repair or for the enforcement of this article. (1996 Code, art. 11.1000(g))
Sec. 13.06.008 Policies and procedures
There are adopted hereby and incorporated by reference municipal drainage utility policies and procedures for the
city, on file in the office the city secretary. These are rules considered appropriate to provide for calculation of the
drainage charges and operate the drainage utility system and may be amended from time to time by appropriate
ordinance. (1996 Code, art. 11.1000(h))
ARTICLE 13.07 INDUSTRIAL SEWER USE REGULATIONS*
Sec. 13.07.001 Adopted
The current industrial sewer use regulations of the City of Dallas are herewith adopted by reference. Three (3)
copies of each are to remain on file in the city manager/secretary's office. Unless deleted, amended, expanded, or
otherwise changed herein, all provisions of such sewer use regulations shall be fully applicable and binding and of
full force and effect. Only the industrial sewer regulations on file shall be valid in the city. (1996 Code, art. 11.800)
ARTICLE 13.08 PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.08.001 Purpose and scope
(a) This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) for the
city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33
United States Code 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations part
403). The objectives of this article are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will
interfere with its operation;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/385
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass
through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be
incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works;
(3) To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater
and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public;
(4) To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned
treatment works;
(5) To enable the city to comply with the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit
conditions of the City of Dallas, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state
laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject.
(b) This article shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. This article authorizes the issuance
of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes
administrative review procedures; and requires user reporting.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.901)
Sec. 13.08.002 Administration
Except as otherwise provided herein, the public works director (director) shall administer, implement, and enforce
the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the director may be delegated by the
director to other personnel. (1996 Code, sec. 11.902)
Sec. 13.08.003 Abbreviations
The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings:
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
gpd Gallons per day
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/385
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
TSS Total suspended solids
U.S.C. United States Code
(1996 Code, sec. 11.903)
Sec. 13.08.004 Definitions
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the
meanings hereinafter designated:
Act or the Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33
U.S.C. section 1251 et seq.
Approval authority. The regional administrator of the EPA.
Authorized representative of the user.
(1) If the user is a corporation:
(A) The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a
principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or decision-making
functions for the corporation; or
(B) The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing
more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding
twenty-five (25) million dollars (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents
has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
(2) If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor, respectively.
(3) If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility, a director or highest official appointed
or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or
their designee.
The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) above may designate another authorized representative if
the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall
operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city.
Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD. The quantity of oxygen, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter [as measured] by standard methods.
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which apply to a
specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR chapter 1, subchapter N, parts 405–471.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/385
City. The City of University Park or the city council of University Park.
Composite sample. Samples collected during a period of time exceeding fifteen minutes and combined into one
sample.
Control authority. The operator of any part of the POTW if different from the city, e.g., the City of Dallas water
utilities.
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the
regional water management division director or other duly authorized official of said agency.
Existing source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the
publication by the EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such source if
the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act.
Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over
a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source
regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act.
Industrial user. An industry that discharges wastewater into the wastewater system.
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be
discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent
of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
Interference. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits
or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal, and therefore is
a cause of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following
statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: section
405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including title II, commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant
to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine
Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps,
body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
New source.
(1) Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of
pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
(A) The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other
source is located;
(B) The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production
equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
(C) The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or
installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same
general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/385
(2) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a
new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting
the criteria of subsection (1) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or
production equipment.
(3) Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has commenced if the owner or
operator has:
(A) Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program:
(i) Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
(ii) Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing
buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or
installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
(B) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment
which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering, and design studies, do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
subsection.
Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material,
intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.
Pass-through. A discharge of pollutants through the city's system into waters of the United States in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause, in
whole or in part, of a violation of any discharge requirement of the city, including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation.
Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This
definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities.
pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration of a solution.
Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment,
rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g.,
pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature
of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This
reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, by process changes, or by
other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment
standard.
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user,
other than a pretreatment standard.
Pretreatment standards or standards. Pretreatment standards shall mean pollutant concentration discharge
limitation requirements or standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. National pretreatment
standard means any pretreatment regulations containing pollutant discharge limits that have been established or will
be established for industrial users by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain
substances; these prohibitions appear in section 13.08.005 of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/385
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW. A “treatment works,” as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
1292), which is owned by the city and/or the control authority. This definition includes any devices or systems used
in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and
any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
Septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic
tanks.
Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).
Shall and may. “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive or directory.
Significant industrial user.
(1) A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
(2) A user that:
(A) Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater
to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater);
(B) Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average
dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant;
(C) Is designated as such by the director or the control authority on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement; or
(D) Is defined as subject to national categorical pretreatment standards by the United States
EPA.
Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) has no reasonable potential
for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement, the city and/or the control authority may at any time, on its own initiative or in
response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR
403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
Slug load or slug. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited
discharge standards in section 13.08.005 of this article.
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code. A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget.
Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation, including snowmelt.
Superintendent (public works director). The person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the
wastewater collection system, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or a duly
authorized representative.
Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or
other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.
User or industrial user. A source of indirect discharge.
Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial
buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/385
contributed to the POTW.
Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant. That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment
of municipal sewage and industrial waste.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.904)
Sec. 13.08.005 Prohibited discharges
(a) General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or
wastewater which causes pass-through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW
whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
(b) Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following
pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to,
waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140° F (60° C) using the test methods specified
in 40 CFR 261.21;
(2) Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 10.5;
(3) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW
resulting in interference;
(4) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow
rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will
cause interference with the POTW;
(5) Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150° F (65° C), or which will inhibit biological
activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104° F (40° C);
(6) Used motor oil;
(7) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a
quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems;
(8) Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the director and/or control
authority in accordance with section 13.08.012 of this article;
(9) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent
entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;
(10) Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but
not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the
treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the applicable NPDES permit;
(11) Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes in a manner that will permit a transient
concentration higher than 100 microcuries per liter, except in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations;
(12) Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, and subsurface
drainage, unless specifically authorized by the director and/or the control authority;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/385
(13) Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes;
(14) Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to
fail a toxicity test;
(15) Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the
POTW;
(16) Except where the director and/or the control authority have determined that different limits under
an industrial waste permit are appropriate, wastewater exceeding 100 mg/l of oils, fats, and grease of the
following types:
(A) Floatable grease of any origin;
(B) Free or emulsified grease of petroleum or mineral origin, or both, including but not limited
to:
(i) Cooling or quenching oil;
(ii) Lubricating oil;
(iii) Non-biodegradable cutting oil; and
(iv) Non-saponifiable oil;
(17) A discharge of water, normal domestic wastewater, or industrial waste which in quantity of flow
exceeds, for a duration of longer than fifteen minutes, more than four times the average twenty-fourhour
flow during normal operation;
(18) Insecticides and herbicides in concentrations that are not amenable to treatment;
(19) Polychlorinated biphenyls;
(20) Garbage that is not properly shredded to such an extent that all particles will be carried freely
under the flow conditions normally prevailing in wastewater mains, with no particle having greater than
a one-half-inch (1/2") cross-sectional dimension;
(21) Wastewater or industrial waste generated or produced outside the city, unless approval in writing
from the director and the control authority has been given to the person discharging the waste; or
(22) Without the approval of the director and/or control authority, a substance or pollutant other than
industrial waste, normal domestic wastewater, septic tank waste or chemical toilet waste that is of a
toxic or hazardous nature, regardless of whether or not it is amenable to treatment, including but not
limited to bulk or packaged chemical products.
(c) Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a
manner that they could be discharged to the POTW.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.905)
Sec. 13.08.006 Applicability of national categorical pretreatment standards
The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter 1, subchapter N, parts 405–71, are hereby
incorporated.
(1) Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the
concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the director and/or the control authority may impose
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/385
equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
(2) When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not
regulated by the same standard, the director and/or the control authority shall impose an alternate limit
using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(3) A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove,
pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its
discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by the EPA when developing the
categorical pretreatment standard.
(4) A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR
403.15.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.906)
Sec. 13.08.007 Local limits
(a) The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass-through and interference. No person
shall discharge, or cause or permit to be discharged, wastewater containing in excess of the following instantaneous
maximum allowable discharge limits:
(1) Metals in the form of compounds or elements in solution or suspension in concentrations
exceeding the following:
0.5 mg/l arsenic
1.0 mg/l cadmium
5.0 mg/l chromium
4.0 mg/l copper
1.6 mg/l lead
0.01 mg/l mercury
9.0 mg/l nickel
0.2 mg/l selenium
4.0 mg/l silver
5.0 mg/l zinc
(2) Organic chemical substances in concentrations exceeding the following:
21,000.0 mg/l acetone
1.0 mg/l benzene
1.6 mg/l ethyl benzene
26,250.0 mg/l isopropyl alcohol
20,000.0 mg/l methyl alcohol
249.0 mg/l methyl ethyl ketone
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/385
21.0 mg/l methylene chloride
149.0 mg/l total phenols
3.0 mg/l toluene
2.0 mg/l xylene
(3) 1.6 mg/l cyanide or cyanogen compounds.
(4) 100.0 mg/l oil and grease.
(5) 10.0 mg/l sulfides.
(6) 10,000 mg/l BOD5.
(7) 10,000 mg/l total suspended solids.
(b) The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for
metallic substances are for “total” metal unless indicated otherwise.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.907)
Sec. 13.08.008 Right of revision
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards
or requirements on discharges to the POTW. (1996 Code, sec. 11.908)
Sec. 13.08.009 Dilution of discharge
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation, unless expressly
authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The director may impose mass limitations on
users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the
imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. (1996 Code, sec. 11.909)
Sec. 13.08.010 Pretreatment facilities
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance
with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 13.08.005 of this
article within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the state, the control authority, or the director, whichever is
more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's
expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the director for
review, and shall be acceptable to the director before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and
operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as
necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. (1996 Code, sec. 11.910)
Sec. 13.08.011 Accidental discharge/slug control plans
At least once every two (2) years, the director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an
accidental discharge/slug control plan. The director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and
implement such a plan. Alternatively, the director may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental
discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
(2) Description of stored chemicals;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/385
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the director of any accidental or slug discharge, as required
by section 13.08.086 of this article; and
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures
include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of
containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including
solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.911)
Sec. 13.08.012 Septage waste
(a) Septage waste may be introduced into the Dallas Central Wastewater Treatment Plant in the manner
designated by the control authority, and at such times as are established by the control authority. The control
authority may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits.
(b) Septage waste generators must provide a manifest form for every load. This form shall include, at a
minimum, the name and address of the generator, the waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, disposal
site and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste
constituents and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. The generator shall retain a completed manifest
in its business office for three (3) years after disposal.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.912)
Sec. 13.08.013 Wastewater analysis
When requested by the director, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater
within ten (10) days of the request. The director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may
periodically require users to update this information. (1996 Code, sec. 11.913)
Secs. 13.08.014–13.08.040 Reserved
Division 2. Wastewater Discharge Permit
Sec. 13.08.041 Required
(a) No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater
discharge permit from the director, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application
pursuant to section 13.08.042 of this article may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein.
(b) The director may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the
purposes of this article.
(c) Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of
this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 13.08.126 through
13.08.136 of this article. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to
comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal,
state, and local law.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.914)
Sec. 13.08.042 Existing connections
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to
the effective date of this article, and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within sixty (60)
days after said date, apply to the director for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with section 13.08.041 of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/385
this article, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after sixty (60) days of the effective
date of this article except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the director. (1996 Code, sec.
11.915)
Sec. 13.08.043 New connections
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into
the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for
this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section 13.08.041 of this article, must be filed at least thirty
(30) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. (1996 Code, sec. 11.916)
Sec. 13.08.044 Application contents
(a) All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The director
may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information:
(1) All information required by section 13.08.081(b) of this article;
(2) Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw
materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be,
discharged to the POTW;
(3) Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation;
(4) Each product produced, by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production;
(5) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor
drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;
(7) Time and duration of discharges; and
(8) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the director to evaluate the wastewater
discharge permit application.
(b) Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.917)
Sec. 13.08.045 Application signatories and certification
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the
user and contain the following certification statement:
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my
direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel
properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate,
and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information,
including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.918)
Sec. 13.08.046 Decisions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/385
The director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within thirty (30)
days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the director will determine whether or not to
issue a wastewater discharge permit. The director may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.919)
Sec. 13.08.047 Duration
A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years from the
effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five (5) years, at
the discretion of the director. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will
expire. (1996 Code, sec. 11.920)
Sec. 13.08.048 Contents
(a) A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the
director to prevent pass-through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's
effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to
the POTW.
(b) Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
(1) A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed
five (5) years;
(2) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to
the city in accordance with section 13.08.050 of this article, and provisions for furnishing the new
owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
(3) Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards;
(4) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These
requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling
frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and
(5) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and
requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for
compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law.
(c) Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions:
(1) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements
for flow regulation and equalization;
(2) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of
appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants
into the treatment works;
(3) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special
conditions, including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated,
or nonroutine discharges;
(4) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants
discharged to the POTW;
(5) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater
discharged to the POTW;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/385
(6) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and
equipment;
(7) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee
of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including
those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and
(8) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director or the control authority to ensure
compliance with this article and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.921)
Sec. 13.08.049 Modification
The director may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
(1) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements;
(2) To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operations, processes, or wastewater
volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance;
(3) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of
the authorized discharge;
(4) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, city personnel, or
the receiving waters;
(5) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;
(6) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit
application or in any required reporting;
(7) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR
403.13;
(8) To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or
(9) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.922)
Sec. 13.08.050 Transfer
(a) Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at
least thirty (30) days' advance notice to the director and the director approves the wastewater discharge permit
transfer. The notice to the director must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which:
(1) States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's
operations and processes;
(2) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
(3) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit.
(b) Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of
facility transfer.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/385
(1996 Code, sec. 11.923)
Sec. 13.08.051 Revocation
(a) The director and/or the control authority may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause,
including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
(1) Failure to notify the director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed
discharge;
(2) Failure to provide prior notification to the director of changed conditions pursuant to section
13.08.085 of this article;
(3) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit
application;
(4) Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
(5) Tampering with monitoring equipment;
(6) Refusing to allow the director timely access to the facility premises and records;
(7) Failure to meet effluent limitations;
(8) Failure to pay fines;
(9) Failure to pay sewer charges;
(10) Failure to meet compliance schedules;
(11) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application;
(12) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or
(13) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge
permit or this article.
(b) Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business
ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new
wastewater discharge permit to that user.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.924)
Sec. 13.08.052 Reissuance
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by
submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 13.08.044 of this article, a minimum of thirty
(30) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. (1996 Code, sec. 11.925)
Secs. 13.08.053–13.08.080 Reserved
Division 3. Reporting and Testing Requirements
Sec. 13.08.081 Baseline monitoring reports
(a) Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or
the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/385
categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director a
report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) below. At least ninety (90) days prior to
commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the
promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the director a report which contains the
information listed in subsection (b) below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to
meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of
pollutants to be discharged.
(b) Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
(1) Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator
and owner.
(2) Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
(3) Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and
Standard Industrial Classification of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should
include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the
regulated processes.
(4) Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in
gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary to allow
use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(5) Measurement of pollutants.
(A) The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.
(B) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass,
where required by the standard or by the director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from
each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or
mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and
shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 13.08.090 of this article.
(C) Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 13.08.091 of
this article.
(6) Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a
qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis,
and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is
required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
(7) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance
date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section
must meet the requirements set out in section 13.08.082 of this article.
(8) Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with section 13.08.045 of this article.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.926)
Sec. 13.08.082 Compliance schedule progress reports
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by section 13.08.081 of this article:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/385
(1) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and
completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required
for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components,
commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);
(2) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;
(3) The user shall submit a progress report to the director no later than fourteen (14) days following
each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being
taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and
(4) In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the director.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.927)
Sec. 13.08.083 Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards,
or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user
subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a report containing the
information described in section 13.08.081(b)(4) through (6) of this article. For users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a
reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of
operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All
compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 13.08.045 of this article. (1996 Code,
sec. 11.928)
Sec. 13.08.084 Periodic compliance reports
(a) All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the director, but in no case less than twice
per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily
flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with
section 13.08.045 of this article.
(b) All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow
measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times.
The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim
that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
(c) If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than
required by the director, using the procedures prescribed in section 13.08.091 of this article, the results of this
monitoring shall be included in the report.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.929)
Sec. 13.08.085 Reports of changed conditions
Each user must notify the director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which
might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least twenty (20) days before the change.
(1) The director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to
evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application
under section 13.08.044 of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/385
(2) The director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 13.08.046 of this article or
modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 13.08.049 of this article in response to
changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
(3) For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow
increases of twenty percent (20%) or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.930)
Sec. 13.08.086 Reports of potential problems
(a) In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine,
episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW,
the user shall immediately telephone and notify the director at 214-987-5400 and the control authority at 214-670-
5700 of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and
volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.
(b) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising
employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (a) above. Employers shall ensure that
all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.931)
Sec. 13.08.087 Reports from unpermitted users
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the director as
the director may require. (1996 Code, sec. 11.932)
Sec. 13.08.088 Notification of violation; repeat sampling and reporting
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the control authority within twenty-four
(24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the
results of the repeat analysis to the control authority within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation.
The user is not required to resample if the control authority monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if
the control authority samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this
sampling. (1996 Code, sec. 11.933)
Sec. 13.08.089 Notification of discharge of hazardous waste
(a) Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste
management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of
a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification
must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number,
and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than one hundred (100)
kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following
information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the
hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in
the waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste
stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All notifications must take place no
later than one hundred and eighty (180) days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection
need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions
must be submitted under section 13.08.085 of this article. The notification requirement in this section does not
apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring
requirements of sections 13.08.082, 13.08.083, and 13.08.084 of this article.
(b) Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (a) above during a calendar month in which they
discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/385
specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of non-acute
hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR
261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges
more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
(c) In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of
hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the director, the EPA
regional waste management waste division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such
substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations.
(d) In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to
reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically
practical.
(e) This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by
this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.934)
Sec. 13.08.090 Analytical requirements
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR part 136, unless
otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR part 136 does not contain
sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in
accordance with procedures approved by the EPA. (1996 Code, sec. 11.935)
Sec. 13.08.091 Sample collection
(a) Except as indicated in subsection (b) below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flowproportional
composite collection techniques. In the event flow-proportional sampling is infeasible, the director
may authorize the use of time-proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user
demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab
samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
(b) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must
be obtained using grab collection techniques.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.936)
Sec. 13.08.092 Timing of reports
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed,
postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report
shall govern. (1996 Code, sec. 11.937)
Secs. 13.08.093–13.08.120 Reserved
Division 4. Enforcement and Penalties
Sec. 13.08.121 Recordkeeping
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and
copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of
such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/385
person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical
techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at
least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the
user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director or
control authority. (1996 Code, sec. 11.938)
Sec. 13.08.122 Right of entry; inspection and sampling
The director or the control authority or their authorized representative shall have the right to enter the premises of
any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the inspecting person ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any
additional duties.
(1) Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so
that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the inspecting person will be permitted to enter without
delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
(2) The director or control authority shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require
installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's
operations.
(3) The director or control authority may require the user to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater
flow and quality shall be calibrated annually to ensure their accuracy.
(4) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected
and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the director or
control authority and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
(5) Unreasonable delays in allowing the inspecting person access to the user's premises shall be a
violation of this article.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.939)
Sec. 13.08.123 Search warrants
If the director or control authority representative has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any
part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that
there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify
compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety
and welfare of the community, then the director or control authority representative may seek issuance of a search
warrant from an appropriate court. For purposes of this section, the director is designated as the code enforcement
official of the city. (1996 Code, sec. 11.940)
Sec. 13.08.124 Confidential information
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications,
wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the inspection and sampling activities, shall be
available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the director or the control authority, that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such
request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by
the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might
disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/385
available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or
pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as
confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. (1996 Code, sec. 11.941)
Sec. 13.08.125 Publication of list of users in significant noncompliance
The director shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW
is located, a list of the users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance
with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term “significant noncompliance” shall mean:
(1) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six percent
(66%) or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum
limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount;
(2) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three percent
(33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month
period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the
applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
(3) Any other discharge violation that the director believes has caused, alone or in combination with
other discharges, interference or pass-through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or
the general public;
(4) Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the
environment, or has resulted in the director's exercise of his emergency authority to halt or prevent such
a discharge;
(5) Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone
contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing
construction, or attaining final compliance;
(6) Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including
baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
(8) Any other violation(s) which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the local pretreatment program.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.942)
Sec. 13.08.126 Notice of violation
When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may
serve upon that user a written notice of violation. An explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the director.
Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of
the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including
emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. (1996 Code, sec.
11.943)
Sec. 13.08.127 Show cause hearing
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/385
The director may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the
director and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the
user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action,
and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the
meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days
prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing
shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (1996 Code, sec. 11.944)
Sec. 13.08.128 Administrative orders
When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may
issue an administrative order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance
within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly
operated. Administrative orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including
additional self-monitoring, management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the
sewer, and pretreatment or control of the quantities and rates of discharge of wastewater to bring the discharge
within the limits of this article. An order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment
standard or requirement, nor does an administrative order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including
any continuing violation. Issuance of an administrative order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the user. (1996 Code, sec. 11.945)
Sec. 13.08.129 Cease and desist orders
(a) When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that
the user's past violations are likely to recur, the director may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and
desist all such violations and directing the user to:
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a
continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
(b) Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the user.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.946)
Sec. 13.08.130 Emergency suspension of discharge
(a) The director or the control authority may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the
user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to
present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The director or the
control authority may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that
threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the
environment.
(1) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its
contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension
order, the director or control authority may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW or its receiving stream,
or endangerment to any individuals. The director or the control authority may allow the user to
recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director or the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/385
control authority that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in
section 13.08.131 of this article are initiated against the user.
(2) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the director and the control
authority prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under section 13.08.127 or
13.08.131 of this article.
(b) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under
this section.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.947)
Sec. 13.08.131 Termination of discharge
(a) In addition to the provisions in section 13.08.051 of this article, any user who violates the following
conditions is subject to discharge termination:
(1) Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and
characteristics prior to discharge;
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or
sampling; or
(5) Violation of the pretreatment standards in sections 13.08.005 through 13.08.009 of this article.
(b) Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show
cause under section 13.08.127 of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option
by the director shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.948)
Sec. 13.08.132 Injunctive relief
When the director or the control authority finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the director or the control authority may petition the district court for the issuance of a temporary or
permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater
discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The director or the
control authority may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a
requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. (1996 Code, sec. 11.949)
Sec. 13.08.133 Civil penalties
(a) A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for the
maximum civil penalties or fines as allowed by state law . In the case of a monthly or other long-term average
discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
(b) The director may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with
enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/385
by the city.
(c) In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances,
including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance
history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires.
(d) Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against
a user.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.950; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 13.08.134 Criminal prosecution; criminal responsibility
(a) Violations generally. A user who violates any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, further
regulations and procedures established by the director and/or the control authority or an administrative order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine as provided for in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(b) Discharges causing personal injury or property damage. A user who introduces any substance into the POTW
which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject
to the same penalty. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property
damage available under state law.
(c) False information. A user who makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any
application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, a
wastewater discharge permit, or an order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a
fine as provided for in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(d) Criminal responsibility. A culpable mental state is not required to prove an offense under this article. A
person is criminally responsible for a violation of this article if:
(1) The person commits or assists in the commission of a violation, or causes or permits another
person to commit a violation; or
(2) The person owns or manages the property or facilities determined to be the cause of the illegal
discharge under section 13.08.005, 13.08.006, 13.08.007, 13.08.012, or 13.08.041.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.951)
Sec. 13.08.135 Remedies nonexclusive
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The director may take any, all, or any combination of
these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance
with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the director may take other action against any user when the
circumstances warrant. Further, the director is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any
noncompliant user. (1996 Code, sec. 11.952)
Sec. 13.08.136 Applicability of more stringent regulations
(a) National pretreatment standards. If national pretreatment standards, categorical or otherwise, more stringent
than the discharge limits prescribed in this article, are promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency for certain industries, the more stringent national pretreatment standards will apply to the affected
industrial user. A violation of the more stringent national pretreatment standards will also be considered a violation
of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/385
(b) Waste received and treated by other governmental entity. An industrial user within the city who discharges
industrial waste ultimately received and treated by another governmental entity pursuant to a wholesale wastewater
contract or a reciprocal agreement with the city is subject to the following additional rules:
(1) If the governmental entity has more stringent discharge limits than those prescribed by this article,
or by a discharge permit issued hereunder, because the United States Environmental Protection Agency
requires the more stringent discharge limits as a part of the governmental entity's wastewater
pretreatment program, the more stringent discharge limits shall prevail.
(2) The director is authorized to issue a discharge permit to an industrial user affected by subsection
(1), to insure notice of and compliance with the more stringent discharge limits. If the industrial user
already has a discharge permit, the director may amend the permit to apply and enforce the more
stringent discharge limits. An industrial user shall submit to the director an expected compliance date
and an installation schedule if the more stringent discharge limits necessitate technological or
mechanical adjustments to discharge facilities or plant processes.
(3) If the director chooses not to issue or amend a permit under subsection (2), the director shall
notify the affected industrial user in writing of the more stringent discharge limits and their effective
date. Regardless of whether or not a permit is issued or amended, an industrial user shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to comply with the more stringent discharge limits.
(4) The more stringent discharge limits cease to apply upon termination of the city's wholesale
wastewater contract or reciprocal agreement with the governmental entity, or upon modification or
elimination of the limits by the governmental entity or the United States Environmental Protection
Agency. The director shall take the appropriate action to notify the affected industrial user of an
occurrence under this subsection.
(c) Variances in compliance dates. The director may grant a variance in compliance dates to an industry when, in
the director's opinion, such action is necessary to achieve pretreatment or corrective measures. In no case shall the
director grant a variance in compliance dates to an industry affected by national categorical pretreatment standards
beyond the compliance dates established by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
(d) Authority to regulate. The director may establish regulations, not in conflict with this article or other laws, to
control the disposal and discharge of industrial waste into the wastewater system and to insure compliance of the
city's pretreatment enforcement program with all applicable pretreatment regulations promulgated by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency. The regulations established shall, where applicable, be made a part of any
discharge permit issued to an industrial user by the director.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.953)
Sec. 13.08.137 Upset as affirmative defense
(a) For the purposes of this section, “upset” means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control
of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or
improper operation.
(b) An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical
pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (c) below are met.
(c) A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed,
contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence, that:
(1) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/385
(2) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in
compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and
(3) The user has submitted the following information within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming
aware of the upset:
(A) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
(B) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the
anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and
(C) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the
noncompliance.
(d) In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden
of proof.
(e) Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement
action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
(f) Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with
categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among
other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.954)
Sec. 13.08.138 Bypass as affirmative defense
(a) For the purposes of this section:
Bypass. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility.
Severe property damage. Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes
them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be
expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by
delays in production.
(b) A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be
violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject
to the provisions of subsections (c) and (d) of this section.
(c) (1) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the
director, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible.
(2) A user shall submit oral notice to the director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable
pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A
written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of
the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated
time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral
report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours.
(d) (1) Bypass is prohibited, and the director may take an enforcement action against a user for a
bypass, unless:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/385
(A) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property
damage;
(B) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary
treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of
equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should
have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass
which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance;
and
(C) The user submitted notices as required under subsection (c) of this section.
(2) The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the
director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (d)(1) of this section.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.955)
CHAPTER 14
ZONING
ARTICLE 14.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 14.02 ZONING ORDINANCE
Sec. 14.02.001 Zoning ordinance retained
A comprehensive zoning ordinance and map for the city are hereby adopted by Ordinance 18/038 of November 6,
2018, and as subsequently amended, are not included in this volume of the code, but are printed in a separate
pamphlet. A copy of this ordinance shall be maintained and available on file in the office of the city secretary.
(Ordinance 18/038 adopted 11/6/18)
APPENDIX A
FEE SCHEDULE
The following schedule of fees is compiled from various ordinances, resolutions, etc., and is included for reference
purposes only. The fees contained herein may be amended from time to time, and do not necessarily require an
amending ordinance to do so.
ARTICLE A1.00 ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
Sec. A1.001 Health permit
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 363/385
(a) An annual fee of two hundred and twenty-five dollars ($225.00) will be collected from each food service
establishment for a health permit issued by the city secretary and thereafter for the renewal of such permit.
(b) A temporary health permit shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first day of operation plus $10.00
for each additional day of operation up to 14 consecutive days.
(c) There shall be a one hundred dollar ($100.00) charge to re-open a food service establishment that has been
closed by the health inspector.
Sec. A1.002 Rental of city facilities
(a) Reserved. (Resolution 12/03 adopted 5/1/12)
(b) News rack rental fees. Each news rack space provided by the city in Snider Plaza may be rented for $48.00
annually thereafter to the permit holder during the rental term of such space.
(c) Reserved.
(d) Reserved.
(Resolution 12/03 adopted 5/1/12)
Sec. A1.003 Permit to paint house numbers on streets
A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for investigation shall be charged to any person applying for a permit to paint house
numbers on streets. The fee shall not be pro-rated and shall be paid at the time the application is made and shall not
be returned to the applicant regardless of whether a permit is issued or not.
Sec. A1.004 Licenses for dogs and cats
The owner of each dog or cat more than four (4) months old in the city shall obtain a license for such dog or cat
from the city manager or his designee. At the time of application for such license, the owner shall present a
certificate of vaccination as specified in the city code and pay a licensing fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each altered
dog or cat and twenty dollars ($20.00) for each unaltered dog or cat.
Sec. A1.005 Dangerous dog
The animal control authority shall annually register a dangerous dog if the owner presents proof of liability
insurance or financial responsibility as required by the Code of Ordinances, current rabies vaccination of the
dangerous dog, and the secure enclosure in which the dangerous dog will be kept, and pays an annual registration
fee of $50.00.
Sec. A1.006 Returned check charge
(a) The maximum charge permitted under state law will be imposed by the city for the collection of checks
returned by the banks for the lack of funds when such checks are used in payment to the city for deposits or
obligations legally owed by the issuer of the said returned checks. The finance director will add the returned check
charge to the other obligations owed to the city by the issuer of the returned checks. The same charge shall be
applied to electronic funds transactions in which lack of funds prevents payment from being made.
(b) The finance director, with the approval of the city manager, may waive such charge if the city was negligent
in the cashing of the check or if special circumstances deem the waiver as appropriate; however, in all cases of a
waiver complete records must be made of the reason for the waiver.
Sec. A1.007 Photocopy charges
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 364/385
The city may charge a reasonable fee to cover the costs of reproducing public documents for private use. The
charge for this service will be based on section 552.261 et seq. of the Texas Government Code as amended from
time to time. (Resolution 13/01 adopted 2/5/13)
Sec. A1.008 Reserved
Editor's note–Resolution 13/01 adopted by the city council on February 5, 2013, deleted former section A1.008 pertaining to Code of
Ordinances book or CD charge, in its entirety.
Sec. A1.009 Reserved
Editor's note–Resolution 13/01 adopted by the city council on February 5, 2013, deleted former section A1.009 pertaining to the new
resident packet charge in its entirety.
Sec. A1.010 Valet parking permit
A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed annually for a valet parking permit. A fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) shall be assessed for a temporary valet parking permit.
Sec. A1.011 Administrative review fee for state license or permit
An administrative review fee of $250.00 from each applicant for a state license or permit to defray the city's cost of
review of the application, investigation of the background of the applicant, review of the zoning and other code
requirements of the city, measurement to determine minimum distances required, and completion and certification
of the application. (Resolution 10/26, sec. 1, adopted 12/7/10)
ARTICLE A2.00 BUILDING AND ZONING
Sec. A2.001 Building permits
(a) New construction fees.
Occupancy type Permit fee Minimum fee
Residential $0.95/s.f. –
Nonresidential 0.75% of valuation $75.00
(b) Additions, alterations, and repair fees.
Occupancy type Permit fee Minimum fee
Residential 1% of valuation $50.00
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 365/385
Nonresidential 0.75% of valuation $75.00
(c) Demolition fees.
Occupancy type Permit fee
Residential $100.00
Nonresidential $250.00
(d) Plan review fee. The fee to perform plan review shall be 25% of the total building permit fee, paid upon
application for any new residential structure, new commercial structure, major remodel/addition in excess of
$150,000.00 in valuation, and detached accessory structures. The plan review fee shall be credited towards the total
fee to be collected on issuance of the building permit.
(e) Plan review addendum fees.
(1) Application fee for permit addendum: The fee to addend a submitted plan application shall be
$50.00 (fifty dollars), which shall include the first 30 minutes of staff review time.
(2) For staff plan review time in excess of 30 minutes, $50.00 (fifty dollars) per hour shall be charged.
The charge may be prorated in 30-minute increments.
(Resolution 13/01 adopted 2/5/13)
Sec. A2.002 Trade permits (mechanical/electrical/plumbing/concrete)
(a) New construction fees.
Occupancy type Permit fee Minimum fee
Residential 2% of valuation $75.00
Nonresidential 2% of valuation $75.00
(b) Additions, alterations, and repair fees.
Occupancy type Permit fee Minimum fee
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 366/385
Residential 2% of valuation $50.00
Nonresidential 2% of valuation $75.00
Sec. A2.003 Fence permits
Occupancy type Permit fee
Residential $50.00
Nonresidential $100.00
Sec. A2.004 Lawn sprinkler permits
Occupancy type Permit fee
Residential $50.00
Nonresidential $150.00
Sec. A2.005 Pool/spa permits
Permit type Permit fee
Pool $250.00
Spa $150.00
Sec. A2.006 Sign permits
(a) Fee for sign permit. The permit fee to construct, erect, or renovate a sign shall be seventy-five dollars
($75.00).
(b) An investigation fee shall be collected in addition to the permit fee whenever any sign for which a permit is
required has been installed, replaced or altered without first having obtained a permit. The investigation fee shall be
two (2) times the amount of the permit fee. The investigation fee shall be collected even if a permit is not issued.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 367/385
Sec. A2.007 Automatic fire-extinguishing system and fire alarm permits
The permit for the installation of an automatic fire-extinguishing system or a fire alarm system shall be one percent
(1%) of the valuation of the materials and labor involved, with a minimum fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Resolution
12/03 adopted 5/1/12)
Sec. A2.008 Filing fee for amending plats, license agreements, requests for special sign districts, and
submissions for planning and zoning commission and board of adjustment hearings
(a) The fee to be paid by applicants who request an amending plat from the building division shall be one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per request.
(b) The fee to be paid by applicants who request a license agreement from the city shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00) per request.
(c) The fee to be paid by applicants who request a special sign district shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per
request.
(d) The fees to be paid by applicants who request a hearing before the planning and zoning commission shall be
three hundred dollars ($300.00) per application.
(e) The fees to be paid by applicants who request a hearing before the board of adjustment shall be one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) per application.
Sec. A2.009 House moving permit and related charges
(a) The applicant shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to the city for a house-moving permit.
(b) The applicant shall reimburse the city for any personnel costs, including overhead, directly related to
providing assistance to the moving activity. The building official may require a cash deposit at the time of
application to ensure partial or full payment of personnel costs. The hourly rate for each police officer used for
escort purposes is twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per hour.
(c) All fees shall be paid to the city at the time of application for moving permit. If escort personnel have to
return, the building official may require that an additional cash deposit be paid before the house, building, or
structure is to be moved.
Sec. A2.010 Moving temporary buildings and mobile homes
The permit fee for the movement of a mobile or temporary home within the city limits shall be five dollars ($5.00).
Sec. A2.011 Registration fee for license to install automatic fire-extinguishing systems
The fee for registration of a license shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for fire sprinkler contractors.
Sec. A2.012 Grass and weed mowing fees and liens
(a) Fees. Owners of property mowed to correct tall grass and weeds shall pay a fee equal to the cost of mowing
plus interest at six percent from the date of mowing.
(b) Liens. Property liens filed for nonpayment of fees and interest for mowing tall grass and weeds will include a
legal and administrative fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).
Sec. A2.013 Certificate of occupancy
The fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). All new businesses moving into the city are
required to obtain a certificate of occupancy from the building inspection division.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 368/385
Sec. A2.014 Reinspection fee
A reinspection fee may be assessed for each reinspection of work or a building site when the work for which an
inspection has been called is not complete or is not in compliance with an applicable law or when a building site is
not in compliance with or is in violation of an applicable law. To obtain a reinspection, a contractor or his
representative shall appear in person at the community development department, complete a form furnished by the
department requesting reinspection, and pay a reinspection fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
Sec. A2.015 After-hours building inspection fee
A fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) may be assessed for each inspection requested to be performed after
regular business hours.
Sec. A2.016 Inspection fee
A fee for the inspection of private improvements being placed in public right-of-way shall be charged in the
amount of two percent (2%) of the total estimated cost of the improvements to be constructed under the permit.
(Resolution 12/03 adopted 5/1/12)
Sec. A2.017 License or permit fee for alcoholic beverage sales
Permits must be renewed every two years in accordance with Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission (TABC)
renewal cycles. The following schedule shows the fees that will be assessed upon each renewal:
(1) Sales of beer and wine for off-premises consumption (BF license, BQ permit):
Admin
Review Fee Permit
Year 1 Permit
Year 2 Total Fee
Initial permit (yrs 1 & 2) $250.00 + $30.00 + $30.00 $310.00
2-year renewal (yrs 3 & 4 and all subsequent
renewals) $0.00 + $30.00 + $30.00 $60.00
(2) Wine only package store (Q):
Admin
Review Fee Permit
Year 1 Permit
Year 2 Total Fee
Initial permit (yrs 1 & 2) $250.00 + $37.50 + $37.50 $325.00
2-year renewal (yrs 3 & 4 and all subsequent
renewals) $0.00 + $37.50 + $37.50 $75.00
(3) Sales of beer and wine for on-premises consumption (BG permit with food and beverage
certificate):
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 369/385
Admin
Review Fee
Permit
Year 1
Permit
Year 2
Total Fee
Initial permit (yrs 1 & 2) $250.00 + $500.00 + $500.00 $1,250.00
2-year renewal (yrs 3 & 4 and all subsequent
renewals)
$0.00 + $375.00 + $375.00 $750.00
(4) Sales of mixed beverages in restaurants by food and beverage certificate holders (RM permit):
Admin
Review Fee Permit
Year 1 Permit
Year 2 Total Fee
Initial permit (yrs 1 & 2) $250.00 + $0.00 + $0.00 $250.00
1st renewal (yrs 3 & 4 and all subsequent
renewals)
$0.00 + $0.00 + $1,125.00 $1,125.00
2nd renewal (yrs 5 & 6) $0.00 + $750.00 + $750.00 $1,500.00
3rd renewal (yrs 7 & 8) and all subsequent
renewals
$0.00 + $375.00 + $375.00 $750.00
(Resolution 16/009 adopted 9/20/16)
Sec. A2.018 Plan restamp fee
A fee of $50.00 (fifty dollars) shall be charged for city staff to restamp a set of contractor's approved plans.
(Resolution 13/01 adopted 2/5/13)
Sec. A2.019 Bike share operator
As authorized by section 12.08.009 of this code, a bike share operator fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) is
established. (Resolution 18/009 adopted 7/17/18)
ARTICLE A3.00 UTILITIES
Sec. A3.001 Water meter security
(a) Before water service is furnished to a consumer at any address, the consumer shall be required, upon making
application for such service, to deposit with the manager of the utility billing office, deposits amounting to the
following for each meter:
Meter size Status Fee
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 370/385
5/8" to 1.5" meters Homeowner $50.00
Meter size Status Fee
5/8" to 1.5" meters Renter $80.00
Meters larger than 1.5" All $100.00
Hydrant meter Installation $40.00
Hydrant meter Refundable deposit $1,500.00
(b) The deposit for apartments or duplexes that are not individually metered will be fifty dollars ($50.00) per
unit. For example, the deposit for a four-unit apartment will be two hundred dollars ($200.00).
(c) In the case of business institutions, the manager of the utility billing office may require a deposit equal to
three times the average monthly bill on such premises.
Sec. A3.002 Reconnection of water service following cut-off for nonpayment of water bills
When water is cut off because of nonpayment, the manager of the utility billing office shall not permit the water or
sewer services to be resumed until the full amount delinquent, the ten percent (10%) penalty, and a collection or
reconnection charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) is paid. Such amount shall be paid at the utility billing office if
reconnected during normal office hours.
Sec. A3.003 Emergency water cut-off service
Whenever any consumer, owner or occupant of premises shall request the city to cut off his water service at the
meter for his convenience or due to the fact that his stop and waste or house cut-off is either nonfunctional or
cannot be found, then the manager of the utility billing office shall add a service fee to his bill of fifteen dollars
($15.00) for each cut off.
Sec. A3.004 Examination and test of meters
Any consumer shall have the right to have their water meter tested. The consumer shall make application in writing
to the manager of the utility billing office, and pay the appropriate fee:
Testing any size meter up to a 1" $10.00
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 371/385
Testing any meter larger than 1" $15.00
Sec. A3.005 Meter re-reads
Any consumer who feels that their measured water consumption is excessive may request that the meter be re-read.
Two (2) free re-reads are allowed within each calendar year and any in excess will be charged ten dollars ($10.00),
unless there has been an error on the part of the city or the meter is faulty.
Sec. A3.006 Water service
(a) The following water rates are hereby established and shall be collected. The minimum monthly rates for all
metered water service shall be as follows:
(1) 5/8" or 3/4" meter: $5.88.
(2) 1" meter: $11.44.
(3) 1-1/2" meter: $21.37.
(4) 2" meter: $32.97.
(5) 3" meter: $60.11.
(6) 4" meter: $98.90.
(7) 6" meter: $195.83.
(8) 8" meter: $312.10.
(9) 10" meter: $560.25.
(10) Portable meter: N/A.
(b) In any billing period, the rate shall be $4.65 (four dollars and sixty-five cents) per 1,000 gallons or any
portion thereof.
(c) Any duplex or multifamily dwelling which is served by a single water meter shall be billed a minimum
charge for each unit, occupied or vacant. All single-family units shall pay a minimum charge for each meter.
Sec. A3.007 Conservation surcharge and drought premium
(a) Each water customer (except Southern Methodist University) shall be subject to a conservation surcharge for
all consumption in excess of 30,000 gallons per month. SMU meters shall be subject collectively to a monthly
conservation surcharge for all consumption in excess of 13,000,000 gallons per month. The surcharge rate shall be
an additional $1.73 (one dollar and seventy-three cents) per thousand (1,000) gallons for all consumption exceeding
the conservation threshold.
(b) In the event that a stage 3 declaration of the city's drought contingency plan is made, the city council shall
have the option of enacting a special drought premium rate for consumption exceeding 30,000 gallons per month
by non-SMU users or 13,000,000 gallons per month by SMU. The rate shall represent a 50% increase from the
existing conservation surcharge rate.
(Resolution 16/009 adopted 9/20/16)
Sec. A3.008 Sewer service
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 372/385
(a) The sewer charge for each single-family, duplex or multifamily dwelling shall be included in the utility bill
and calculated as follows:
(1) All sewer charges are based on the use of water passing through the water meter or meters. All
single-family units, having more than one meter, shall have the usage of meters added together for the
purposes of this section; however, if separate bills are rendered for a lawn sprinkler, such consumption
shall not be considered for sewer charges.
(2) Any duplex or multifamily dwelling, which is served by a single water meter, shall be billed a
minimum charge for each unit, occupied or vacant, and any usage over the minimum shall be averaged
over each unit of the dwelling as though each unit consumed the water the average indicates.
(3) Any duplex or multifamily dwelling, having individual water meters for each unit, shall be treated
for sewer billing purposes as though each were a single-family dwelling.
(4) There shall be an $11.00 (eleven dollars) minimum sewer charge per unit.
(5) Any water used shall be billed at $4.52 (four dollars and fifty-two cents) per 1,000 gallons per
month per unit for the sewer fee.
(6) The sewer bill for March through February shall be based on the average billing of water over the
three-month period as listed below:
(A) CYCLE I: The water used during the months of November, December and January.
(B) CYCLE II: The water used during the period of November 15th to February 15th.
(b) For each business or commercial establishment of any nature, plus public institutions such as schools and
churches:
(1) There shall be an $11.00 (eleven dollars) minimum sewer charge.
(2) Any water used shall be billed at a rate of $4.52 (four dollars and fifty-two cents) per 1,000
gallons per month.
(3) For service to Southern Methodist University, $4.52 (four dollars and fifty-two cents) per 1,000
gallons of water used per month; the monthly charge for the period April through March shall be based
on the average amount of water used during the immediately preceding months of October, November,
December, January, February and March, adjusted for lawn, swimming pool, and metered cooling tower
use.
Sec. A3.009 Utility service construction fees
(a) The following charges shall apply for services performed by the city:
1" water meter and tap installation $600.00 each
1.5" irrigation water meter and tap installation $1,600.00 each
Sanitary sewer tap installation $300.00 each
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 373/385
Existing water meter or sanitary sewer tap removal $150.00 each
Utility excavation $1,900.00 each
(b) Each utility excavation includes the removal of existing alley pavement, excavation, backfill/compaction, and
concrete replacement of not more than ten (10) linear feet of alley.
(c) The city, based on the size, location, current costs and specifications, will determine the price for the
installation of water meters greater than one inch (l") and excavations other than in an alley.
(Resolution 17/014 adopted 9/19/17)
Sec. A3.010 Sewer rate re-calculation
Sewer service customers may apply to have their sewer service charges re-calculated to the previous year's rates.
The fee for re-calculating sewer service charges shall be thirty dollars ($30.00).
Sec. A3.011 Schedule of drainage charges
The Municipal Drainage Utility Systems Act having been adopted by ordinance of the city council, the following
drainage charges are levied against real property in the city, subject to the limitations set out in article 13.06 of the
Code of Ordinances and chapter 552 of the Local Government Code, to wit:
Zoning District Monthly Drainage Charge
Single-family district 1 $21.39
Single-family district 2 $6.78
Single-family district 3 $5.72
Single-family district 4 $5.30
Single-family attached district $4.24 per dwelling unit
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 374/385
Duplex 1 district $4.29 per dwelling unit
Duplex 2 district $3.12 per dwelling unit
Multifamily 1, 2, and 3 districts $1.48 per dwelling unit
Nonresidential districts $0.001177 per square foot of maximum allowable impervious
surface
(Resolution 17/014 adopted 9/19/17)
Sec. A3.012 Network provider fees
Small cell application fee - one time (these fees
shall not exceed and are capped by statutory or
FCC limits).
$500.00 (nonrecurring single, up-front application for 1–5
network nodes/small wireless facilities) plus $100.00 for each
additional facility beyond five; a $1,000.00 nonrecurring fee
per new pole (not a collocation)
Small cell user fees - annual (these fees shall not
exceed and are capped by statutory or FCC
limits).
$250.00 annually for each network node (“small wireless
facility”), plus $20.00 per year for attachment to a municipally
owned structure in the right-of-way, if applicable
Transport facility monthly user fee (this fee shall
not exceed and is capped by statutory limits).
$28.00 per month multiplied by the number of the network
provider's network nodes located in the public right-of-way for
which the installed transport facilities provide backhaul, until
the time the network provider's payment or that of its transport
provider to the city exceeds its monthly aggregate per node
compensation to the city
(Ordinance 19/003 adopted 2/19/19)
Sec. A3.013 Backflow prevention assembly test report filing fee
A filing fee of $15.00 shall be assessed for the filing of each backflow prevention assembly test report required by
section 13.04.071(c) of this code. (Resolution 18/003 adopted 3/6/18)
ARTICLE A4.00 PUBLIC SAFETY AND JUDICIAL
Sec. A4.001 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 375/385
Editor's note–Resolution 12/03 adopted by the city council on May 1, 2012 deleted former section A4.001 pertaining to impounded
vehicle fees in its entirety.
Sec. A4.002 Reserved
Editor's note–Resolution 12/03 adopted by the city council on May 1, 2012 deleted former section A4.002 pertaining to wrecker service
fees in its entirety.
Sec. A4.003 Ambulance (MICU) service
(a) A base fee shall be charged per trip per person for transportation by the Mobile Intensive Care Unit (MICU)
to a hospital providing emergency medical attention within the boundaries of Dallas County. The base fee shall be
as follows: $800.00 for residents of the city, with an additional fee of $100.00 being charged for nonresidents. In all
cases, whether one (l) person or more than one (l) person is transported in the same MICU, the charge per trip
applies to each individual transported.
(b) Additional fees will be charged for each emergency medical aid provided to the person or persons transported
including, but not limited to, drugs, bandaging, oxygen, electrocardiogram (EKG), etc. The charge for these items
shall be based upon usual and customary amounts in place at the time of patient treatment. The city fire department
shall maintain, and make available for inspection, a complete list of charges. (Resolution 13/01 adopted 2/5/13)
(c) Each transported patient will be charged a mileage fee from the point of patient loading to the hospital of
patient preference in Dallas County. The mileage fee shall be $9.00 per mile. If the patient is unable to establish a
preference, transport will be made to the nearest available hospital. Common transports are to Baylor, Children's,
Parkland, Presbyterian, St. Paul, and Veterans hospitals.
(d) A base fee of $200.00 will be charged to all patients who are not transported to a hospital but on whom
medical supplies and/or drugs are used. Supply and drug fees will be charged to nontransported patients based on
the above table in order to recover the cost of supplies used at the time of treatment. These charges are not covered
by Medicare or other health insurance plans, as these plans only cover ambulance charges incurred during
transport.
(e) A fee will be charged to any incapacitated citizen needing assistance from a paramedic in accomplishing
physical movements, such as exiting and entering automobiles or movement within a residence, if such assistance
is not needed in connection with an immediate medical condition and does not constitute an emergency in the
judgment of the paramedic at the scene. The first such call in a calendar quarter will be at no cost to the citizen. The
second and subsequent calls in the same calendar quarter for the same citizen will result in a fee being charged to
the citizen in the amount of $32.00 per call. This fee will be in addition to any other fee authorized by this section.
Sec. A4.004 Solicitor's license
A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for investigation of persons wishing to peddle, sell, solicit, canvass, or take orders for
any services, wares, merchandise, or goods shall be charged, which shall not be prorated and shall be paid at the
time application is made and shall not be returned to the applicant regardless of whether a permit is issued or not.
Sec. A4.005 Commission for private guards
Each individual receiving a private guard commission shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).
Sec. A4.006 Impoundment fees for animals
(a) The city shall collect a fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per day or part of a day for the impoundment of
any animal for rabies testing or any other reason, prior to the release of such animal. In addition to the
impoundment fee, the city shall collect an additional one-time processing fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per
animal. (Resolution 13/012 adopted 9/10/13)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 376/385
(b) If an animal is euthanized, the city shall collect an additional fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00). A fee of
twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50) will be charged for disposal of euthanized domesticated animals.
Sec. A4.007 9-1-1 Emergency service fee
The city shall collect a monthly 9-1-1 billing fee from each telephone service customer. The fee shall be 6% of the
service provider's base charge per line for residential, business, and trunk lines.
Sec. A4.008 Alarm permit/direct alarm monitoring fees
(a) The city shall charge a fee of $50.00 (fifty dollars) for the initial alarm permit. Each year thereafter, alarm
permit holders shall pay an annual fee of $48.00 (forty-eight dollars) due on the anniversary date of their original
application or included on their utility bill at the rate of $4.00 (four dollars) per month. Alarm permits are not
transferable.
(b) Each alarm permit holder subscribing to the city's basic digital-dialer direct alarm monitoring system shall
pay a fee of $300.00 per year. This basic monitoring may be by digital-dialer, internet service provider, or by a
wireless radio. This fee will be paid in 12 monthly installments of $25.00 each. An additional fee of $7.00 per
month will be charged for a secondary wireless or back-up transmitting device for direct alarm monitoring. The
monitoring fee for digital-dialer or internet service provider and back-up radio will be $384.00 per year paid in 12
monthly installments of $32.00.
(c) A penalty shall be imposed on a permit holder for the signaling of a false burglary alarm as follows:
(1) $50.00 for each false alarm if the location has had more than three but fewer than six other false
alarms in the preceding 12-month period;
(2) $75.00 for each false alarm if the location has had more than five but fewer than eight other false
alarms in the preceding 12-month period; or
(3) $100.00 for each false alarm if the location has had eight or more other false alarms in the
preceding 12-month period.
Sec. A4.009 Hose cabinet fees
The city shall collect an annual fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each hose cabinet in all parking structures.
The fee is intended to recover the cost of regular hose testing and records maintenance.
Sec. A4.010 Fire re-inspection fees
The city shall collect a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the second re-inspection and one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for the third re-inspection.
Sec. A4.011 Tent permit
The city shall collect a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each permit to operate a temporary membrane structure, tent,
or canopy.
Sec. A4.012 Municipal court building security fee
The city shall collect a fee of three dollars ($3.00) from a defendant convicted of a misdemeanor offense as a cost
of court. (Resolution 12/03 adopted 5/1/12)
Sec. A4.013 Municipal court technology fee
The city shall collect a fee of four dollars ($4.00) from a defendant convicted of a misdemeanor offense as a cost of
court. (Resolution 12/03 adopted 5/1/12)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 377/385
Sec. A4.014 School crossing guard program fee
The city shall collect a fee of five dollars ($5.00) on each violation of a parking regulation as a cost of court.
Sec. A4.015 Warrant fee; bond fee
The city shall collect a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00).
Sec. A4.016 Fingerprint fee
The fee for taking fingerprints and making a fingerprint card shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) per card. (Resolution
10/26, sec. 3, adopted 12/7/10)
Sec. A4.017 Fire training facility rental
The city shall collect fees for rental of the training tower and FireBlast burn prop to be used by outside entities in
the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per hour base rental for the facility only, with a three-hour minimum,
plus a charge for water if used; a fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for four hours and a fee of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for eight hours for the facility and the FireBlast burn prop. This includes two fire department
personnel, the FireBlast operator and a safety officer. Additional staff can be provided for a fee of sixty dollars
($60.00) per hour each. Use of the vertical ventilation simulator will be charged a fee of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) and includes up to five 4'x8' sheets of decking. Outside agencies are required to provide their own
instructors. Water usage will be estimated and market rate will apply. (Resolution 12/03 adopted 5/1/12)
ARTICLE A5.00 SANITATION
Sec. A5.001 Residential garbage collection
The city shall charge the following sums per month for collection of garbage and trash from residences:
Residential dwelling $22.27
Carryout, per unit $136.50
Sec. A5.002 Brush and tree limb collection
An extra charge shall be assessed for pick-up of brush and tree limbs that are too bulky to be tied in bundles. Brush
and limbs shall be stacked on the parkway for pick-up and charged as follows:
Manual pick-up $23.00
Mechanical pick-up–less than 1/2 truckload $75.00
Mechanical pick-up–1/2 truckload $115.50
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 378/385
Mechanical pick-up–full truckload $152.50
Sec. A5.003 Appliances, furniture, and large items collection
(a) The city shall charge the following sums for the removal of appliances, furniture and other large items:
Refrigerator, freezer, or air-conditioning unit $75.00
Washer, dryer, water heater, sofa, bed, etc. $23.00
(b) These items shall be placed on the parkway and will be picked up on a “call-in” basis only.
Sec. A5.004 Commercial garbage collection
(a) The city shall for its services in removing garbage and trash from all businesses, lodging houses, boarding
houses, commercial institutions, individual businesses, firms or corporations, churches, schools, office buildings
and properties, charge for containers placed at any of such establishments, sanitation charges based upon the
following schedule:
Collections per 6-
day week Number of 3-yard containers
1 2 3 4
3 $110.0 $220.00 $330.00 $440.00
6 $220.00 $440.00 $660.00 $880.00
12 $440.00 $880.00 $1,320.00 $1,760.00
18 $660.00 $1,320.00 $1,980.00 $2,640.00
(b) Nothing in this schedule shall prevent the superintendent of sanitation from calculating rates which are lower
or which exceed the schedule as long as time, volume, and number of pick-ups are the basis for such calculation.
(Resolution 17/014 adopted 9/19/17)
Sec. A5.005 Residential construction sites
A one-time fee of one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00) for garbage collection services will be charged at the
time of issuance of a building permit for residential construction where the property will not be occupied during
any or all of the construction, such as for new homes or major remodels. Garbage collection services will be
rendered to the property during construction as part of the regular collection service to the area.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 379/385
Sec. A5.006 Liquid waste transport
The city shall not issue a liquid waste transport to an applicant until the appropriate established fee is paid. A
person shall pay a fee of two hundred and forty dollars ($240.00) for the first vehicle and one hundred and seventy
dollars ($170.00) for each additional vehicle operated by the person. Each permit must be renewed annually.
Sec. A5.007 Reserved
Editor's note–Resolution 15/007 adopted by the city council on September 15, 2015, deleted former section A5.007 pertaining to yard
waste bags charge in its entirety.
Sec. A5.008 Transfer station fees
City residents may use the city's transfer station once a month without charge. Use of the transfer station is
restricted to residents, who must be present when off-loading. For more than one load per month, the following fees
shall apply:
Pick-up truck $40.00
Single-axle truck, less than 15-feet long $75.00
Double-axle truck, more than 15-feet long $100.00
Southern Methodist University vehicles $113.00
Sec. A5.009 Recycling fees
Each account with a dwelling unit receiving recycling collection service will be charged a monthly recycling fee:
Alley/curbside service $3.50
Carry-out service $5.51
(Resolution 15/007 adopted 9/15/15)
ARTICLE A6.00 PARKS AND RECREATION
Sec. A6.001 Goar Park Pavilion reservation
(a) Residents of the city may rent the pavilion for personal use for thirty dollars ($30.00) per hour.
(b) All other groups who use the pavilion for personal use, except those specified in the following section, shall
pay sixty dollars ($60.00) per hour.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 380/385
(c) All applicants that desire to use the facility for business, commercial, or professional gatherings may apply
for the use of said pavilion for daytime hours between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. and, if such application is approved,
the applicant shall pay the city secretary seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per hour, but the applicant may make no
charges nor collect any money of any kind or character from any person whatsoever.
Sec. A6.002 Tennis permits
All qualified residents of the city, upon making application with the utilities office, may secure an annual tennis
permit. Such permit shall be numbered and coded as to indicate the time of its validity. The charge shall be as
follows:
Individual permit $40.00
Family permit $80.00
Children 12 and under $7.50
Persons over 65 $7.50
Sec. A6.003 Park and playing field reservations for filming
Commercial use of any and all park facilities, including tennis courts and Goar Park Pavilion, for filming,
photographing, etc., shall carry a charge of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per hour, plus a damage and clean up
deposit of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00).
Sec. A6.004 Playing field reservations
Playing fields may be reserved by city sports teams (non-YMCA) for ten dollars ($10.00) per hour. Reservations
must be made through the park department office.
Sec. A6.005 Park reservations for sports clinics
Any individual or group wishing to use a park or playing field to conduct a sports clinic as a profit-making venture
shall reserve the park or playing field by filling out the appropriate application forms in the park department office
and pay a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per hour for each hour the clinic is operational in the park or on the reserved
playing field. If, after the completion of the clinic, the number of hours during which the park or playing field was
actually in use exceeds the fee paid, the applicant shall be liable and responsible to pay the additional fee in the
park department office within five (5) days. If the actual number of hours is less than the fee paid, the applicant
shall receive a pro rata refund. The application forms and all fees must be in the park department office at least one
(l) week before the clinic is scheduled to begin.
Sec. A6.006 Park reservation fees
(a) Any organized group not sponsored by the city and having special features (i.e., pony rides, petting zoos,
bounce machines, port-a-lets, tents, etc.) which wishes to use a park, must make a reservation with the park
department, make a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) refundable deposit, and pay a rental fee according to the
following schedule:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 381/385
Number of People Fee Amount
1–25 $25.00
26–50 $50.00
51–99 $100.00
100–199 $200.00
200–299 $300.00
300 and up $500.00
(b) Groups of twenty-five (25) or less that wish to reserve a park but would not use special features do not have
to make a deposit.
(c) Baseball fields may also be reserved for an additional fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per hour.
Sec. A6.007 Swimming pool
(a) All residents of the city, nonresident property owners, and nonresidents of the city within the Highland Park
Independent School District (HPISD) six (6) years of age or older, upon making application, may secure an annual
swimming pool permit. The charge for annual swimming pool permits shall be:
(1) Resident.
(A) Renewal: $50.00.
(B) New: $70.00.
(C) Senior: $40.00.
(D) Military: $40.00.
(2) Nonresident (within HPISD).
(A) Renewal: $100.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 382/385
(B) New: $120.00.
(C) Senior: $80.00.
(D) Military: $40.00.
(b) A member of a group defined in subsection (a) above may schedule a rental of the pool pavilion (either the
“baby pool” or “large pool”), the Atmos Energy Party Room, the large pool and slide, or the entire aquatic facility.
Prior to the rental, the member shall fill out an application stating the date of the rental, time of the rental and
number of guests. Fees for aquatic facility rentals shall be:
# of Guests Baby Pool Large Pool Pavilion Atmos Energy Party Room Private Party* Large
Pool and Slide
Private Party* Entire
Aquatic Facility
1-25 $100.00 $100.00 $250.00/2 hours
$250 refundable deposit.
$1,000.00/2 hours
(fully staffed)
$1,200.00/2 hours
(fully staffed)
26-50 $150.00 $150.00 Not available
51-75 $200.00 $200.00 Not available
75+ Mgr. discretion Mgr. discretion Not available
* - Does not include use of Atmos Energy Party Room.
(c) A member of a group defined in subsection (a) above may enroll in the following aquatic programs:
(1) “Baby sharks” (parent and child program): $100.00.
(2) “Shark school” (learn to swim lessons): $150.00.
(3) “Makos” (swim team): $300.00.
(4) Private lessons (one-on-one individualized instruction): $150.00.
(d) A member of a group defined in subsection (a) above may secure permission for guests to use pools by
paying attendants at the gate a cash fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each guest each time each guest uses the pool.
(e) A member of a group defined in subsection (a) not owning an annual swimming pool permit may use the
swimming pool upon presentation of identification and paying a charge of five dollars ($5.00) per person each time
the pool is used.
(f) Lost annual swimming pool permit. If the annual swimming pool permit is lost, a duplicate may be secured
for ten dollars ($10.00).
(g) Use of pool by children under six (6) years of age.
(1) Children under six (6) years of age, who are members of a group defined in subsection (a) above
or guests of a member of a group defined in subsection (a) above, may use any of the pools without
charge if accompanied at all times by a parent or guardian sixteen (16) years of age or older.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 383/385
(2) A one hundred thirty-five dollar ($135.00) fee shall be assessed for private lessons.
(h) Persons who may accompany children to small pools. All adults in bathing attire accompanying children to
small pools must pay a five dollar ($5.00) guest fee or purchase an annual swimming pool permit.
(Resolution 18/002 adopted 3/6/18)
Sec. A6.008 Tree removal penalty
A monetary civil penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be assessed against any person
removing or damaging a tree six inches (6") or more in diameter, or two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a tree
less than six inches (6") in diameter, in violation of the tree preservation ordinance. (Resolution 12/03 adopted
5/1/12)
ARTICLE A7.00 COMMERCIAL FILMING FEES
Sec. A7.001 Small productions
(a) Filming permit application fee: $25.00.
(b) Rental of city parks: See section A6.00.
Sec. A7.002 Large productions
(a) Filming permit application fee: $200.00.
(b) Filming fees.
First day of filming (or fraction) $200.00
Each additional day of filming $50.00
(c) Permit revision fee: $50.00.
(d) Rental of city parks: See article A6.00.
Sec. A7.003 Reimbursement of personnel costs
The applicant shall reimburse the city for any personnel costs (i.e., police, fire, traffic, etc.), plus overhead, directly
related to providing assistance for the filming activity. The film coordinator may require a cash deposit at the time
of the application to ensure full payment of personnel costs.
ARTICLE A8.00 LIBRARY SERVICES
Sec. A8.001 Borrowing privileges
(a) Resident borrowing card (library card): No charge.
(b) Nonresident borrowing card: See city's public library borrowing policy.
(c) Library card replacement fee: $10.00.
(Resolution 14/001 adopted 1/21/14)
Sec. A8.002 Fines
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 384/385
(a) Media.
(1) Overdue materials fine: $0.25/item/day.
(2) Lost materials replacement fee: Varies according to original acquisition price.
(3) Lost materials processing fee: $10.00.
(b) Equipment (Launchpads).
(1) Overdue fee: $2.00 per day.
(2) Damage fee (repairable): $70.00.
(3) Replacement of lost or non-repairable Launchpad: $150.00 + $10.00 processing fee.
(4) Replacement of charger: $20.00 + $10.00 processing fee.
(Ordinance 17/005 adopted 5/2/17)
Sec. A8.003 Room rental fees
(a) Meeting room - nonprofit organization:
(1) First two hours: $50.00.
(2) Additional two hours: $25.00.
(3) Staffing (required after 6:00 p.m.): $30.00 per hour.
(b) Meeting room - for profit organizations:
(1) First two hours: $300.00.
(2) Additional two hours: $200.00.
(3) Staffing (required after 6:00 p.m.): $30.00 per hour.
(c) Local history/conference room:
(1) First two hours: $30.00.
(2) Additional two hours: $15.00.
(Resolution 14/001 adopted 1/21/14)
Sec. A8.004 Reproduction/print fees
The library will charge the following fees per page of printed material from any source:
(1) 8.5 x 11 black and white: $0.20.
(2) 8.5 x 11 color: $0.50.
(3) 11 x 17 black and white: $0.50.
(4) 11 x 17 color: $1.50.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 385/385
(Resolution 16/009 adopted 9/20/16)

City of University Park
Zoning Ordinance
Article 1. Introductory Provisions*
Sec. 1.1.     Title
This ordinance is known and may be cited and referred to as the “zoning ordinance” of the City of University Park, Texas.
Sec. 1.2     Authority
This zoning ordinance is adopted under the authority granted and subject to any limitations imposed by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas and the home rule charter of the city.
Sec. 1.3.     Effective Date
The provisions of this zoning ordinance become effective on November 6, 2018, except as otherwise expressly stated.
Sec. 1.4.     Considerations
The zoning regulations and districts have been made with reasonable consideration for, among other things, the character of the district, and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified; and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city consistent with the comprehensive plan. The comprehensive plan has been used as a guide to develop the regulations of this zoning ordinance.
Sec. 1.5.     Applicability and Jurisdiction
The provisions of this zoning ordinance apply to all buildings, structures, land and uses within the corporate limits of the City of University Park.
Sec. 1.6.     Purposes
This zoning ordinance is adopted to advance the purposes defined in Sec. 211.004 of the Texas Local Government Code and to:
1.6.1. Maintain and enhance a high quality of life for city residents;
1.6.2. Protect the character of established neighborhoods;
1.6.3. Maintain economically vibrant and visually attractive business, commercial and mixed-use areas;
1.6.4. Promote a range of housing choices and options;
1.6.5. Establish clear and efficient development review and approval procedures that are commensurate with potential land use impacts;
1.6.6. Accommodate and promote innovation, creativity and flexibility; and
1.6.7. Encourage development, in accordance with the preceding purposes.
Sec. 1.7.     Minimum Requirements
1.7.1. The provisions of this zoning ordinance are the minimum requirements deemed necessary to carry out the zoning ordinance's stated purposes.
1.7.2. In addition to the requirements of this zoning ordinance, all uses, buildings and structures must comply with all other applicable ordinances, laws and regulations.
1.7.3. All references in the zoning ordinance to other governmental regulations are for informational purposes only and do not constitute a complete list of such regulations. These references do not imply any responsibility for the city to enforce regulations imposed by other government authorities.
Sec. 1.8.     Compliance Required
1.8.1. Land may not be used for any purpose other than one that is allowed by the provisions of this zoning ordinance.
1.8.2. A building or structure may not be erected, located, moved, reconstructed, extended or structurally altered except as allowed by this zoning ordinance.
1.8.3. Buildings, structures and land may be used and occupied only in compliance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance.
1.8.4. All lots created or modified and all improvements and lot features must comply with all applicable provisions of this zoning ordinance.
Sec. 1.9.     Creation of Building Sites
1.9.1. Legal Lot Required. Permits for the construction of a building upon any lot or parcel may be issued only after the community development director determines, based on evidence provided by the applicant, that at least one of the following criteria has been met:
A.     The lot or parcel is part of a plat or replat of record that has been reviewed and approved by the planning and zoning commission and filed in the plat records of Dallas County;
B.     The site, lot, or parcel is all or part of a site plan officially approved by the city council in a planned development district, and the approved site plan provides all utility and drainage easements, alleys, streets, and other public improvements necessary to meet the normal requirements for platting, including the designation of building areas and such easements, alleys, and streets have been properly dedicated and the necessary public improvements provided; or
C.     The lot or parcel abuts a dedicated street and was separately owned as a lot of record before November 7th, 1977, in which case a building permit for only one main building may be issued on each such original separately owned parcel, provided that a lot or parcel to be occupied by a detached dwelling structure in a single-family or duplex district must have a minimum lot width of at least 40 feet.
1.9.2. Plat Required.
A.     Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1.9.1, permits for construction of a structure may not be issued until such lot or parcel has been fully platted, either by original plat, replat, or amending plat as may be required or authorized by law.
B.     If the survey description or the submitted drawing indicates an existing property line or multiple property lines through the building lot, the process for amending the plat to remove the old property lines must be initiated for all new homes, additions, pools and detached accessory structures (excluding arbors, outdoor fireplaces and outdoor kitchens). However, an amending plat may be required when an alley dedication is necessary. An amending plat allows two or more lots to be combined into one lot.
C.     An individual single-family attached house must be located on its own lot. A survey or plat must be submitted with the building plans for attached houses showing that each house will be located on its own individual lot.
Sec. 1.10.     Conflicting Provisions
1.10.1. State or Federal Regulations. If the provisions of this zoning ordinance are inconsistent with state or federal law, the more restrictive provision governs, to the extent allowed by law. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes more stringent controls.
1.10.2. Other City Regulations. If the provisions of this zoning ordinance are inconsistent with one another or if they conflict with provisions found in other adopted ordinances or regulations of the city, the more restrictive provision governs unless otherwise expressly stated. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes more stringent controls.
1.10.3. Private Agreements and Covenants. This zoning ordinance does not interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, deed restriction or other agreement between private parties. If the provisions of this zoning ordinance impose a greater restriction than imposed by an agreement or covenant among private parties, the provisions of this zoning ordinance govern. The city is not responsible for monitoring or enforcing agreements or covenants among private parties.
Sec. 1.11.     Language and Interpretation
1.11.1. Meanings and Intent. Words and terms expressly defined in this zoning ordinance including those defined in Article 11 have the specific meanings assigned unless the context indicates another meaning. Words and terms that are not expressly defined in this zoning ordinance have the meaning given in Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary.
1.11.2. Computation of Time.
A.     References to “days” are to calendar days unless otherwise expressly stated. References to “business days” are references to regular city government working days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays observed by city government.
B.     The time in which an act is to be completed is computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or holiday observed by city government, that day is excluded and the “last day” is the next business day.
C.     A day concludes at the close of business and any materials received after that time will be considered to have been received the following business day.
1.11.3. Tenses and Usage.
A.     Words used in the singular include the plural, and words in the plural include the singular.
B.     Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The reverse is also true.
C.     The words “must,” “will,” “shall” and “may not” are mandatory.
D.     The word “may” is permissive, not mandatory or required.
E.     When used with numbers, “up to x,” “not more than x” and “a maximum of x” all include “x.”
F.     The word “person” includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, limited liability company, trust, or corporation, as well as an individual.
G.     The words “used” and “occupied” include “intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied.”
1.11.4. Conjunctions.
A.     Unless the context otherwise expressly indicates, conjunctions have the following meanings:
B.     “And” indicates that all connected items or provisions apply; and
C.     “Or” indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singularly or in combination.
1.11.5. Headings and Illustrations. Headings and illustrations are provided for convenience and reference only and do not define or limit the scope of any provision of this zoning ordinance. In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this zoning ordinance and any heading, drawing, table, figure or illustration, the text governs.
1.11.6. Versions and Citations. All references in this zoning ordinance to other city, state or federal regulations are to be construed as referring to the most up-to-date version and citation for those regulations, unless otherwise expressly indicated. When the referenced regulations have been repealed and not replaced by other regulations, zoning ordinance requirements for compliance are no longer in effect.
1.11.7. Lists and Examples. Unless otherwise expressly indicated, lists of items or examples that use “including,” “such as,” or similar terms are intended to provide examples only. They are not to be construed as exhaustive lists of all possibilities.
1.11.8. Delegation of Authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or another officer or employee of the city to perform an act or duty, that provision will be construed as authorizing the department head or officer to delegate that responsibility to others over whom he or she has authority. Delegation of authority is not allowed when the provisions of this zoning ordinance expressly prohibit such delegation.
1.11.9. Public Officials and Agencies. Unless otherwise expressly stated, all employees, public officials, bodies and agencies to which references are made in this ordinance are those of the City of University Park or individuals or agencies legally authorized to act on behalf of the City of University Park.
Sec. 1.12.     Zoning Map
1.12.1. Establishment. The location and boundaries of the districts included in this zoning ordinance must be established by ordinance and shown on a geographic coverage layer that is maintained as part of a geographic information system (GIS). This “zoning” geographic coverage layer constitutes the city's official zoning map.
1.12.2. Maintenance and Updates. The community development director is responsible for directing revisions to the official zoning map to reflect its amendment as soon as possible after the effective date of any zoning map amendments (rezonings) or other actions requiring notation on the zoning map.
1.12.3. Amended Boundaries. When a zoning map amendment is approved, amended boundary lines of districts must be described by legal description or by a map that accompanies the ordinance establishing the district or amending the district boundaries. When a legal description is used, the boundary is deemed to extend to the centerline of abutting streets. When a map is used, boundary lines must be established by dimensions, property lines, recorded lot lines, or the centerline of abutting streets, alleys, or railroad rights-of-way, as those features were of record at the time of adoption.
1.12.4. Map Interpretations. Where any uncertainty exists about a zoning boundary that was established by legal description, the legal description accompanying the amending ordinance governs. In other cases, the community development director is authorized to make an interpretation of the boundaries. The following rules apply to all zoning map interpretations:
A.     Boundaries shown as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, alleys or other public rights-of-way must be construed to follow such centerlines.
B.     Boundaries shown as approximately following platted lot lines must be construed as following such lot lines.
C.     Boundaries shown as approximately following city limit lines must be construed as following those lines.
D.     Boundaries shown as approximately following rail lines must be construed to be midway between the main tracks.
E.     Boundaries shown as approximately following the shoreline or centerline of a river, stream, lake or other watercourse must be construed as following the actual shoreline or centerline of the watercourse. If, after establishment of the boundary, the shoreline or centerline of the watercourse moves as a result of natural processes (flooding, erosion, sedimentation, etc.), the boundary must be construed as moving with the shoreline or centerline of the watercourse.
F.     Where physical features on the ground are at odds with information shown on the zoning map, or if questions arise about how or whether property is zoned and the question cannot be resolved by the application of paragraphs A through E of this subsection or the zoning of property is invalidated by a final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, the property remains zoned in accordance with the ordinance immediately preceding the invalidated one.
1.12.5. Right-of-Way Vacations. Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the city council or whenever street or alley area is franchised for building purposes, the zoning boundary line adjoining each side of such street, alley or other public way is extended to the centerline of such vacated street, alley or way, and all area so involved will be subject to all regulations of the extended zoning district.
Sec. 1.13.     Transitional Provisions
The provisions of this section address the transition to this zoning ordinance, from the zoning ordinance in effect immediately before the effective date specified in Section 1.3.
1.13.1. Completion of Building. Any building, development or structure for which a building permit was issued or a complete building permit application had been accepted for processing before the effective date specified in Section 1.3 may be completed in conformance with the issued building permit and other applicable permits and conditions, even if such building, development or structure does not comply with provisions of this zoning ordinance. If the building, development or structure is not commenced and completed within the time allowed under the original building permit and any authorized permit extension, the building, development or structure may be constructed, completed and occupied only if it complies with the regulations of this zoning ordinance.
1.13.2. Pending Approvals. Complete applications for variances, special exceptions, specific use permits, planned development districts and other zoning-related matters that are pending approval on the effective date specified in Section 1.3 must be reviewed wholly under the terms of the zoning ordinance in effect immediately preceding the effective date specified in Section 1.3.
1.13.3. Issuance of Permits. The community development director is authorized to issue permits for construction or development approved before the effective date specified in Section 1.3 and for approved developments that were pending approval before that effective date, subject to all applicable conditions of the approval. If construction of development is not commenced and completed within the time allowed under the permit and any authorized permit extension, then the building, development or structure may be constructed, completed and occupied only if it complies with the regulations of this zoning ordinance.
1.13.4. Violations. The adoption of this zoning ordinance does not affect any pending or future prosecution of, or action to abate, violations of the previous zoning ordinance that occurred before the effective date specified in Section 1.3.
Sec. 1.14.     Severability
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this zoning ordinance are severable. If any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section is declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction that portion of the ordinance is to be deemed severed from the zoning ordinance and in no way affects or diminishes the validity of the remainder of the zoning ordinance.
Article 2. Residential Districts
Sec. 2.1.     Districts
The residential zoning districts are listed in Table 2-1. When the provisions of this zoning ordinance refer to “residential” districts they are referring to these districts.
Table 2-1: Residential Districts
District Name	Map Symbol
Single-family detached dwelling district 1	SF-1
Single-family detached dwelling district 2	SF-2
Single-family detached dwelling district 3	SF-3
Single-family detached dwelling district 4	SF-4
Single-family attached dwelling district	SFA
Duplex dwelling district 1	D-1
Duplex dwelling district 2	D-2
Multiple-family dwelling district 1	MF-1
Multiple-family dwelling district 2	MF-2
Multiple-family dwelling district 3	MF-3

Sec. 2.2.     Purpose
The residential districts are intended to accommodate single-family detached and attached houses, duplexes, and multiple-family buildings. The regulations for these districts are intended to maintain and promote the desired physical character of existing neighborhoods.
Sec. 2.3.     Additional Regulations
2.3.1. Uses. Uses are allowed in single-family districts in accordance with Article 5.
2.3.2. Tree Preservation. See Article 3.08 of the Code of Ordinances for tree preservation regulations.
Sec. 2.4.     SF District Regulations
2.4.1. References. When the provisions of this zoning ordinance refer to “single-family” or “SF” districts, they are referring to SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, and SF-4 districts.
2.4.2. Lot of Record Prior to Adoption. The minimum dimensional and intensity standards for the SF districts shall be in accordance with Section 2.4, except for any lot that was an official lot of record before the effective date specified in Section 1.3. See also the nonconforming lot provisions of Section 10.3.2.
2.4.3. Lot and Building Zones. For the purpose of presenting SF lot and building regulations, lots are divided into a series of smaller segments or “zones,” as described in this subsection and illustrated in Figure 2-1.
A.     Overall Lot. Some regulations apply to the entire lot. These regulations are referred to as “overall lot” regulations and are presented in Section 2.4.4.
B.     Street-Yard Zone. Street-yard zone regulations govern the area between any lot line abutting a street right-of-way and the minimum front or street-side setback line (see Section 2.4.5).
C.     Main-House Zone. The main-house zone accommodates the greatest building mass. The zone extends from the back of the street-yard zone rearward to the mid-lot zone (see Section 2.4.6).
D.     Mid-Lot Zone. The mid-lot zone lies immediately at the back of the main-house zone and extends rearward to the rear lot zone. Portions of the principal building may be located in this zone, but the regulations are more stringent than in the main-house zone (see Section 2.4.7).
E.     Rear-Lot Zone. The rear-lot zone covers the rearmost portion of the lot, typically abutting an alley. The rear-lot zone extends from the rear lot line forward for a distance of 40 feet (see Section 2.4.8).
Figure 2-1: SF District Lot Zones
 
2.4.4. Overall Lot. The overall lot regulations of Table 2-2 apply in SF districts.
 
Table 2-2: Overall Lot Regulations
Regulation	SF-1	SF-2	SF-3	SF-4
Lot Size
(A) Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)	35,000	10,000	8,400	7,000
(B) Minimum Lot Width (ft.)	150	70	60	50
(C) Minimum Lot Depth (ft.)	150	120	120	120
Buildings
(D) Maximum Number of Principal Buildings	1	1	1	1
(E) Principal Building Orientation	Principal building must face a street other than alley
(F) Permitted Accessory Structures	See Section 5.3.2
(G) Garage, Carport Location, Orientation	See Article 7
(H) Maximum Building Coverage from Midpoint of the Lot to the Rear Lot Line (%) [1]	50
(I) Maximum Impermeable Lot Coverage	See Section 2.9
Building Height [2]
(J) Maximum Principal Building Height (ft.)	35	35	35	35
(K) Maximum Accessory Building Height (ft.)	25	25	25	25
Minimum Interior Side Setback (ft.)
(L) One side (% of lot width) [3]	10	10	10	10
Both sides combined (% of lot width) [3] [4]	24	24	24	24
(M) Permitted Encroachments	See Section 2.10

TABLE NOTES:
[1]     Building coverage includes all principal and accessory buildings, and all structures 30 inches or more above grade.
[2]     See Section 11.3.12 for building height measurement rules.
[3]     If the entire structure is 1 story, the minimum side yard may be 10% of the total lot width on each side yard.
[4]     Minimum combined setback of 22% applies to lot less than 60 feet in width.
2.4.5. Street-Yard Zone. The street-yard zone regulations of Table 2-3 apply in SF districts.
 
Table 2-3: Street-Yard Zone Regulations
Regulation	SF-1	SF-2	SF-3	SF-4
Location
(A) Street-Yard Zone Location	Between any lot line abutting a street and the minimum front or streetside setback line
Street Setbacks
(B) Minimum Front Setback (ft.) [1]	50	30	30	25
	Average front setback distance applies per [1]
(C) Minimum Street-Side Setback (ft.) [2]	10	10	10	10
(D) Permitted Encroachments	See Section 2.10
(E) Maximum Impermeable Coverage (%)	50
Building Locations
(F) Front Facade Articulation	See Section 2.4.9
(G) Building Coverage	No building is allowed in the street-yard zone except as permitted by encroachments and front facade articulations

TABLE NOTES:
[1]     Refer to the city's list of average front setbacks, available online. See average front setback regulations of Section 11.3.8 when the average existing building setback on a block face is greater or less than the minimums of this table.
[2]     Corner lots with a width of 60 feet or less may have a minimum street-side setback of 10% of lot width if the distance between the curb and sidewalk is 5 feet or more, the sidewalk width is 4 feet or more, and the front setback complies with minimum front setback regulations.
[3]     Garages, carports, or similar vehicle storage areas facing a side street shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the street right-of-way. See Article 7.
2.4.6. Main-House Zone. The main-house zone regulations of Table 2-4 apply in SF districts.
 
Table 2-4: Main-House Zone Regulations
Regulation	SF-1	SF-2	SF-3	SF-4
Location
(A) Main-House Zone Location	From back of street-yard zone rearward for a distance equal to 42% of the overall lot depth [1]
Wall Height
(B) Maximum Top Plate Height (ft.) [2]	Lots 70 ft. to less than 80 ft. in width: 25
Lots 60 ft. to less than 70 ft. in width: 24
Lots less than 60 ft. in width: 23
Building Coverage
(C) Building Coverage	Building may fully occupy the main-house zone with the exception of any setbacks
Third Story
(D) Maximum 3rd Story Area	50% of total 2nd floor area
(E) Minimum Habitable Area Requiring at least 2 Exit Stairs (sq. ft.) [3]	501	501	501	501
(F) Maximum 3rd Story Wall Area facing Interior Side Lot Line (sq. ft.) [3]	200	180	165	135
(G) Third Story Windows and Dormers Facing Interior Side Lot Line	See section 2.8.2

TABLE NOTES:
[1]     The beginning point of measurement of the 42% maximum side wall length may be set back from the street-yard zone if there is an offset in the wall a minimum of 8 feet from the minimum side yard setback.
[2]     No maximum top plate height applies to lots 80 feet or greater in width.
[3]     Third story wall area includes vertical walls, gable walls, and all sides of dormers.
2.4.7. Mid-Lot Zone. The mid-lot zone regulations of Table 2-5 apply in SF districts.
 
Table 2-5: Mid-Lot Zone Regulations
Regulation	SF-1	SF-2	SF-3	SF-4
Location
(A) Mid-Lot Zone Location	From the rear of main-house zone per Section 2.4.6 to front of rear-lot zone
Walls Facing Interior Side Lot Lines [1] [2]
(B) Maximum Wall Height at Min. Interior Side Setback (ft.)	12.5	12.5	12.5	12.5
(C) Additional Wall Height above 12.5 ft.	2 ft. additional height per 1 ft. of additional side setback
Building Coverage
(D) Building Coverage	See Section 2.4.4 for maximum coverage limits from midpoint of lot to rear lot line
Third Story
(E) Maximum 3rd Story Floor Area	50% of total 2nd floor area
(F) Minimum Habitable Area Requiring at least 2 Exit Stairs	501	501	501	501
(G) Maximum 3rd Story Wall Area facing Interior Side Lot Line (sq. ft.) [3]	200	180	165	135
(H) Third Story Windows and Dormers Facing Interior Side Lot Line	See Section 2.8.2

TABLE NOTES:
[1]     Wall height is measured from the finished first floor elevation to the top plate per Section 11.3.13.
[2]     See Section 2.8.1 for roof pitches that are considered walls.
[3]     Third story wall area includes vertical walls, gable walls, and all sides of dormers.
2.4.8. Rear-Lot Zone. The rear-lot zone regulations of Table 2-6 apply in SF districts.
 
Table 2-6: Rear-Lot Zone Regulations
Regulation	SF-1	SF-2	SF-3	SF-4
Location
(A) Rear-Lot Zone Location	From rear lot line forward for distance of 40 ft.
(B) Minimum Rear Setback (ft.) except Garage Door (see C below)	12.5	12.5	12.5	12.5
(C) Minimum Rear Garage Door Setback (ft.)[1]	20	20	20	20
Walls Heights [2] [3]
(D) Maximum Wall Height (ft.)	12.5	12.5	12.5	12.5
(E) Additional Wall Height above 12.5 ft.	Allowed when part of gable or dormer and set back minimum 20 ft. from interior side lot line
(F) Windows, Dormers, Openings Above 12.5 ft. Wall Height	Allowed when set back minimum 20 feet from the interior side lot line
Building Coverage
(G) Building Coverage	See Section 2.4.4 for maximum coverage limits from midpoint of lot to rear lot line

TABLE NOTES:
[1]     See Article 7. for garage and carport regulations.
[2]     Wall height is measured from finished first floor elevation to the top plate per Section 11.3.13.
[3]     See Section 2.8.1 for roof pitches that are considered walls.
[4]     See Section 5.3.2 for regulations governing accessory structures allowed in the rear-lot zone, including pools.
2.4.9. Front Facade Articulation
A.     Purpose and Applicability. The front facade articulation provisions of this subsection are intended to encourage multiple planes on the front street-facing facade of houses. The provisions apply to houses in SF districts.
B.     Permitted Facade Encroachments.
1.     Up to 60% of the width of a house's front facade may encroach into (forward of) the required front setback by up to 2 feet if the remaining portion of the house's front facade is set back at least one foot more than the minimum front setback. One example of this front setback encroachment allowance is illustrated in Figure 2-2.
2.     If a portion of a house's front facade is set back 3 feet or more beyond the minimum front street setback, the main-house zone is allowed to extend up to 3 feet into the mid-lot zone or the rear-lot zone when no mid-lot zone exists. The width of the house's main-house extension may not exceed the width of the portion of the front facade that is set back 3 feet or more beyond the minimum front street setback. Permitted rear yard encroachments are illustrated in Figure 2-3.
Figure 2-2: Permitted Front Facade Articulation Encroachments
 
Figure 2-3: Permitted Front Facade Articulation Encroachments with Rear Yard Encroachment
 
Sec. 2.5.     SF-A District Regulations
2.5.1. Lot Zones. For the purpose of presenting SF-A lot and building regulations, lots are divided into a series of smaller areas or “zones,” as described in this subsection and illustrated in Figure 2-4.
A.     Overall Lot. Some regulations apply to the entire lot. These regulations are referred to as “overall lot” regulations and are presented in Section 2.5.2.
B.     Street-Yard Zone. Street-yard zone regulations govern the area between any lot line abutting a street and the minimum front or street-side setback line (see Section 2.5.3).
C.     Main-House Zone. The main-house zone accommodates the greatest building mass. The zone extends from the back of the street-yard zone to the rear-lot zone (see Section 2.5.4).
D.     Rear-Lot Zone. The rear-lot zone covers the rearmost portion of the lot, typically abutting an alley. The rear-lot zone extends from the main-house zone to the rear lot line (see Section 2.5.5).
Figure 2-4: SF District Lot Zones
 
2.5.2. Overall Lot. The overall lot regulations of Table 2-7 apply in SF-A districts.
 
Table 2-7: Overall Lot Regulations
Regulation	SF-A
Lot Size
(A) Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)	3,000 per dwelling unit
(B) Minimum Lot Width (ft.)	25 per dwelling unit
(C) Minimum Lot Depth (ft.)	120
Buildings
(D) Maximum Number of Units per Lot [1]	1
(E) Maximum Number of Dwelling Units Combined [1]	4
(F) Maximum Width of Combined Units (ft.) [1]	130
(G) Principal Building Orientation	Principal building's front facade must face a street
(H) Permitted Accessory Structures	See Section 5.3.2
(I) Garage, Carport Location, Orientation	See Article 7.
(J) Maximum Building Coverage from Midpoint of the Lot to the Rear Lot Line (%) [2]	50
(K) Maximum Impermeable Lot Coverage	See Section 2.9
Building Height [3]
(L) Maximum Principal Building Height (ft.)	35
(M) Maximum Accessory Building Height (ft.)	25
Minimum Interior Side Setback (ft.)
(N) Minimum Required Interior Side Yard at the End of each Continuous Row of Attached Dwellings (ft.) [4]	5
(O) Permitted Encroachments	See Section 2.10

TABLE NOTES:
[1]     Each dwelling unit is required to be on its own lot and each attached unit must be separated by a firewall per the building code.
[2]     Building coverage includes all principal and accessory buildings, and all structures 30 inches or more above grade.
[3]     See Section 11.3.12 for building height measurement rules.
[4]     Allowed public and civic uses must provide minimum side setbacks of 50 feet.
2.5.3. Street-Yard Zone. The street-yard zone regulations of Table 2-8 apply in SF-A districts.
 
Table 2-8: Street-Yard Zone Regulations
Regulation	SF-A
Location
(A) Street-Yard Zone Location	Between any lot line abutting a street and the minimum front or street-side setback line
Street Setbacks
(B) Minimum Front Setback (ft.)	25
(C) Minimum Street-Side Setback (ft.) [1] [2]	10
(D) Permitted Encroachments	See Section 2.10
(E) Maximum Impermeable Coverage (%)	50
Building Locations
(F) Building Coverage	No building is allowed in the street-yard zone except as permitted by encroachments and front facade articulations

TABLE NOTES:
[1]     Corner lots with a width of 60 feet or less may have a minimum street-side setback of 10% of lot width if the distance between the curb and sidewalk is 5 feet or more, the sidewalk width is 4 feet or more, and the front setback complies with minimum front setback regulations.
[2]     Street-facing garages and carports must be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the street right-of-way. See Article 7.
2.5.4. Main-House Zone. The main-house zone regulations of Table 2-9 apply in SF-A districts.
 
Table 2-9: Main-House Zone Regulations
Regulation	SF-A
Location
(A) Main-House Zone Location	From back edge of the street-yard zone to the rear yard setback defining the rear-lot zone
Wall Height
(B) Maximum Top Plate Height (ft.)	23
Building Coverage
(C) Building Coverage	See Section 2.5.2 for maximum coverage limits from midpoint of lot to rear lot line
Third Story
(D) Maximum 3rd Story Area [1]	50% of total 2nd floor area
(E) Maximum 3rd Story Wall Area facing Interior Side Lot Line (sq. ft.) [2]	200
(F) Third Story Windows and Dormers Facing Interior Side Lot Line	See Section 2.8.2

TABLE NOTES:
[1]     At least 2 interior exit stairways must be provided when the habitable area of a 3rd floor exceeds 500 sq. ft..
[2]     Third story wall area includes vertical walls, gable walls, and all sides of dormers.
2.5.5. Rear-Lot Zone. The rear-lot zone regulations of Table 2-10 apply in SF districts.
 
Table 2-10: Rear-Lot Zone Regulations
Regulation	SF-A
Location
(A) Rear-Lot Zone Location [1]	From rear lot line to the rear setback line
Regulations
(B) Minimum Rear Setback (ft.) except Garage Door (see (C) below)	12.5
(C) Minimum Rear Garage Door Setback (ft.) [2]	20
Building Coverage
(D) Building Coverage	No building is allowed in the rear yard zone except as permitted by encroachments

TABLE NOTES:
[1]     Dedication of required alley right-of-way may be a condition for platting and building permit.
[2]     See Article 7 for garage and carport regulations.
Sec. 2.6.     D District Regulations
2.6.1. Lot and Building Zones. For the purposes of presenting D district lot and building regulations, lots are divided into a series of smaller areas or “zones,” as described in this subsection and illustrated in Figure 2-5.
A.     Overall Lot. Some regulations apply to the entire lot. These regulations are referred to as “overall lot” regulations and are presented in Section 2.6.2.
B.     Street-Yard Zone. Street-yard zone regulations govern the area between any lot line abutting a street and the minimum front or street-side setback line (see Section 2.6.3).
C.     Main-House Zone. The main-house zone accommodates the greatest building mass. The zone extends from the back of the street-yard zone to the rear-lot zone (see Section 2.6.4).
D.     Rear-Lot Zone. The rear-lot zone covers the rearmost portion of the lot, typically abutting an alley. The rear-lot zone extends from the main-house zone to the rear lot line (see Section 2.6.5).
Figure 2-5: D District Lot Zones
 
2.6.2. Overall Lot. The regulations in Table 2-11 apply to all zones of lots in the D districts.
 
Table 2-11: Overall Lot Regulations
Regulation	D-1	D-2
Lot Size
(A) Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)	10,000	7,000
(B) Minimum Lot Width (ft.)	70	50
(C) Minimum Lot Depth (ft.)	120	120
Buildings
(D) Maximum Number of Principal Buildings [1]	1	1
(E) Principal Building Orientation	Principal building must face a street other than alley
(F) Permitted Accessory Structures	See Section 5.3.2
(G) Garage, Carport Location, Orientation	See Article 7
(H) Maximum Building Coverage from Midpoint of the Lot to the Rear Lot Line (%) [2]	50
(I) Maximum Impermeable Lot Coverage	See Section 2.9
Building Height [3]
(J) Maximum Principal Building Height (ft.)	35	35
(K) Maximum Accessory Building Height (ft.)	25	25
Minimum Interior Yard Setbacks
(L) Interior Side Setback (min. % of lot width) [4]	10% or 6 ft., whichever is greater; but not to exceed 8 ft.	10% or 5 ft., whichever is greater; but not to exceed 7 ft.
(M) Permitted Encroachments	See Section 2.10

TABLE NOTES:
[1]     No more than two units are permitted on one lot and must be located in one principal building with each unit separated by a firewall per the building code.
[2]     Building coverage includes all principal and accessory buildings, and all structures 30 inches or more above grade.
[3]     See Section 11.3.12 for building height measurement rules.
[4]     Allowed public and civic uses must provide minimum side setbacks of 50 feet.
2.6.3. Street-Yard Zone. Table 2-12 establishes the regulations for the street-yard zone on D district lots.
 
Table 2-12: Street-Yard Zone Regulations
Regulation	D-1	D-2
Location
(A) Street-Yard Zone Location	Between any lot line abutting a street and the minimum front or street-side setback line
Street Setbacks
(B) Minimum Front Setback (ft.) [1]	25	25
(C) Minimum Street-Side Setback (ft.) [2] [3]	10	10
(D) Permitted Encroachments	See Section 2.10
(E) Maximum Impermeable Coverage (%)	50
Building Locations
[(F)] (E) Building Coverage	No building is allowed in the street-yard zone except as permitted by encroachments

TABLE NOTES:
[1]     The average front setback regulations of Section 11.3.8 apply when the average existing building setback on a block face is greater or less than the minimums of this table.
[2]     Corner lots, 60 ft or less in width, may have a street-side setback of 10% of the lot width, if the distance between the curb and sidewalk is 5 feet or more, the sidewalk width is 4 feet or more, and the front setback is not less than the minimum front setback for the district.
[3]     Street-facing garages and carports must be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the street right-of-way. See Article 7.
2.6.4. Main-House Zone. Table 2-13 establishes the requirements for the main-house zone on D district lots.
 
Table 2-13: Main-House Zone Regulations
Regulation	D-1	D-2
Location
(A) Main-House Zone Location	From the back of the street-yard zone rearward to the rear-lot zone
Wall Height
(B) Maximum Top Plate Height (ft.)	23	23
(C) Maximum 3rd Story Wall Area facing Interior Side Lot Line (sq. ft.) [1]	200	200
(D) Third Story Windows and Dormers Facing Interior Side Lot Lines	See Section 2.8.2
Building Coverage
(E) Building Coverage	See Section 2.6.2 for maximum coverage limits from midpoint of lot to rear lot line

TABLE NOTES:
[1]     Third story wall area includes vertical walls, gable walls, and all sides of dormers.
2.6.5. Rear-Lot Zone. Table 2-14 establishes the regulations for the rear-lot zone on D district lots.
 
Table 2-14: Rear-Lot Zone Regulations
Regulation	D-1	D-2
Location
(A) Rear-Lot Zone Location [1]	From the rear lot line forward to the rear lot setback.
(B) Minimum Rear Lot Setback (ft.) except Garage Door (see (C) below)	12.5	12.5
(C) Minimum Rear Garage Door Setback (ft.)	20
(D) Permitted Encroachments	See Section 2.10
Building
(E) Building Coverage	No building is allowed in the rear-lot zone except as permitted by encroachment

TABLE NOTES:
[1]     Dedication of required alley right-of-way may be a condition for platting and building permit.
Sec. 2.7.     MF District Regulations
2.7.1. Lot and Building Zones. For the purposes of presenting MF district lot and building regulations, lots are divided into a series of smaller areas or “zones,” as described in this subsection and illustrated in Figure 2-1.
A.     Overall Lot. Some regulations apply to the entire lot. These regulations are referred to as “overall lot” regulations and are presented in Section 2.6.2 [Section 2.7.2].
B.     Street-Yard Zone. Street-yard zone regulations govern the area between any lot line abutting a street and the minimum front or street-side setback line (see Section 2.6.3 [Section 2.7.3]). On corner lots, the street-yard zone may be L-shaped. On lots fronting 3 streets, the street-yard zone may be C-shaped. On full block developments, the street-yard zone will surround the development.
C.     Main-Building Zone. The main-building zone accommodates the greatest building mass. The zone extends from the back of the street-yard zone to the rear-lot zone (see Section 2.6.4 [Section 2.7.4]).
D.     Rear-Lot Zone. The rear-lot zone covers the rearmost portion of the lot, typically abutting an alley. The rear-lot zone extends from the main-house zone to the rear lot line (see Section 2.6.5 [Section 2.7.5]).
Figure 2-1: MF District Lot Zones
 
2.7.2. Overall Lot. The regulations in Table 2-15 apply to all zones of lots in the MF districts.
 
Table 2-15: Overall Lot Regulations
Regulation	MF-1	MF-2	MF-3
Lot Size
(A) Minimum Lot Area per Unit (sq. ft.) [1]	2,400	1,800	1,200
(B) Minimum Lot Width (ft.)	60	50	50
(C) Minimum Lot Depth (ft.)	120	120	120
Buildings
(D) Maximum Number of Principal Buildings [2]	Maximum number of dwelling units is determined by dividing the total number of square feet of lot by the minimum lot area per unit.
(E) Permitted Accessory Structures	See Section 5.3.2
(F) Maximum Building Coverage from Midpoint of the Lot to the Rear Lot Line (%) [3]	50
(G) Maximum Impermeable Lot Coverage	See Section 2.9
Building Height [4]
(H) Maximum Principal Building Height (ft.)	35	35	35
(I) Maximum Principal Building Height (ft.) with underground parking	37	37	37
(J) Basement Height	Basements are limited to one level only.
(K) Maximum Accessory Building Height (ft.)	20	20	20

TABLE NOTES:
[1]     Any detached single-family or duplex dwelling to be constructed within the MF districts must meet the minimum lot area requirements for the SF-4 and D-2 districts respectively.
[2]     After calculating the number of units allowed, a fractional remainder does not authorize an additional unit.
[3]     Building coverage includes all principal and accessory buildings, and all structures 30 inches or more above grade.
[4]     See Section 11.3.12 for building height measurement rules.
[5]     See Article 6 for parking regulations.
2.7.3. Street-Yard Zone. Table 2-16 establishes the regulations for the street-yard zone on MF district lots.
 
Table 2-16: Street-Yard Zone Regulations
Regulation	MF-1	MF-2	MF-3
Location
(A) Street-Yard Zone Location	Between any lot line abutting a street and the minimum front building or streetside setback line
Street Setbacks
(B) Minimum Front Building & Basement Setback (ft.) [1]	25	25	25
(C) Minimum Front Below-Grade Parking Garage Setback (ft.) [2] [3]	15	15	15
(D) Minimum Street-Side Setback (ft.) [1]	10	10	10
(E) Minimum Street-Side Below-Grade Parking Garage Setback (ft.) [2] [3]	3	3	3
(F) Permitted Encroachments	See Section 2.10
(G) Maximum Impermeable Coverage (%)	50
Building Locations
(H) Building Coverage	No building is allowed in the street-yard zone except as permitted by encroachments and below-grade parking structures as defined in (C).
(I) Garage Location	Garages, carports, and similar vehicle storage areas may not open on to or face the front or side streets.

TABLE NOTES:
[1]     Minimum front and street-side building and basement setback applies to all below-grade construction except parking garages..
[2]     A 24" deep permeable landscape fill, designed to accommodate shrubs and other landscaping, is required above any parking garage extended beyond the building. In order to encourage parking garages below-grade, this area does not count as building coverage.
[3]     No building projections or other encroachments are permitted in the required setbacks for parking garages.
2.7.4. Main Building Zone. Table 2-17 establishes the requirements for the main building zone on MF district lots.
 
Table 2-17: Main-House Zone Regulations
Regulation	MF-1	MF-2	MF-3
Location
(A) Main Building Zone Location	From the back of the street-yard zone rearward to the rear-lot zone
Minimum Interior Side Setbacks
(B) Minimum Interior-Side Setback: Building & Basement (ft.) [1]	10; except up to 2 side wall segments without doors, each no longer than 35 feet continuous, may have a 6 ft. minimum setback
(C) Minimum Interior-Side Setback: Below-Grade Parking Garage (ft.) [2] [3]	3
(D) Permitted Encroachments	See Section 2.10
(E) Minimum Interior-Side Setback: Garage, Carport, or Similar Vehicle Storage Opening (ft.)	24; with a minimum turning radius of 15 ft. from the driveway to the opening and at the driveway approach
Wall Height & Dormers
(F) Maximum Top Plate Height (ft.)	less than 70-ft lot width: 28
70-ft or greater lot width: 30
(G) Maximum Top Plate Height (ft.) within 100 ft. of SF district lot	less than 70-ft lot width: 23
70-ft or greater lot width: 25
(H) Maximum Top Plate Height (ft.) for elevator tower	less than 70-ft lot width: 26
70-ft or greater lot width: 28
(I) Third Story Dormers Facing Interior Side Lot Lines	See Section 2.8.2

TABLE NOTES:
[1]     Minimum interior side building and basement setback applies to all below-grade construction except parking garages
[2]     A 24" deep permeable landscape fill, designed to accommodate shrubs and other landscaping, is required above any parking garage extended beyond the building. In order to encourage parking garages below-grade, this area does not count as building coverage.
[3]     No building projections or other encroachments are permitted in the required setbacks for parking garages..
2.7.5. Rear-Lot Zone. Table 2-18 establishes the regulations for the rear-lot zone on MF district lots.
 
Table 2-18: Rear-Lot Zone Regulations
Regulation	MF-1	MF-2	MF-3
Location
(A) Rear-Lot Zone Location	From the rear lot line forward to the minimum rear lot setback.	 
(B) Minimum Rear Setback: Building & Basement (ft.) [1]	12.5	12.5	12.5
(C) Minimum Rear Setback: Below-Grade Parking Garage (ft.) [2]	7.5	7.5	7.5
(D) Permitted Encroachments	See Section 2.10
Building
(E) Building Coverage	No building is allowed in the rear-lot zone except as permitted by encroachments and below-grade parking structures as defined in (C).

TABLE NOTES:
[1]     Minimum interior side building and basement setback applies to all below-grade construction except parking garages
[2]     A 24" deep permeable landscape fill, designed to accommodate shrubs and other landscaping, is required above any parking garage extended beyond the building. In order to encourage parking garages below-grade, this area does not count as building coverage.
[3]     No building projections or other encroachments are permitted in the required setbacks for parking garages..
2.7.6. Building Design Features
A.     Applicability. The building design feature regulations of this section apply to buildings in MF zoning districts.
B.     Number of Required Features.
1.     A building facade that is 50 feet or greater in width and that faces or generally faces a public street must incorporate at least 3 of the following building design features:
a.     Building structural elements in accordance with Section 2.4.9.C [Section 2.7.6.C].
b.     Facade variations in accordance with Section 2.4.9.D [Section 2.7.6.D].
c.     Changes in materials or material patterns in accordance with Section 2.4.9.E [Section 2.7.6.E].
d.     Building entries in accordance with Section 2.4.9.F [Section 2.7.6.F].
e.     Architectural features in accordance with Section 2.4.9.G [Section 2.7.6.G].
2.     A building facade that is less than 50 feet in width and that faces or generally faces a public street must incorporate at least 2 of the following building design features:
a.     Building structural elements in accordance with Section 2.4.9.C [Section 2.7.6.C].
b.     Facade variations in accordance with Section 2.4.9.D [Section 2.7.6.D].
c.     Changes in materials or material patterns in accordance with Section 2.4.9.E [Section 2.7.6.E].
d.     Building entries in accordance with Section 2.4.9.F [Section 2.7.6.F].
e.     Architectural features in accordance with Section 2.4.9.G [Section 2.7.6.G].
C.     Building Structural Elements.
1.     Expression of the floor structures on the building facade with design elements not less than 1 inch deep and 4 inches, such as banding, belt courses, and other similar features.
2.     Expression of the vertical support structures on the building facade with design elements not less than 1 inch deep and 6 inches, such as columns, pilasters, piers, quoins, and other similar features.
D.     Facade Variation.
1.     Variations must be at least 3 feet in depth for projections and recesses and at least than 2 stories in height for an area no more than 10% of and no less than 20% of the facade width.
2.     When more than 2 facade variations are provided, they must be separated by a distance of at least 20 feet.
3.     Variations on the front facade may not encroach more than 24 inches into the required front street setback.
E.     Changes in Materials. A change in material or material pattern with a minimum of 1 inch variation in wall plane depth.
F.     Building Entries.
1.     Building entrances must incorporate arcades, roofs, porches, alcoves, or awnings that protect pedestrians from the weather.
2.     The covered entrance area must be at least 2 feet in depth and 8 feet in width.
G.     Architectural Features. A minimum of one of the following per every 60 feet of street facade is required: balcony, fireplace, bay window, patterns of door and window openings (and the use of sills, mullions, and other scale-providing window elements), and/or more pronounced architectural features, such as porches, alcoves, and roof dormers. Refer to Section 2.10.2 for allowed encroachments.
Sec. 2.8.     Roofs and Dormers
2.8.1. Roofs. The roof regulations of Table 2-19 apply to all principal and accessory buildings in SF and D districts and are illustrated in Figure 2-6.
Table 2-19: Roof Regulations
Regulation	LOT WIDTH
	80 ft. or greater	70 ft. to 79 ft.	60 ft. to 69 ft.	less than 60 ft.
Roof Pitch (rise/run)
(A) In mid-lot and rear-lot zones, roofs with pitches greater than the slopes shown are considered a vertical wall.	16/12	16/12	15/12	14/12

2.8.2. Third-Story Dormers. The third-story dormer regulations of Table 2-20 apply in all residential districts and are illustrated in Figure 2-6. All other dormers facing interior side lot lines are subject to any window setback, size, and location requirements for the district.
Table 2-20: Dormer Regulations
Regulation	ALL SF & D DISTRICTS	MF DISTRICTS
Third-Story Dormers Facing Interior Side Lot Lines
(B) Maximum Dormer Width (ft.)	6	6
(C) Minimum Separation Between Dormers, or Between Dormers and Vertical Walls (ft.)	6	6
(D) Minimum Additional Interior Side Setback for Third Story Dormers (ft.)	2.5	not applicable

Figure 2-6: Roofs and Dormers
 
Sec. 2.9.     Impermeable Lot Coverage
2.9.1. Allowable Impermeable Lot Coverage. The regulations of Table 2-21 apply to all residential districts. Allowable impermeable lot coverage refers to the total maximum amount of impermeable surfaces permitted on the subject lot. See Section 11.3.11 for impermeable lot coverage measurement rules.
2.9.2. Street Yard Zone Exemption. Driveways located within the required street-yard zone are not counted in calculating the total impermeable coverage on a lot.
2.9.3. Maximum Impermeable Coverage in Street Yards. Refer to the street-yard zone for each residential district for maximum impermeable surface limits in the streetyard zone.
Table 2-21: Impermeable Lot Coverage
Lot Size (square feet)	Maximum Impermeable Lot Coverage
SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-4 Districts
0 to 6,000	3,600 sq. ft.
6,001 to 7,500	60%
7,501 to 10,000	52% or 4,500 sq. ft., whichever is greater
10,001 to 12,000	48% or 5,200 sq. ft., whichever is greater
12,001 to 35,000	40% or 5,760 sq. ft., whichever is greater
35,001 or more	35% or 4,500 sq. ft., whichever is greater
SF-A, D-1, D-2, MF-1, MF-2, MF-3 Districts
All lot sizes	63%

Sec. 2.10.     Setbacks and Encroachments
2.10.1. General.
A.     Required setbacks must be open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky except as otherwise expressly stated in this ordinance.
B.     Finished grade of setbacks and yards must be within 30 inches of the average natural grade of the lot unless otherwise expressly stated.
C.     All basements and below-grade building elements are subject to compliance with all required setbacks unless otherwise expressly stated.
2.10.2. Allowed Building Encroachments.
A.     Front Setbacks. Except as otherwise expressly stated, the following parts of a principal building may encroach into front setbacks in SF, SF-A, D, and MF districts:
1.     Eaves and roof extensions projecting a maximum of 3 feet;
2.     Bay windows, maximum 8 feet in width, projecting a maximum of 2 feet;
3.     Chimneys, maximum 8 feet in width, projecting a maximum of 1.5 feet;
4.     Unenclosed, covered porches a maximum of 30 inches above average natural grade to finished floor, extending a maximum of 6 feet and with an aggregate width no more than 20% of the lot width;
5.     Unenclosed and uncovered terraces, a maximum of 30 inches above average natural grade to finished floor, extending a maximum of 10 feet into the yard and no wider than the front facade of the principal building (see Figure 2-7);
6.     Balconies extending a maximum of 6 feet and with a width no more than 20% of the lot width;
7.     Decorative, non-wood, non-solid banisters and handrails with at least 3 inches clear vision between vertical posts, maximum one-inch wide vertical posts and maximum 48 inches in overall height (measured from grade) may be placed along the perimeter of an encroaching terrace or porch;
8.     Seat walls up to 2 feet in height are permitted on porches and terraces;
9.     Light wells projecting a maximum of 2 feet; and
10.     Building elements allowed pursuant to the front facade articulation provisions of Section 2.4.9.
B.     Street-Side Setbacks. Except as otherwise expressly stated, the following parts of a principal building may encroach into street-side setbacks in SF, SF-A, and D districts:
1.     Eaves and roof extensions projecting a maximum of 3 feet;
2.     Bay windows, maximum 8 feet in width, projecting a maximum of 2 feet;
3.     Chimneys, maximum 8 feet in width, projecting a maximum of 1.5 feet;
4.     Decorative banisters and handrails no more than 4 feet in height may be placed along the perimeter of an encroaching terrace or porch;
5.     Seat walls are permitted on porches up to 2 feet in height; and
6.     Light wells projecting a maximum of 2 feet.
C.     Interior Side Setbacks. Except as otherwise expressly stated, the following parts of a principal building may encroach into interior side setbacks in SF, SF-A, D, and MF districts:
1.     Window sills, belt courses, cornices, and other architectural features projecting a maximum of one foot;
2.     Eaves and roof extensions projecting a maximum of 1.5 feet;
3.     Chimneys projecting a maximum of 2 feet;
4.     Box or bay windows located a minimum of 2 feet above floor elevation projecting a maximum of one foot with no increase in floor space allowed; and
5.     Light wells projecting a maximum of 2 feet, except when the side setback is greater than 10 feet, in which case light wells may project a maximum of 3 feet. Light wells may include steps and doors.
D.     Rear Setbacks. Except as otherwise expressly stated, the following parts of a principal building may encroach into rear setbacks in SF and SF-A districts:
1.     Window sills, belt courses, cornices, roof overhangs and other architectural features projecting a maximum of 3 feet;
2.     Light wells projecting a maximum of 2 feet; and
3.     Secondary means of ingress and egress from basements at or below grade.
Figure 2-7: Terraces and Balconies Diagrams
 
Article 3. Commercial Districts
Sec. 3.1.     The Districts
The commercial zoning districts are listed in Table 3-1. When the provisions of this zoning ordinance refer to “commercial” districts they are referring to these districts as well as the RC and SC districts, which are included in Section 4.1 and [Section 4.2].
Table 3-1: Commercial Districts
District Name	Map Symbol
Office - 1	O-1
Office - 2	O-2
General Retail	GR
Commercial	C

Note: See Section 4.1 and Section 4.2 for regulations governing “Park Cities Plaza” and “Preston Center East.”
Sec. 3.2.     Uses
Uses are allowed in commercial districts in accordance with Table 5-1.
Sec. 3.3.     Lot and Building Regulations
The lot and building regulations of Table 3-2 apply to all lots and buildings in commercial districts.
Table 3-2: Commercial District Lot and Building Regulations
Regulation	O-1	O-2	GR	C
Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)	5,000	5,000	5,000	5,000
Minimum Lot Width (ft.)	50	50	50	50
Minimum Lot Depth (ft.)	100	100	100	100
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR)	4.0	4.0	1.5[1]	N/A
Max. Impermeable Cover. (% of lot area)	90	90	90	90
Minimum Setbacks (ft)
Front	50% of the height of the building from the centerline of the street or 25 ft. from the front lot line, whichever is less	None [2]	Same as required in O-1 and O-2 [2]
Street Side	10 ft. plus 1 ft. of additional setback for each 2 ft. of building height above 40 ft	0/10 ft when rear lot line abuts SF [2]	[2]
Interior Side	0[3]	0[3]	0[3]	0
Rear	 	 	 	 
Buildings up to 40 feet in height	10 ft. or 20 ft. from centerline of alley, whichever is greater	12.5	12.5
Buildings more than 40 feet in height	1 ft. per 2 ft. of building height or 50 ft. whichever is less	NA	12.5
Maximum Height (ft.)	200	60	40[4]	55

[1]     Applies to portions of building above grade. Maximum FAR of 1.83 applies to buildings with basement occupied by retail use.
[2]     Gasoline pump islands must be set back at least 18 feet from front and street side lot lines.
[3]     Lots abutting an SF district must provide an interior side setback equal to that required in the abutting SF district or 10 feet, whichever is less, provided that lots less than 50 feet in width are exempt from this requirement.
[4]     Air-conditioning equipment, cooling towers, chimneys, radio and television antennae and vent stacks may be extended up to 10 feet above maximum district height limit.
Sec. 3.4.     Additional Regulations
3.4.1. Fences. Fences are prohibited in rear yards of O-1 and O-2 districts abutting alleys. See also Article 8 for additional regulations governing fences.
3.4.2. Mechanical Equipment.
A.     Air-conditioning compressors, cooling towers, swimming pool equipment and similar accessory mechanical equipment must be installed at grade. Such equipment may not be located within the front yard and must be set back at least 5 feet from side lot lines and at least 3 feet from the rear lot line.
B.     When such equipment is located in the street side yard of a corner lot, or in the front half of any lot, it must be completely screened from view of the street by fence, wall, or dense vegetative screening.
C.     In the C district, parapet walls no more than 10 feet in height must shield any roof-mounted mechanical equipment from view at ground level.
3.4.3. Outdoor Storage and Display. Goods, wares and merchandise offered for sale in GR and C districts may not be displayed or stored outside of a building. See Chapter 4, Section 4.01.001 of the Code of Ordinances for Special Event Permit and License Regulations and Chapter 4, Section 4.01.002 for regulations regarding Christmas tree lots.
Article 4. Special Districts
Sec. 4.1.     RC, Retail Center District (Park Cities Plaza)
4.1.1. Uses. Uses are allowed in the RC district in accordance with Table 5-1.
4.1.2. Lot and Building Regulations. The lot and building regulations of this subsection (4.1.2) apply to all lots and buildings in the RC district.
A.     Lot Area, Width and Depth. All lots in the RC district are subject to compliance with all applicable lot area, lot width and lot depth requirements established for Park Cities Plaza.
B.     Building Lines, Setbacks and Easements.
1.     Buildings must comply with the building lines established for Park Cities Plaza.
2.     The alley at the rear of the existing buildings is located on private property, but by prescriptive rights must remain as a utility easement and accessway for delivery purposes.
C.     Height.
1.     The maximum allowed height of buildings and structures in the RC district is 25 feet, except as follows:
a.     One functional cooking chimney up to 35 feet in height is permitted.
b.     Parapet walls up to 31.5 feet in height are permitted to screen mechanical equipment or to support south-facing sign structures approved as part of a special sign district.
c.     One curved metal south-facing sign up to 35 feet in height is permitted if approved as part of a special sign district and if the northfacing side of the sign has a finished surface identical to the south-facing side.
D.     Fences. See Article 8.
E.     Outdoor Display and Storage. Goods, wares and merchandise offered for sale may not be displayed or stored outside of a building in the RC district. See Chapter 4, Section 4.01.001 of the Code of Ordinances for Special Event Permit and License Regulations and Chapter 4, Section 4.01.002 for regulations regarding Christmas Tree Lots.
Sec. 4.2.     SC, Shopping Center District (Preston Center East)
4.2.1. Uses. Uses are allowed in the SC district in accordance with Table 5-1.
4.2.2. Lot and Building Regulations. The lot and building regulations of this subsection (4.2.2) apply to all lots and buildings in the SC district.
A.     Lot Area, Width and Depth. All lots in the SC district are subject to compliance with all applicable lot area, lot width and lot depth requirements established for Park Cities Plaza.
B.     Building Lines and Setbacks.
1.     Except as otherwise expressly stated in the following paragraphs, building lines must comply with the building lines established on the following plat sheets of Dallas County Deed Records, filed 6-10-47 in volume 11, page 217:
a.     Blocks A & J, Varsity Village Addition;
b.     Block E, Varsity Village Addition;
c.     Blocks D & F, Varsity Village Addition;
d.     Blocks B, C, K & G, Varsity Village Addition; and
e.     Block H, Varsity Village Addition, except that a minimum 5-foot building setback is required from the right-of-way line of Wentwood Drive.
C.     Height.
1.     Except as otherwise expressly stated in this section, the maximum allowed building height in the SC district is 75 feet.
2.     Buildings on Block E abutting a residential district may not exceed 25 feet in height.
3.     All portions of a building above 40 feet in height must be set back from lot lines abutting a street by at least one foot for each 2 feet of building height above 40 feet
4.     When elevator equipment, cooling towers, or other mechanical equipment is installed on the roof of a building, such items must be screened from ground-level view by one or both of the following:
a.     A parapet wall not exceeding 10 feet in height; or
b.     On buildings with a height of 60 feet or more, a screening wall or enclosure, at least equal in height to the top of the equipment but not exceeding 20 feet in height measured from the top of the roof of the building, may be used to screen such equipment from ground level view, provided that the height of such wall or enclosure follows a slope of 1 foot in vertical height to 2 feet of horizontal setback starting at a point at least 10 feet in height above the exterior wall of the building. The screening wall or enclosure must be constructed with the same or similar materials as used on the exterior facade of the principal building.
5.     Buildings on Block H may not exceed 18 feet in height when located within 23 feet of the Wentwood Drive right-of-way.
D.     Parking.
1.     At the time that streets were dedicated to the city, parking on city right-of-way was allowed to be included in calculating off-street parking requirements.
2.     The parking district on Wentwood Avenue south of the SC district is included in the calculation of off-street parking provided. Parking in this district is limited to surface and/or underground parking.
3.     The following 3 parking areas with the SC district may not be converted to any other use unless equivalent off-street parking is otherwise provided on an adjacent lot or building:
a.     East portion of Block D;
b.     North portion of Block E; and
c.     South portion of Block J.
E.     Fences. See Article 8.
F.     Outdoor Display and Storage. Goods, wares and merchandise offered for sale may not be displayed or stored outside of a building in the SC district. See Chapter 4, Section 4.01.001 of the Code of Ordinances for Special Event Permit and License Regulations and Chapter 4, Section 4.01.002 for regulations regarding Christmas Tree Lots.
Sec. 4.3.     UC, University Campus Districts
4.3.1. Purpose. The UC (University Campus) districts are intended to accommodate buildings and facilities associated with Southern Methodist University (SMU).
4.3.2. Uses. Uses are allowed in UC districts in accordance with Table 5-1.
4.3.3. Lot and Building Regulations. The lot and building regulations of Table 4-1 apply to all lots and buildings in UC districts.
Table 4-1: UC District Lot and Building Regulations
Regulation	UC-1	UC-2	UC-3	UC-4
Min. Lot Area (sq. ft.)	N/A	5,000	5,000	7,000
Min Lot Width (ft.)	N/A	50	50	50
Min. Lot Depth (ft.)	N/A	100	100	180
Max Impermeable Coverage (% of lot)	90	90	90	90
Minimum Setbacks (ft.)
Front [see also Section 4.3.4]	25	25	25	25
Side [see also Section 4.3.4]	15 [1]	10	10	10
Rear [see also Section 4.3.4]	5[1]	10	10	12.5
Maximum Height (ft.) [see also Section 4.3.4]
Residential	120	42	35	35
Nonresidential	120	55	35	35

[1]     Applies only to sites abutting non-UC zoning districts. No setback required for sites abutting other UC districts.
4.3.4. Supplemental Height and Setback Regulations.
A.     UC-1 District. Side and rear setback requirements for buildings on lots abutting non-UC-1-zoned lots must be increased by at least 2 additional feet for each foot of building height above 40 feet.
B.     UC-2 District. The following supplemental height and setback requirements apply in the UC-2 district.
1.     When the block face between 2 intersecting streets is divided by 2 or more zoning districts, the minimum front setback regulation of the most restrictive district on the block face applies to the entire block face.
2.     Side and rear setback requirements for buildings on lots abutting SF or D districts must be increased by one foot for each 2 feet of building height above 35 feet. This supplemental setback regulation does not apply to UC-2 zoned lots separated from SF or D-zoned lots by a public street.
C.     UC-3 District. The following supplemental height and setback requirements apply in the UC-3 district.
1.     When the block face between 2 intersecting streets is divided by 2 or more zoning districts, the minimum front setback regulation of the most restrictive district on the block face applies to the entire block face.
2.     Buildings on lots fronting on Dublin Street must be constructed so that the front or side of the building faces Dublin Street.
3.     The minimum front and street side setback requirement for lots abutting Dublin Street is 35 feet.
4.     Buildings on lots with frontage on Dublin Street may not exceed 35 feet in height, provided that buildings up to a maximum of 42 feet in height are allowed when an additional one foot of building setback is provided for each one foot of building height above 35 feet.
D.     UC-4 District. The following supplemental height and setback requirements apply in the UC-4 district.
1.     When the block face between 2 intersecting streets is divided by 2 or more zoning districts, the minimum front setback regulation of the most restrictive district on the block face applies to the entire block face.
2.     The minimum required interior side setback is 10 feet or 10% of lot width, whichever is less.
3.     The minimum required street side setback is 10 feet or 10% of lot width, whichever is greater.
4.3.5. Off-Street Parking.
A.     General.
1.     The purpose of this section is to assure that adequate parking spaces are maintained by Southern Methodist University by setting a minimum number of parking spaces required for an established university population and requiring additional parking spaces should the university population increase.
2.     The following population numbers are to be full-time equivalents (FTE) as defined by the university. The university must provide and maintain at least 5,723 parking spaces.
3.     If either the daytime or evening university population exceeds 9,770, the university must provide and maintain new parking spaces in the proportion of 0.5 parking spaces for each additional student and 0.8 parking spaces for each additional faculty or staff member.
4.     To verify that the required number of parking spaces exist on the campus, the university must submit annually a map of the UC zoning districts indicating the total number of spaces in each district. A summary of the spaces with locations specified and a summary of the annual maximum evening and daytime populations of the university for the immediately preceding year must be submitted with the required map.
5.     The map and summaries must be filed with the community development director, and once verified, will become a part of the university's required annual parking report. Thereafter, whenever for any reason a parking space is eliminated anywhere in the University Campus zoned districts, the university must concurrently add a replacement space within a UC zoning district.
6.     On or before June 30, 2003, and annually thereafter on or before the same date, the university must submit to the community development director an annual parking report in accordance with the provisions of this section.
7.     If the annual parking report demonstrates full compliance with the requirements of this section, it must be received and filed by the community development director and acknowledgment given the university of such compliance.
8.     If violations of this section exist or are demonstrated by the annual parking report, the community development director must immediately give notice in writing of such violation to the university. Upon receipt of such notice, the university must, within 30 days either:
a.     Demonstrate to the satisfaction of the community development director that the university is in compliance with the requirements of this section; or
b.     Submit a plan satisfactory to the community development director for the correction of violations within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 60 days, acceptable to the community development director. Upon acceptance of the plan, the university must follow the plan to completion to correct such violation within the time allowed.
9.     If the university fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this section or the plan submitted and approved by the community development director, it will be subject to all the remedies and penalties provided by this zoning ordinance or otherwise authorized by law.
10.     Concurrently with the submission of the annual parking report, the university must also submit the university's operational plan for the shuttle bus system to be implemented the following academic year and a statement describing the utilization of the shuttle bus system under the current operational plans.
11.     All parking spaces in UC districts are to comply with the parking space dimensional standards of this zoning ordinance. Up to 33% of the parking spaces in each parking lot may be smaller spaces designated for small size cars.
B.     Parking Space Credit for Transit. In determining parking requirements under this section, the university is entitled to credit for parking spaces required beyond the minimum for faculty, staff, and students who reside in a zip code served by a DART rail park and ride station or a zip code adjacent to such park and ride station, excluding students who reside in zip codes 75225, 75275 and 75205, as follows:
Table 4-2: Parking Credit for Transit
Permitted Credit	Reduction (%)
Students	15
Faculty	10
Staff	15

C.     Parking For Ford Stadium.
1.     Provided SMU maintains an annual inventory of parking spaces as required by this section, Ford Stadium may host events (as hereinafter described) so long as spectator admissions to the events do not exceed 22,892. For events that exceed 22,892 spectator admissions, the university must provide one additional parking space for every 4 additional spectator admissions that the university can reasonably anticipate. In the event sufficient additional spaces are not included in the annual report to the city, the number of additional required spaces may be provided at a remote location so long as no fee is charged to the spectators for such remote parking. The university may include in its plan that 25% of the required additional spectators anticipated will be served by the DART Rail System and that no additional parking spaces will be required for that number of seats.
2.     Before hosting any event at which more than 22,892 spectator admissions are expected, a written plan for the use of remote parking must be submitted to the city manager and city attorney for review in accordance with the requirements of this section. The plan will be deemed approved only if notice of approval is given in writing by the city manager. If the city manager fails to approve the plan within 15 days of its submission, the university may submit the plan to the planning and zoning commission for review and then to the city council for approval or denial. The plan must provide the following:
a.     Statement of the number of spectator admissions that the university reasonably anticipates being in attendance. [Note: 10 business days after the completion of each event, the university must file with the city manager for each such event the actual number of spectators in attendance.]
b.     Binding contracts with the providers of the remote parking spaces.
c.     Free shuttle bus service to Ford Stadium from remote parking and return, including description of bus routes and schedule.
d.     Description of how the university plans to inform the public attending the events of the remote parking,
e.     Description of how the university plans to locate appropriate signage directing the attending public to the remote parking.
f.     Description of how the university plans to provide advance notice to visiting colleges and universities.
g.     Location and operation of a command post which must make provision for assistance to the attending public for emergency services and recovery of towed vehicles.
h.     Adequate security and traffic-control personnel.
D.     Construction of Parking Spaces. Parking spaces or surfaced parking areas may not be located or constructed to allow any portion of a vehicle to touch or overhang the property line of the lot on which the parking is located. Tandem parking spaces or parking spaces or facilities containing 2 or more spaces and that require the moving of one parked vehicle in order to utilize such spaces, will be counted as a single parking space in computing off-street parking.
E.     Site Plan Approval. In UC districts, removal or reduction of off-street required parking spaces or area in excess of 30 parking spaces may not be undertaken until a site plan delineating such proposed removal or reduction and provisions for replacement of such spaces or area is reviewed and approved by the community development director.
F.     District-Specific Parking Regulations.
1.     In the UC-3 District, surface parking is allowed only as accessory to an adjacent use. Nonaccessory surface parking lots are prohibited in the UC-3 district.
2.     Only required off-street parking is permitted in the UC-4 district.
4.3.6. Other Regulations
A.     Control of Runoff. The regulations of Chapter 3, Art. 3.100 [Art. 3.02, Divisions 2 and 3] of the Code of Ordinances apply in UC districts when the runoff water does not enter the storm sewer system maintained by SMU in the original main campus.
B.     Residential Protection. When new development occurs in the UC-4 District, a solid screening wall at least 8 feet in height must be installed along any alley that is adjacent to private residential uses. New single-family uses are exempt from the requirement to install such screening walls,[.]
C.     Fences and Walls. See Article 8.
D.     Access. No rear-entry alley access is allowed for lots in the UC-4 district, except for access to lots occupied by single-family dwellings.
E.     Screening. Dumpsters, mechanical equipment, loading areas and similar service facilities In the UC-3 district must be screened from view from any point on Dublin Street by a solid wall.
F.     Accessory Uses and Structures. See Section 5.3.
G.     Ford Stadium.
1.     The following temporary uses and occasional activities are permitted in Ford Stadium:
a.     Collegiate activities sponsored and approved by SMU;
b.     High school football playoff games;
c.     High school football games other than playoff games provided that such games are limited to 2 calendar days per academic year with no more than 2 games played per day;
d.     Football and soccer youth league events; and
e.     Any event for which no admission is charged and for which fewer than 500 spectators will be admitted.
2.     Uses and events primarily providing musical entertainment over an electronically amplified speaker system are prohibited in Ford Stadium.
Sec. 4.4.     P, Parking District
4.4.1. Uses. Uses are allowed in P districts in accordance with Table 5-1.
4.4.2. Lot and Building Regulations. The lot and building regulations of Table 4-3 apply to all lots and buildings in P districts.
Table 4-3: UC District Lot and Building Regulations
Regulation	P District
Minimum Lot Width (ft.)	50
Minimum Lot Depth (ft.)	100
Max. Impermeable Coverage (% of lot)	90
Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)	5,000
Minimum Front Setback (ft.)	See Section 4.4.4
Minimum Side Setback (ft.)	See Section 4.4.5
Minimum Rear Setback (ft.)	See Section 4.4.5
Maximum Height (ft.)	35

4.4.3. General Regulations.
A.     Only surface parking lots are allowed on lots that abut SF districts.
B.     A 2.5-foot tall masonry wall is required in all areas where parking spaces are adjacent to the property line.
C.     Parking lot paving must be set back at least 3 feet from all lot lines.
4.4.4. Supplemental Setback Regulations. Buildings must provide a minimum front setback of 25 feet or the most restrictive front setback requirement that applies to any zoning district on the same block face, whichever is distance is greater.
4.4.5. Residential Protection. When a P zoning district abuts a residential zoning district, a minimum setback of 10 feet must be provided on the side (or rear) of the lot abutting the residential district.
4.4.6. Fences and Walls. See Article 8.
4.4.7. Accessory Uses and Structures. See Section 5.3.
Sec. 4.5.     PD, Planned Development District
4.5.1. Purpose and Intent.
A.     The PD, Planned Development district is intended to:
1.     Ensure adequate public review of major development proposals;
2.     Encourage unified planning and development;
3.     Promote economically beneficial development patterns that are compatible with the character of existing neighborhoods;
4.     Ensure a level of amenities appropriate for the nature and scale of the project; and
5.     Allow flexibility in application of selected use, lot, building and development regulations to promote high-quality building and site design.
B.     Different types of PDs will promote different planning goals. In general, however, PDs are intended to promote one or more of the following objectives:
1.     Flexibility and creativity in responding to changing social, economic and market conditions allowing greater public benefits than could be achieved using conventional zoning regulations;
2.     Efficient and economical provision of public facilities and services;
3.     High-quality buildings and improvements that are compatible with surrounding areas, as determined by their arrangement, massing, form, character and landscaping;
4.     Protection and enhancement of open space amenities and natural resource features;
5.     Best management practices in stormwater management, including low-impact development (LID) approaches that provide aesthetic, flood protection and water-quality benefits;
6.     Sustainable development practices focusing on energy efficiency; and
7.     Attractive, high-quality landscaping, lighting, architecture and signage.
4.5.2. Mandatory PD Thresholds. All of the following require review and approval of PD zoning in accordance with the procedures of Section 9.5:
A.     New buildings with a gross floor area of more than 40,000 square feet;
B.     Expansions of existing buildings by more than 40,000 square feet;
C.     New uses or expansions of existing uses that are required to provide more than 200 off-street parking spaces under the minimum off-street parking regulation of Article 6; and
D.     Any other use or activity expressly identified as requiring PD zoning under this zoning ordinance.
4.5.3. Elective PD Thresholds. Applicants for developments that do not meet the criteria for a mandatory planned development may nonetheless elect to request approval of PD zoning if the proposed development is for a public or civic use or is located on a development site that is at least 30,000 square feet in area.
4.5.4. Procedure. PD zoning map amendments must be approved in accordance with the procedures of Section 9.5.
4.5.5. Zoning Map. Approved PDs must be identified on the zoning map.
4.5.6. Allowed Uses. The uses to be allowed in a PD must be identified as part of the PD approval process, along with all applicable conditions or supplemental use regulations that apply to such uses.
4.5.7. Lot and Building Regulations. Lot and building regulations applicable to PD zoning districts must be established as part of the PD zoning approval process (see Section 9.5).
4.5.8. Other Regulations. Unless otherwise expressly approved by the city council as part of the PD approval process, PDs are subject to all applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance. The planning and zoning commission is authorized to recommend and the city council is authorized to approve PDs that deviate from strict compliance with the regulations of this zoning ordinance.
Article 5. Uses
Sec. 5.1.     Principal Uses
5.1.1. Table of Allowed Uses. Principal uses are allowed in accordance with Table 5-1.
5.1.2. Interpreting the Use Table.
A.     Use Classification System. Uses are listed in the first column of Table 5-1. This zoning ordinance classifies uses into categories and subcategories, which are defined in Section 5.2. In some cases, specific use types are listed in addition to the use categories and subcategories. The “definitions/regulations” (final) column of Table 5-1 includes a cross-reference to the applicable use definition and any applicable supplemental use regulations.
B.     Permitted Uses.
1.     Uses identified with a “*” are permitted as-of-right in the subject zoning district.
2.     Permitted uses are subject to compliance with any supplemental regulations identified in the final column of Table 5-1 and with all other applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance.
C.     Specific Use Permits. Uses identified with an “S” may be allowed in the subject zoning district if reviewed and approved in accordance with the specific use permit procedures of Section 9.4. These uses are subject to compliance with any supplemental regulations identified in the final column of Table 5-1 and with all other applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance.
D.     Prohibited Uses. Uses identified with an “–” are expressly prohibited. Uses that are not listed in the table and that cannot be reasonably interpreted (as stated in Section 5.2.5) to fall within any defined use category or subcategory are also prohibited.
E.     Supplemental Regulations. The “definitions/regulations” column of Table 5-1 includes a cross-reference to the use definition and any applicable supplemental use regulations that apply to the subject use. Unless otherwise expressly stated, compliance with supplemental use regulations is required regardless of whether the use is permitted as-of-right or requires specific use permit approval.
F.     Accessory and Temporary Uses. Accessory and temporary uses are not regulated by Table 5-1. Customary accessory uses are allowed in conjunction with principal uses permitted by right or by specific use permit, subject to compliance with all applicable accessory use regulations of Section 5.3. Temporary uses are addressed in Section 5.4.
Table 5-1: Use Table
USE CATEGORY	SF 1-4	SF A	D 1-2	MF 1-3	O 1-2	GR	RC	SC	C	P	UC	Definitions
Use Subcategory
Specific use type											1	2	3	4	Regulations
* = use permitted as of right | S = specific use permit required | – = prohibited use
RESIDENTIAL
Household Living	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	5.2.6-A
Detached house	*	*	*	*	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	*	*	 
Attached house	–	*	*	*	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	*	S	 
Duplex	–	–	*	*	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	*	S	 
Apartment	–	–	–	*	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	 
Apartment (faculty or graduate student)	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	*	*	S	S	 
Group Living	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	5.2.6-B
Community home	*	*	*	*	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	 
Fraternity, sorority, dormitory	–	*	*	*	–	–	–	–	–	–	*	*	–	–	 
Nursing home	–	–	–	S	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	 
PUBLIC, CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL
College or University	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	*	*	–	–	5.2.7-A
Community Center	–	S	S	S	*	*	*	*	*	–	*	*	–	–	5.2.7-B
Fraternal Organization or Private Club	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	*	–	*	*	–	–	5.2.7-C
Governmental Service (not otherwise classified)	–	S	S	S	S	*	*	*	*	–	*	*	S	S	5.2.7-D
Library or Cultural Exhibit	–	S	S	S	*	*	*	*	*	–	*	*	S	S	5.2.7-E
Parks and Recreation (except as below)	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	–	*	*	–	–	5.2.7-F
Athletic field (intramural or intercollegiate)	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	*	*	S	S	 
Philanthropic Institutions	–	–	–	–	S	S	S	S	S	–	S	S	S	S	 
Religious Assembly	S	S	S	S	*	*	*	*	*	–	*	*	–	–	5.2.7-G
Safety Service	–	–	S	S	*	*	*	*	*	–	*	*	–	–	5.2.7-H
School	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	5.2.7-I
Private	–	–	S	S	*	*	*	*	*	–	*	*	–	–	 
Public	–	S	S	S	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	 
Utilities and Public Service Facilities	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Minor	S	S	S	S	S	S	S	S	S	S	S	S	S	S	5.2.7-J
Major	–	–	–	–	S	S	S	S	S	S	S	S	S	S	5.2.7-K
Wireless Communications Facility	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	5.2.7-L
Freestanding tower	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	*	–	*	*	–	–	 
Antenna	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	*	–	*	*	–	–	 
COMMERCIAL
Adult restricted uses	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	 
Animal Services	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	5.2.8-A
Boarding	–	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	–	–	–	–	–	 
Grooming	–	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	–	–	–	–	–	 
Veterinary	–	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	–	–	–	–	–	 
Assembly and Entertainment (except as below)	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	*	–	–	–	–	–	5.2.8-B
Cinema or theater	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	*	–	*	*	–	–	 
Health club/gymnasium	–	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	–	–	–	–	–	 
Commercial Service	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	5.2.8-C
Building service	–	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	–	–	–	–	–	 
Building support service	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	*	–	–	–	–	–	 
Consumer maintenance/repair service	–	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	–	–	–	–	–	 
Personal improvement service (except as below)	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	*	–	–	–	–	–	 
Tanning salon	–	–	–	–	–	–	*	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	 
Research service	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	*	–	*	*	–	–	 
Day Care (except as below)	–	–	–	S	–	–	–	–	*	–	–	*	–	–	5.2.8-D
Day care for university faculty or students	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	 
Financial Institution	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	*	–	–	–	–	–	5.2.8-E
Lodging	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	5.2.8-F
Hotel or motel	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	*	–	–	–	–	–	 
Boarding or rooming house	–	–	–	S	–	–	–	–	–	–	*	*	–	–	 
Office	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	5.2.8-G
Business or professional office	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	*	–	–	–	–	–	 
Dental or health practitioner	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	*	–	*	–	–	–	 
Parking, non-accessory (except as below)	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	–	–	5.2.8-H
Parking lot for trucks and vans	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	*	–	–	–	–	–	 
Restaurant	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	*	–	*	*	–	–	5.2.8-I
Retail Sales (except as below)	–	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	–	–	–	–	–	5.2.8-J
Building materials sales	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	*	–	–	–	–	–	 
Drugstore or pharmacy	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	*	–	–	–	–	–	 
Florist or garden shop	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	*	–	–	–	–	–	 
Newsstand or bookstore	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	*	–	*	*	–	–	 
Studio, Artist or Instructional Service	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	*	–	–	–	–	–	5.2.8-K
Vehicle Sales and Service	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	5.2.8-L
Personal vehicle repair and maintenance	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	*	–	–	–	–	–	 
Fueling station	–	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	–	–	–	–	–	 
Personal vehicle sales	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	*	–	–	–	–	–	 
Vehicle body and paint finishing shop	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	*	–	–	–	–	–	 
OTHER
Helistop	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	S	–	S	S	–	–	5.2.9-A
Drive-in or Drive-through Facility	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	5.2.9-B
Financial institution uses	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	*	–	–	–	–	–	 
Other uses	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	 
Large-scale Use	Requires Planned Development (PD) Approval (Section 9.5)	5.2.9-C
Public Transportation Facility	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	*	–	S	–	–	–	 
Radio or TV Tower, Commercial	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	*	–	*	*	–	–	 
Bakery (wholesale)	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	*	–	–	–	–	–	 
Cabinet or upholstery shop	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	*	–	–	–	–	–	 
Cleaning and dying plant	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	*	–	–	–	–	–	 
Equipment sales and service	–	–	–	–	–	–	S	S	*	–	–	–	–	–	 
Wine Storage	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	*	–	–	–	–	–	 

Sec. 5.2.     Use Classifications
5.2.1. General. This section establishes and describes the use classification system used to classify principal uses in this zoning ordinance.
5.2.2. Use Categories. This zoning ordinance classifies principal land uses into 4 major groupings (described in Section 5.2.6 through Section 5.2.9). These major groupings are referred to as “use categories.” The use categories are as follows:
A.     Residential (see Section 5.2.6).
B.     Public, Civic and Institutional (see Section 5.2.7).
C.     Commercial (see Section 5.2.8).
D.     Other (see Section 5.2.9).
5.2.3. Use Subcategories. Each use category is further divided into more specific “subcategories.” Use subcategories classify principal land uses and activities based on common functional, product or physical characteristics, such as the type and amount of activity, the type of customers or residents, and how goods or services are sold or delivered and site conditions.
5.2.4. Specific Use Types. Some use subcategories are further broken down to identify specific types of uses that are regulated differently than the subcategory as a whole.
5.2.5. Determination of Use Categories and Subcategories.
A.     The community development director is authorized to classify uses on the basis of the use category, subcategory and specific use type descriptions of this article.
B.     When a use cannot be reasonably classified into a use category, subcategory or specific use type, or appears to fit into multiple categories, subcategories or specific use types, the community development director is authorized to determine the most similar and thus most appropriate use category, subcategory or specific use type based on the actual or projected characteristics of the principal use or activity in relationship to the use category, subcategory and specific use type descriptions provided in this article. In making such determinations, the community development director must consider:
1.     The types of activities that will occur in conjunction with the use;
2.     The types of equipment and processes to be used;
3.     The existence, number and frequency of residents, customers or employees;
4.     Parking demands associated with the use; and
5.     Other factors deemed relevant to a use determination.
C.     If a use can reasonably be classified in multiple categories, subcategories or specific use types, the community development director is authorized to categorize each use in the category, subcategory or specific use type that provides the most exact, narrowest and appropriate “fit.”
D.     If a use can reasonably be interpreted as falling within any of the use categories or subcategories, the community development director is authorized to determine that the use is only allowed if reviewed and approved in accordance with the planned development procedures of Section 9.5.
5.2.6. Residential Use Category. This category includes uses that provide living accommodations for one or more persons. The residential use subcategories are as follows.
A.     Household Living. Residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a household. When dwelling units are rented, tenancy is arranged on a month-to-month or longer basis. Uses where tenancy may be arranged for a shorter period are not considered residential; they are considered a form of lodging.
B.     Group Living. Residential occupancy of all or a portion of a building by a group other than a household. Group living uses typically include communal kitchen/dining areas. Examples of group living include community homes, nursing homes, assisted living facilities, fraternity and sorority houses and dormitories.
1.     Community Home. A community-based residential home pursuant to Chapter 123, Texas Human Resource Code.
5.2.7. Public, Civic and Institutional Use Category. This category includes public, quasi-public and private uses that provide unique services that are of benefit to the public at-large. The public, civic and institutional subcategories are as follows.
A.     College or University. Academic institutions of higher learning that are accredited or recognized by the state and offer courses of general or specialized study.
B.     Community Center. A building and/or grounds that may be used by the City of University Park, or any person or entity as its designee, to provide recreational or social services for the benefit of citizens.
C.     Fraternal Organization or Private Club. The use of a building or lot by a not-for-profit, social or business organization that restricts access to its facility to bona fide, annual dues-paying members and their occasional guests and where the primary activity is a service not carried on as a business enterprise.
D.     Governmental Service. Local, state or federal government services that are not otherwise classified in this section. Includes city hall and other buildings and related facilities operated by local, state or federal government.
E.     Library or Cultural Exhibit. Museum-like preservation and exhibition of objects in one or more of the arts and sciences, gallery exhibition of works of art or library collections of books, manuscripts and similar materials operated by a public or quasi-public agency other than the city for study and reading by the general public.
F.     Parks and Recreation. Recreational, social or multi-purpose uses associated with public (including school district) parks and open spaces, including playgrounds, play fields, play courts and other facilities typically associated with public parks and open space areas.
G.     Religious Assembly. A place of worship of recognized religions operated by persons qualified by special training in a seminary or a recognized school of religious training and which facility is open to the general public, including such accessory uses as church-operated nursery and educational facilities and on-site residence for religious personnel.
H.     Safety Service. Establishments that provide fire, police or life protection, together with the incidental storage and maintenance of necessary vehicles. Typical uses include fire stations and police stations.
I.     School. Public and private schools at the primary, elementary, middle school or high school level that provide basic, compulsory education.
J.     Utilities and Public Service Facility, Minor. Infrastructure services that need to be located in or close to the area where the service is provided. Minor utilities and public service facilities do not regularly have employees at the site and typically have few if any impacts on surrounding areas. Typical uses include: underground electric distribution substations; electric transformers; water conveyance systems; stormwater facilities and conveyance systems; telephone switching equipment and emergency communication warning/broadcast facilities.
K.     Utilities and Public Service Facility, Major. Infrastructure services that typically have substantial visual or operational impacts on nearby areas.
L.     Wireless Communication Facility. Towers, antennas, equipment, equipment buildings and other facilities used in the provision of wireless communication services.
1.     Freestanding Towers. A structure intended to support equipment that is used to transmit and/or receive telecommunications signals, including monopoles and guyed and lattice construction steel structures.
2.     Antennas. The physical device that is attached to a freestanding tower, building or other structure, through which electromagnetic, wireless telecommunications signals authorized by the Federal Communications Commission are transmitted or received.
3.     Federal Law. The wireless communication facility regulations of this zoning ordinance must be applied within the constraints of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and Section 6409 of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012.
5.2.8. Commercial Use Category. The commercial use category includes uses that provide a business service or involve the selling, leasing or renting of merchandise to the general public. The commercial use subcategories are as follows.
A.     Animal Service. Uses that provide goods and services for care of animals, including the following specific use types:
1.     Boarding. Non-medical care provided for household pets within a completely enclosed building in a location other than their primary residence. Typical examples include indoor kennel services for dogs, cats and small animals, pet resorts/hotels, pet training centers conducted entirely indoors, and indoor doggy day care centers.
2.     Grooming. Grooming of dogs, cats and similar small household pets conducted within a completely enclosed building, including dog bathing and clipping salons and pet grooming shops.
3.     Veterinary. Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics, with all activities conducted within a completely enclosed building
B.     Assembly and Entertainment. Uses conducted within a completely enclosed building that provide gathering places for participant or spectator recreation, entertainment or other assembly activities. Typical uses include health clubs, gymnasiums, billiard centers, bowling centers, cinemas and live theaters.
C.     Commercial Service. Uses that provide for consumer, business or research services and for the indoor, low-impact repair and maintenance of a wide variety of products. Includes the following specific use types:
1.     Building Service. Uses that provide maintenance and repair services for structural and mechanical elements of buildings. Typical uses include janitorial, carpet cleaning, extermination, plumbing, electrical, window cleaning and similar services.
2.     Business Support Service. Uses that provide personnel services, printing, copying, package (delivery) drop-off, photographic services or communication services to businesses or consumers. Typical uses include employment agencies, copy and print shops, delivery/courier service drop-off location for consumers, caterers and photo developing labs.
3.     Consumer Maintenance and Repair Service. Uses that provide maintenance, cleaning and repair services for consumer goods on a site other than that of the customer (i.e., customers bring goods to the site of the repair/maintenance business). Typical uses include laundry and dry cleaning pick-up shops, tailors, taxidermists, dressmakers, shoe repair, picture framing shops, locksmiths, vacuum repair shops, electronics repair shops and similar establishments. Businesses that offer repair and maintenance service for large equipment or technicians who visit customers' homes or places of business are classified as a “building service.”
4.     Personal Improvement Service. Uses that provide personal grooming, cosmetic or health and well-being-related services. Typical uses include barbers, hair and nail salons, tanning salons and day spas.
5.     Research Service. Uses engaged in scientific research and testing services leading to the development of new products and processes. Such uses resemble office buildings or campuses and do not involve the mass production, distribution or sale of products. Research services do not produce odors, dust, noise, vibration or other external impacts that are detectable beyond the property lines of the subject property.
D.     Day Care. Uses providing care and supervision for 3 or more children away from their primary residence for less than 24 hours per day.
E.     Financial Institution. A depository institution chartered by the state or federal government, the deposits of which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration. This includes banks, savings and loan associations, mutual savings banks and credit unions. Automatic teller machines, kiosks and similar facilities that do not have on-site employees or amplified sound are not classified as financial institution uses if they meet the criteria for classification as an accessory use (see Section 5.3).
F.     Lodging. Uses that provide temporary lodging for less than 30 days where rents are charged by the day or by the week. Lodging uses sometimes provide food or entertainment, primarily to registered guests. Examples of specific lodging use types include:
1.     Hotel. A lodging establishment that includes at least 12 individual guest rooms and provides customary hotel services.
2.     Boarding House or Rooming House. A building, other than a hotel or motel, where lodging and meals for 3 or more persons who are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption, are provided for compensation or other services, reward or privilege.
G.     Office. Uses in an enclosed building, customarily performed in an office, that focus on providing executive, management, administrative, professional or medical services. Examples of specific use types include:
1.     Business or Professional Office. Office uses for companies and non-governmental organizations. Examples include corporate office, law offices, architectural firms, insurance companies and other executive, management or administrative offices for businesses and corporations.
2.     Medical, Dental or Health Practitioner. Office uses related to diagnosis and treatment of human patients' illnesses, injuries and physical maladies that can be performed in an office setting with no overnight care. Typical uses include offices of physicians, dentists, psychiatrists, psychologists and chiropractors. Surgical, rehabilitation and other medical centers that do not involve overnight patient stays are included in this use subcategory, as are medical and dental laboratories, unless otherwise expressly indicated.
H.     Parking, Non-Accessory. Parking that is not provided to comply with minimum off-street parking requirements or that is not provided exclusively to serve occupants of or visitors to a particular use, but rather is available to the public at-large.
I.     Restaurant. An establishment that serves food or beverages for on-premises consumption as its principal business and in which more than 25% of the establishment's floor area is devoted to seating/dining and customer service areas. Typical examples include restaurants, cafés, cafeterias. Restaurants may include beer, wine and alcohol sales for on-premises consumption if the operator holds a valid mixed beverage permit issued by the state alcoholic beverage commission in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 28 of the Alcoholic Beverage Code, provided the operator also holds a food and beverage certificate under Section 28.18 of the Alcoholic Beverage Code. Food service and eating places in which no more than 25% of the floor area is devoted to customer service or seating/dining area are classified as “retail sales.”
J.     Retail Sales. Uses involving the sale, lease or rental of goods to the ultimate consumer.
K.     Studio, Artist or Instructional Service. Uses in an enclosed building that focus on providing individual or small group instruction or training in fine arts, music, dance, drama, fitness, language or similar activities. Also includes dance studios, ballet academies, yoga studios, martial arts instruction, tutoring, artist studios and photography studios.
L.     Vehicle Sales and Service. Uses that provide for the sale, rental, maintenance or repair of new or used vehicles and vehicular equipment. The vehicle sales and service subcategory includes the following specific use types:
1.     Fueling Station. Uses engaged in retail sales of vehicle fuels for personal vehicles, other than fleet fueling facilities and truck stops.
2.     Personal Vehicle Repair and Maintenance. Uses that repair, install or maintain the mechanical components of automobiles, small trucks or vans or motorcycles or that wash, clean or otherwise protect the exterior or interior surfaces of these vehicles.
3.     Personal Vehicle Sales. Uses that provide for the sale or rental of automobiles, small trucks, vans, or motorcycles within a completely enclosed building.
4.     Vehicle Body and Paint Finishing Shop. Uses that primarily conduct motor vehicle body work and repairs or that apply paint to the exterior or interior surfaces of motor vehicles by spraying, dipping, flow-coating or other similar means.
5.2.9. Other Use Category. This category includes uses not included in other use categories.
A.     Helistop. A landing pad or area for occasional, non-scheduled use by rotary-wing aircraft not exceeding a gross weight of 6,000 pounds and not including fueling or servicing facilities.
B.     Drive-in or Drive-through Facility. Any use with drive-through windows or drive-through lanes or that otherwise offer service to the occupants of motor vehicles. Typical uses include drive-in or drive-through restaurants, drive-through banks and drive-through pharmacies. Automatic teller machine kiosks and similar drop-off or pick-up facilities that do not have on-site employees or amplified sound are not classified as drive-in or drive-through facilities if they meet the criteria for classification as an accessory use (Section 5.3).
C.     Large-scale Use. Any use that occupies more than 40,000 square feet of floor area or requires more than 200 off-street parking spaces[.]
Sec. 5.3.     Accessory Uses and Structures
5.3.1. Accessory Uses Allowed. Accessory uses and structures are allowed only in connection with lawfully established principal uses.
5.3.2. Allowed Uses and Structures. Allowed accessory uses and structures are limited to those expressly regulated in this article, including this section (Section 5.3) and Table 5-2, as well as those that, in the determination of the community development director, satisfy all of the following criteria:
A.     They are customarily found in conjunction with the subject principal use or principal structure;
B.     They are subordinate and clearly incidental to the principal use of the property; and
C.     They serve a necessary function for or contribute to the comfort, safety or convenience of occupants of the principal use.
5.3.3. Time of Construction and Establishment.
A.     Accessory uses may be established only after the principal use of the property is in place.
B.     Accessory buildings may be established in conjunction with or after the principal building or use. They may not be established before the principal building or use is in place.
5.3.4. Location.
A.     On-Site. Accessory uses and structures must be located on the same lot as the principal use to which they are accessory, unless otherwise expressly allowed.
B.     Rear Yard Location. Except as otherwise expressly allowed, detached accessory buildings and structures must be located in the rear yard. A detached accessory building or structure, including a swimming pool or garage, may be located in the rear half of the lot between the rear of the principal building and the midpoint of the lot if it is set back from side lot lines at least 7 feet or a distance equal to at least 10% of the lot width, whichever is less. See also the garage regulations of Section 7.2.
C.     Front Yards. In addition to the building encroachments allowed in accordance with Section 2.10, the following are expressly allowed within the front yard area of residential districts if they are constructed of permanent materials approved by the community development director:
1.     Up to 4 freestanding columns not exceeding 5 feet in height or 2 feet by 2 feet in dimension on lots with a width of less than 60 feet;
2.     Up to 4 freestanding columns not exceeding 5 feet in height or 3 feet by 3 feet in dimension on lots with a width of 60 feet or more;
3.     Freestanding columns not exceeding 8 feet in height on SF-1-zoned lots of more than one acre in area;
4.     Lamp posts that are not freestanding columns, no more than 6 inches in diameter and no more than 8 feet in height;
5.     Up to 4 statuaries, bird baths, pedestals or yard art objects per lot, not to exceed 5 feet in height or 20 cubic feet in volume per object and located at least 5 feet from all property lines;
6.     Lawn furniture, including benches, tables, and stools no more than 30 inches in height;
7.     Retaining walls no more than 2 feet above the average natural grade of the front yard;
8.     One flagpole per lot, not exceeding 25 feet in height, measured from natural grade, set back a minimum distance equal to the height of the flagpole, measured at natural grade, from all adjoining lot lines. The flag may not exceed 24 square feet in area; and
9.     Earth berms for landscaping and screening purposes, constructed of permanent materials approved by the community development director, provided that the height of the berm may not exceed 1 foot of height for every 2 feet of horizontal distance. The crown of the berm may not exceed 42 inches in height. Berms may not be located or erected so as to obstruct or interfere with vision of a public street by a motorist entering or existing a driveway.
5.3.5. Side Setbacks.
A.     Unless otherwise expressly stated, detached accessory buildings and structures must be set back at least 3 feet from any interior side lot line, as measured from the closest point of the structure[.]
B.     Accessory buildings with vertical walls and roof projections that have a 2-hour fire resistance rating must be set back at least 2 feet from interior side lot lines.
C.     Attached accessory buildings are subject to the minimum side setback regulations that apply to the principal building.
D.     When located within 40 feet of the rear property line, windows or other openings greater than 12.5 feet above the top of the foundation or a vertical wall surface exceeding 12.5 feet in height may not be adjacent to any interior side lot line unless such windows, openings, or vertical wall surfaces are set back at least 20 feet from such interior side lot line.
5.3.6. Rear Setbacks. Non-garage accessory buildings and accessory structures must be setback at least 3 feet from the rear lot line.
5.3.7. Lot Coverage. The principal building, all accessory buildings and all other structures in excess of 30 inches above ground level may not cover more than 50% of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of the midpoint line of the lot.
5.3.8. Separation. Detached accessory buildings must be separated by a minimum distance of 6 feet from the principal building. This required separation area may not contain stairs.
5.3.9. Tennis Courts (Private).
A.     Private tennis courts are allowed only if approved in accordance with the specific use permit procedures of Section 9.4.
B.     A private tennis court may not cover more than 20% of the overall lot area.
C.     Private tennis court surfaces and all appurtenances other than fences or walls must be set back at least 3 feet from the rear property line and any easements.
D.     No portion of a tennis court surface, fence, wall or other related appurtenance may be located within the front yard.
5.3.10. Swimming Pools (Private).
A.     General. Swimming pools constructed on residential lots must be:
1.     Below-ground pools;
2.     Located behind the front building line of the associated principal building and screened from view of all streets by a fence, wall or building; and
3.     Constructed of concrete or other approved material that is inert, nontoxic, and impervious to vermin and decay.
B.     Side and Rear Setbacks. Swimming pools must set back at least 5 feet from all side and rear lot lines, measured from the inside walls of the swimming pool.
C.     Gates and Enclosures.
1.     Any gate allowing access to the swimming pool area from the outside through any accessory or detached building or structure other than the principal building may not exceed 48 inches in width and must also be equipped with self-latching mechanisms.
2.     See also Section 8.9 for regulations governing swimming pool enclosures.
D.     Lighting. Lights in the swimming pool area, except those within the swimming pool, may not be mounted at a height that exceeds the height of the fence surrounding the pool and must include full-cutoff type light fixtures to prevent light trespass and spillover onto adjacent properties.
E.     Drainage.
1.     Swimming pools must be equipped with proper filtration and water treatment equipment to ensure that the water will be sanitary at all times. Equipment must be connected by an underground conduit to the sanitary sewer adjacent to such property and a proper indirect waste connection must be made, as required by the plumbing ordinance.
2.     Deck drains or surface water may not be discharged into the sanitary sewer but must be diverted away from adjacent property into a storm drain either in the street or an alley.
5.3.11. Breezeways and Covered Walkways.
A.     A single-story breezeway or covered walkway may connect a principal building with a detached accessory structure, subject to compliance with the regulations of this subsection.
B.     The detached accessory building or structure to which the breezeway is attached must comply with all applicable accessory structure regulations (see Section 5.3.2).
C.     The breezeway or covered walkway must be at least 50% unenclosed and comply with the side setback regulations that apply to the principal building.
D.     The breezeway's or covered walkway's vertical walls may not exceed 12.5 feet in height, and the breezeway may not exceed 6 feet in width (measured between the structure's vertical supports).
E.     The eaves or roof overhang on a breezeway or covered walkway may not exceed 24 inches.
5.3.12. Air Conditioner Condensing Units and other Mechanical Equipment. Air conditioner condensing units, swimming pool pumps, power generators and similar mechanical equipment are subject to the following regulations:
1.     Equipment adjacent to streets or lots occupied by residential uses must be screened by a solid or wood fence, a wall or landscaping. Equipment may not exceed the height of the screening.
2.     In SFA zoning districts, equipment may be located in the rear yard along the common side property line of abutting SFA-zoned lots without screening if a party wall/mutual access agreement among abutting property owners is recorded.
3.     No more than 5 pieces of mechanical equipment may be located in a single side yard. A minimum clearance of 2 feet must be maintained between equipment and the side property line,
4.     At least one required side setback must be kept clear of all equipment.
5.     Equipment must be set back at least 2 feet from rear property lines.
6.     Placement of new equipment associated with the renovation, addition, and/or construction of a new residential structure must comply with the regulations of this section. Replacement of nonconforming mechanical equipment will be allowed to continue until the building site is redeveloped.
7.     Roof-mounted air conditioner condensing units and similar mechanical equipment are prohibited on residential dwelling units.
8.     Equipment may not exceed a height of 54 inches above the ground.
Figure 5-1: Breezeway/Covered Walkway
 
Figure 5-2: Example Plan of Accessory Structures on Typical Lot
 
5.3.13. Accessory Dwelling Units.
A.     Accessory dwelling units are allowed on lots occupied by single-family dwelling units, subject to compliance with the regulations of this subsection.
B.     Accessory dwelling units may be occupied only by immediate family members or by domestic workers who are full-time household employees of the owner/occupant of the subject property. In case of a live-in domestic worker family, all adult family members must be full-time household employees of the owner/occupant of the subject property.
C.     Accessory dwelling units may not be used for rental purposes or barter exchange.
D.     Kitchen, cooking, food preparation, bathroom and other plumbing facilities are allowed within an accessory dwelling unit.
E.     The accessory dwelling unit may not have separate utility meters.
F.     The community development director is authorized to issue a building permit to construct, remodel, or make addition to a residential accessory dwelling unit only if a deed restriction instrument limiting the use of the accessory dwelling unit to immediate family members or domestic workers who are full-time household employees of the owner/occupant of the subject property has been filed with the community development director in a form approved by the city attorney and sufficiently executed for recording in the Dallas County Deed Records.
5.3.14. Home Occupations.
A.     General. A home occupation is allowed as an accessory use to an allowed household living use, subject to the regulations of this subsection 5.3.14.
B.     Operator. The operator of a home occupation must be a full-time resident and member of the household occupying the dwelling unit. No other outside employees or assistants may be involved in the conduct of a home occupation.
C.     Sales. The home occupation may not involve the sale of goods or services delivered to the buyer on the subject property.
D.     Operation and Appearance.
1.     There may be no visible evidence of the conduct of a home occupation when viewed from the street or right-of-way or from an adjacent lot.
2.     There may be no change in the exterior appearance of the dwelling unit that houses a home occupation or site upon which it is conducted that will make the dwelling appear less residential in nature or function. Signs and other exterior advertisements are expressly prohibited.
3.     No outdoor storage of equipment or materials used in connection with the home occupation is allowed.
4.     No equipment or process may be used in a home occupation that creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses beyond the boundaries of the subject lot.
5.     Home occupations may not cause or create any nuisance, or cause or create any substantial or undue adverse impact on any adjacent property of the character of the area, or threaten the public health, safety or welfare.
Sec. 5.4.     Temporary Uses and Structures
5.4.1. General. Allowed temporary uses and structures are limited to those expressly regulated in this article, including this section (Section 5.4) and Table 5-2, as well as those that, in the determination of the community development director are similar in nature those expressly identified. The community development director is also authorized to refer temporary use approval requests to the board of adjustment through the special exception procedures of Section 9.6.
5.4.2. Temporary Construction Structures. Temporary buildings, offices, and building material storage areas used for construction purposes may be permitted for a specific period of time as accessory structures in accordance with a permit issued by the community development director and subject to periodic review by the community development director for cause shown. All temporary buildings, offices and other materials must be removed before issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
5.4.3. Portable Storage Containers. A portable storage container may be placed in a front yard in a residential district for a period not exceeding one week to provide temporary storage for personal property from the residence to facilitate relocation and moving of household items to or from the residence.
Table 5-2: Accessory and Temporary Use Table
 	SF 1-4	SF A	D 1-2	MF 1-3	O 1-2	GR	RC	SC	C	*	UC
Use Type											1	2	3	4
* = use permitted as of right; S = specific use permit required; – = prohibited use
Field or construction office (temporary)	*	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	*	–	*	*	–	–
Home occupation	*	*	*	*	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–
Amateur radio or CB antenna to 40 ft.	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	–	*	*	–	–
Amateur radio or CB antenna over 40 ft.	S	S	S	S	*	*	*	*	*	–	*	*	–	–
Residential TV dish antenna	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	–	*	*	*	*
Tennis court (private)	S	S	S	S	*	*	*	*	*	–	*	*	S	S
Tennis court (unlighted)	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	S
Swimming pool (private)	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	–	*	*	–	–
Accessory bldg. or use – residential	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	–	–	*	*	*	*
Accessory bldg. retail or commercial	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	*	–	–	–	–	–
Accessory use to university	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	–	*	*	S	S
Video drop box	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	*	–	–	–	–	–
Massage therapy as accessory use in hair salon	–	–	–	–	*	*	*	*	*	–	*	–	–	–

Article 6. Parking
Sec. 6.1.     General
6.1.1. Purpose. The parking regulations of this article are intended to ensure that off-street parking facilities are provided to meet the typical day-to-day needs of shoppers, employees, visitors and residents while avoiding the negative impacts that can result from requiring excessive quantities of off-street parking.
6.1.2. Applicability.
A.     General. Off-street parking must be provided and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this article. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the regulations apply to all zoning districts and uses.
B.     New Uses and Development. The parking regulations of this article apply to all new buildings constructed and all new uses established.
C.     Change of Use. If a new use of a building or structure requires more off-street parking than the use that most recently occupied the building or structure, additional off-street parking is required in an amount equal to the difference between the parking required for the new use and the parking that would have been required for the previous use if current parking requirements had been applicable, provided that the total number of required spaces for the change of use need not exceed the number that would be required for establishment of a new use.
D.     Enlargements and Expansions.
1.     The parking regulations of this article apply whenever an existing building or use is enlarged or expanded to include additional dwelling units, floor area, seating capacity or other units of measurement used for establishing off-street parking requirements.
2.     In the case of enlargements or expansions that trigger requirements for additional parking, additional spaces are required only to serve the enlarged or expanded area, not the entire building or use.
E.     Maintenance. Off-street parking spaces required by this zoning ordinance must be maintained for the life of the principal use.
F.     Damage or Destruction. When a use that has been damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion, or other cause is re-established, off-street parking or loading facilities must also be re-established or continued in operation in an amount equal to the number maintained at the time of such damage or destruction. It is not necessary, however, to restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in excess of those required by this zoning ordinance.
G.     GR District Exception. Any existing building in the GR district that is occupied by a use allowed in the GR district may be maintained, improved or reconstructed or occupied by another use allowed in the GR district without providing the minimum motor vehicle parking otherwise required in this article, provided that any enlargement or expansion of such building or use must comply with the provisions of paragraph D of this section (6.1.2).
Sec. 6.2.     Minimum Parking Ratios
Off-street motor vehicle parking spaces must be provided in accordance with the minimum ratios established in Table 6-1, except within UC zoning districts. Minimum parking ratios for UC districts are established in Section 4.3.5.
Table 6-1: Minimum Motor Vehicle Parking Ratios
USE CATEGORY	Minimum Motor Vehicle Parking Spaces
Use Subcategory (Specific use type)	 
RESIDENTIAL
Household Living	 
Detached house (less than 8,000 sq. ft.)	2/dwelling unit [1]
Detached house (8,000 sq. ft. or more)	3/dwelling unit [1]
Duplex	2/dwelling unit [1]
Other household living	2/dwelling unit or 1/bedroom
Group Living	 
Community home	1/2 beds
Fraternity, sorority, dormitory	1/2 beds
Nursing home	1/6 bed
PUBLIC, CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL
College or University	See Section 4.3.5
Community Center	1/500 sq. ft. [2]
Fraternal Organization or Private Club	1/100 sq. ft. [3]
Governmental Service	[4]
Library or Cultural Exhibit	1/500 sq. ft. [2]
Parks and Recreation	[4]
Religious Assembly	1/3 seats
Safety Service	[4]
School	 
Elementary and Middle or Jr. High	6 + 1/classroom
Senior High	8/classroom
COMMERCIAL
Animal Services	1/300 sq. ft.
Assembly and Entertainment (except as below)	1/3 seats
Stadium	1/6 seats
Commercial Service (except as below)	1/300 sq. ft.
Personal improvement service	1/100 sq. ft. [3]
Day Care	1 + 1/4 enrollees
Eating and Drinking Places	1/100 sq. ft. [2]
Financial Institution	1/300 sq. ft
Office	 
Business or professional office	1/300 sq. ft.
Dental or health practitioner	1/300 sq. ft [3]
Lodging	1/guest room [5]
Retail Sales	1/200 sq. ft [3]
Studio, Artist or Instructional Service	1/300 sq. ft.
Vehicle Sales and Service	4 + 1/100 sq. ft.

[1]     Spaces must be located in a completely enclosed garage.
[2]     Minimum 10 spaces
[3]     Minimum 5 spaces
[4]     As determined by community development director in accordance with Section 6.3.7
[5]     Plus spaces required for ancillary uses
Sec. 6.3.     Parking Calculations
In determining the number of parking spaces required, the following calculation rules apply:
6.3.1. Multiple Uses. Lots containing more than one use or tenant must provide parking in an amount equal to the total aggregate number of spaces required for each use or tenant on the lot.
6.3.2. Floor Area. All area of a building and site that are used for off-street parking is excluded in computing off-street parking requirements.
6.3.3. Occupancy or Capacity-based Standards. For the purpose of computing parking requirements based on employees, students, members, residents or occupants, calculations must be based on the building code-rated capacity.
6.3.4. Bench Seating. For the purpose of calculating parking requirements based on seating, each 22 linear inches of bench or pew length is equivalent to one seat.
6.3.5. Bedrooms. When parking requirements are based on bedroom count, any enclosed floor space exceeding 90 square feet in area that has direct access to a bathroom or a closet, other than a bathroom, kitchen or living room, is counted as a bedroom.
6.3.6. Outdoor Customer Seating/Dining Areas. Any outdoor customer seating/dining area exceeding 20% of a bar, restaurant or other use's enclosed (indoor) floor area must be counted as floor area for purposes of determining off-street parking requirements.
6.3.7. Unlisted Uses. Upon receiving a development application for a use not specifically listed in an off-street parking schedule, the community development director is authorized to:
A.     Apply the off-street parking ratio specified for the listed use that is deemed most similar to the proposed use;
B.     Establish minimum off-street parking requirements for the proposed use in accordance with 6.3.8.
6.3.8. Establishment of Other Parking Ratios. The community development director is authorized to establish required minimum parking ratios for unlisted uses and in those instances where authority to establish a requirement is expressly provided. Such ratios must be established on the basis of (1) a similar use/parking determination (as described in Section 6.3.7), (2) on parking data provided by the applicant or (3) other information available to the community development director. Parking data and studies must include estimates of parking demand based on reliable data collected from comparable local uses or on external data from credible research organizations, such as the Urban Land Institute (ULI) and the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE). Comparability will be determined by density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity and location. Parking studies must document the source of all data used to develop recommended requirements.
Sec. 6.4.     Mandatory PD Thresholds
New uses or expansions of existing uses that are required to provide more than 200 off-street parking spaces under the minimum off-street parking regulations of this article must be rezoned to the PD zoning district in accordance with the procedures of Section 9.5 (see also the PD district regulations of Section 4.5).
Sec. 6.5.     Reserved
Sec. 6.6.     Accessible Parking
Accessible parking spaces for persons with disabilities must be provided in accordance with the State of Texas Program for the Elimination of Architectural Barriers and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
Sec. 6.7.     Parking Location and Design
6.7.1. Location.
A.     Required off-street parking spaces must be located on the same lot as the building or use they are required to serve.
B.     All required parking spaces must be located off-street, completely on private property, and behind the front building line.
6.7.2. Stall Size. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this zoning ordinance (see, for example, Section 6.7.4 and Section 6.7.5). All required parking spaces must be at least 9 feet in width and 20 feet in length, except for permitted small-car parking spaces (See Section 6.7.3), which must be at least 8.5 feet in width and 16 feet in length.
6.7.3. Small-Car Parking.
A.     When Permitted.
1.     Small-car parking spaces are allowed in the SC, PD and P zoning districts.
2.     Small-car parking spaces may be used to satisfy minimum off-street parking requirements in non-SC and non-P zoning districts when 40 or more parking spaces are required for the subject use.
B.     Maximum Number of Small Car Spaces. No more than 25% of the total number of off-street parking spaces provided on a lot may be small-car parking spaces.
C.     Site Plan Requirements. Proposals for use of small-car parking spaces must be accompanied by a site plan, which is subject to review and approval by the community development director. The director must review the site plan to ensure that the parking spaces comply with the requirements of this article and all other applicable city regulations.
D.     Striping and Identification. All small-car parking stalls must be double-striped and clearly marked on the pavement with a sign stating “small car only” or “compact car only.”
6.7.4. Tandem Parking.
A.     Except as expressly stated in this section, all required parking spaces must be designed to allow each parking space to be accessed without passing through another parking space.
B.     Tandem parking spaces may be used to satisfy parking requirements for household living uses in residential districts, provided that multifamily (apartment) uses may utilize tandem parking only if:
1.     Three or more parking spaces are required for the unit;
2.     Each parking space is at least 9 feet in width and 20 feet in length;
3.     Each parking space is assigned to a specified dwelling unit and clearly marked with the unit number; and
4.     All tandem parking spaces located at-grade are enclosed with solid walls and a door.
6.7.5. Parking Area Layout (Geometrics).
A.     Parking areas must be designed in accordance with the dimensional standards of Table 6-2.
B.     Requirements for layouts or angles not shown in Table 6-2 may be interpolated from the layouts shown, as approved by the community development director.
Table 6-2: Parking Lot Geometrics
Stall Angle	Stall Width (feet)	Stall Length (feet)	Aisle Width (feet)
(A)	(B)	(C)	(D)
0°	8.5	18	12/20
	9.0	22	12/20
45°	8.5	16	12/20
	9.0	20	11/19
60°	8.5	16	16/21
	9.0	20	15/20
90°	8.5	16	NA/22
	9.0	20	NA/22
	10.0	20	NA/20
(A) = Stall Angle; (B) = Stall Width (feet)
(C) = Stall Length (feet); (D) = Aisle Width (1-way/2-way, feet)

Figure 6-1: Parking Lot Geometrics
 
6.7.6. Surfacing. Surfacing in all parking areas and driveways must comply with the standards on file in the engineering department and be specified and approved prior to installation. See Permeability Requirements of Chapter 3, Article 3.100 [Article 3.02, Divisions 2 and 3] of the Code of Ordinances.
Sec. 6.8.     Site Plan Review
In all UC-2, GR, RC, SC and PD zoning districts, removal or reduction of any off-street required parking space or area may not be undertaken until a site plan delineating such proposed change, replacement or alteration is reviewed and approved by the city council, after recommendation by the planning and zoning commission.
Sec. 6.9.     Loading
6.9.1. Minimum Ratios. Off-street loading and unloading spaces must be provided for nonresidential uses in accordance with Table 6-3.
Table 6-3: Off-street Loading Ratios
Floor Area (Square feet)	Minimum Number of Loading Berths Required
0–10,000	None
10,001–50,000	1
50,001–100,000	2
Each additional 100,000	1

6.9.2. Additional Regulations. All loading areas must comply with the additional regulations of this subsection (6.9.2).
A.     Loading spaces must have a minimum width of 10 feet and a minimum length of 25 feet, with a minimum overhead clearance of 15 feet.
B.     Loading and unloading activity may not encroach upon any public right-of-way.
Sec. 6.10.     Inset Public Parking
6.10.1. Front Street.
A.     Inset parallel public parking along a street that forms the primary (front) street frontage for buildings on the subject block is to subject review and approval by the city council and to the regulations of this subsection.
B.     If approved, front street inset parking will be designed and constructed by the city.
C.     The process requires a petition requesting inset parking to be signed by at least 75% of all property owners on the subject block face.
D.     The public works director must review the request and submit a recommendation for consideration by the city council.
E.     Residents within 200 feet of the block requesting installation of inset parking must be notified of the date and time of the city council meeting at which the request will be considered.
F.     Front street inset parking spaces must be:
1.     At least 23 feet in length;
2.     Installed within the parkway abutting the existing sidewalk[;]
3.     Set back at least 35 feet from the intersection of the projected curblines at the street corner and at least 15 feet from the intersection of the projected curbline and the pavement line at the corner of any alley; and
4.     Continuous along the entire blockface, as shown Figure 6-2, unless the city council approves a landscape median or other offset that does not create a traffic hazard.
G.     At least one tree island must be installed to separate each 4 parking spaces or each 92 linear feet of inset parking. Tree islands must be at least 12 feet in length and include at least one shade tree with a minimum caliper size of 3 inches.
Figure 6-2: Inset Parking on Front Street
 
6.10.2. Side Street Inset Parking.
A.     Inset parallel public parking along a street that forms the secondary (corner side) street frontage for a lot is permitted, subject to the regulations of this subsection.
B.     All costs of designing and constructing inset parking along a side street must be paid by the abutting private property owner.
C.     Plans showing design, construction and paving details, existing sidewalk, existing curblines, property lines and dimension of parking spaces must be submitted to the public works director for review and approval.
D.     Side street inset parking spaces must be:
1.     At least 23 feet in length;
2.     Installed within the parkway abutting the existing sidewalk
3.     Set back at least 35 feet from the intersection of the projected curblines at the street corner and at least 15 feet from the intersection of the projected curbline and the pavement line at the corner of any alley; and
4.     Continuous along the entire depth of the lot, as shown Figure 6-3.
E.     The total length of side street inset parking may not exceed 4 spaces or 92 feet.
Figure 6-3: Inset Parking on Side Street
 
Article 7. Garages and Driveways
Sec. 7.1.     General
7.1.1. Purpose. The garage and driveway regulations of this article are intended to ensure that garages and driveways are provided to provide for lot access and off-street parking, while maintaining and promoting the desired physical character of existing neighborhoods.
7.1.2. Applicability.
A.     General. Driveways and residential garages must be provided and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this article.
B.     New Uses and Development. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the regulations apply to all new uses established in all zoning districts and to all new buildings constructed and redeveloped in all zoning districts.
Sec. 7.2.     Residential Garages
The regulations of this section apply to all attached and detached garages, carports, and similar vehicle storage structures in all SF, SF-A, and D, and MF districts.
7.2.1. General Garage Regulations.
A.     Building Setbacks.
1.     All attached garages must comply with the setbacks of the subject zoning district, unless otherwise stated in this Section 7.2. Refer to configurations in Section 7.2.2.
2.     All detached garages must be setback a minimum of 3 feet from any rear or interior side property line. Side-street setbacks must comply with the setbacks of the subject zoning district. Refer to configurations in Section 7.2.3.
B.     Window Locations. Windows or other openings greater than 12.5 feet above the top of the foundation or a vertical wall surface exceeding 12.5 feet in height shall not be adjacent to any interior side lot line unless such windows, openings, or vertical wall surfaces are set back at least 20 feet from such interior side lot line.
C.     Parking Pad Required. For all garages except those in the MF districts, an outdoor parking pad is required in front of the garage door. The required parking pad must be at least 20 feet in length and 20 feet in width.
D.     Detached Garages.
1.     Detached garages may be located only in the rear half of the lot. Refer to configurations in Section 7.2.3.
2.     Detached garages must be located at least 6 feet from any portion of the main building. Refer to configurations in Section 7.2.3.
7.2.2. Attached Garage Configurations. Refer to Section 7.2.1 for general garage location regulations.
A.     Alley-Access, Rear-Facing. In addition to compliance with the setbacks for the zoning district, the vehicle access door/opening of any attached garage, carport, or other vehicle storage area that is accessed from and faces an alley must be set back at least 20 feet from the alley right-of-way (see Figure 7-1).
Figure 7-1: Alley-access, Rear-Facing Garage
 
B.     Alley-Access, Side-Facing. In addition to compliance with the setbacks for the zoning district, the vehicle access door/opening of any garage, carport, or other vehicle storage area that is accessed from an alley but faces an interior side property line must be set back at least 24 feet from the side property line that it faces (see Figure 7-2).
Figure 7-2: Alley-access, Side-Facing Garage
 
C.     Side Street-Access, Side Street-Facing. In addition to compliance with the setbacks for the zoning district, the vehicle access door/opening of any garage, carport, or other vehicle storage area that is accessed from and faces a side street must be set back at least 20 feet from the street side property line that it faces (see Figure 7-3).
Figure 7-3: Side-Street Access Garage
 
D.     Front Street-Access in the Rear Yard. Garages, carports, and other vehicle storage areas that are attached to the main structure, accessed from the front street, and located in the rear half of the lot with the door/opening facing the front or interior side property line must comply with the rear and side setbacks of the subject zoning district (see Figure 7-4).
Figure 7-4: Attached, Front Street-Access; Rear-Yard, Front-Facing (L) and Rear-Yard, Side-Facing (R)
 
E.     Front Street-Access, Front Yard. Garages, carports, and other vehicle storage areas that are accessed from the front street and located in the front half of the lot must comply with the front, side and rear setbacks of the subject zoning district. The vehicle access door/opening may not face the street and must be set back at least 24 feet from the side property line that it faces (see Figure 7-5).
Figure 7-5: Attached, Front-Yard Garage
 
7.2.3. Detached Garage Configurations. Refer to Section 7.2.1 for general garage location regulations.
A.     Alley Access, Rear-Facing. The vehicle access door/opening of any detached garage, carport, or other vehicle storage area that is accessed from and faces an alley must be set back at least 20 feet from the alley right-of-way (see Figure 7-6). The side yard setback for a detached rear-facing garage is minimum 3 feet.
Figure 7-6: Detached, Alley Access, Rear-facing
 
B.     Alley Access, Side-Facing. The vehicle access door/opening of any detached garage, carport, or other vehicle storage area that is accessed from an alley but faces a side property line must be set back at least 24 feet from the side property line that it faces (see Figure 7-7). The rear yard setback for a detached side-facing garage is minimum 3 feet.
Figure 7-7: Detached, Alley Access, Side-facing Garage
 
C.     Side Street Access, Side Facing. The vehicle access door/opening of any detached garage, carport, or other vehicle storage area that is accessed from and faces a side street must be set back at least 20 feet from the street side property line that it faces (see Figure 7-8). The rear yard setback for a detached side-facing garage is minimum 3 feet.
Figure 7-8: Detached, Side Street Access, Side-facing
 
D.     Front Street Access in Rear Yard. Rear and side yard setbacks for garages, carports, and other vehicle storage areas that are detached from the main structure, accessed from the front street, and located in the rear half of the lot with the door/opening facing the front or interior side property line is minimum 3 feet (see Figure 7-9).
Figure 7-9: Detached Front Street Access, Rear Yard
 
7.2.4. Below-Grade Garages. Below-grade garages are permitted for all locations and orientations established in Section 7.2.1 and Section 7.2.2.
7.2.5. Portes-Cocheres. Portes-cocheres may be located in the front half of the lot and face the front property line. Portes-cocheres must comply with all setbacks of the subject zoning district (see Figure 7-10).
Figure 7-10: Porte Chochere
 
Sec. 7.3.     Driveways
7.3.1. General Requirements.
A.     Driveways in Nonresidential Zoning Districts.
1.     In nonresidential zoning districts, driveway approaches from a public street may not exceed 24 feet in width along the lot's front property line or 40 feet in width or 30% of the lot depth, whichever is less, along the lot's street-side property line.
2.     Surfaces used on any driveway must comply with the standards on file in the engineering department and be specified and approved prior to installation. See the permeability requirements of Chapter 3, Article 3.100 [Article 3.02, Divisions 2 and 3] of the Code of Ordinances.
B.     Driveways in Residential Districts. Except as otherwise expressly stated in Section 7.3.2 regarding circular driveways, driveways for residential districts must comply with the following:
1.     All driveways and off-street parking must be located on the subject lot, on private property.
2.     Driveway approaches from a public street to lots in residential zoning districts, must be at least 9 feet in width and may not exceed 15 feet in width, measured at the property line.
3.     Driveway approaches from a public street to lots in residential zoning districts, must be located at least 3 feet from the interior side property line at the front property line.
4.     Driveways must be set back at least 1-foot from the interior side property line.
5.     Lots in residential zoning districts are allowed no more than one driveway approach per public street frontage, unless otherwise permitted by this subsection and the circular driveway regulations of Section 7.3.2. Additional driveway approaches are permitted if they are located at least 100 feet from another driveway approach, measured from centerline to the centerline of each driveway approach. Multiple driveways from an alley are permitted.
6.     Surfaces used on any driveway must comply with the standards on file in the engineering department and be specified and approved prior to installation. See the Permeability Requirements of Chapter 3, Article 3.100 [Article 3.02, Divisions 2 and 3] of the Code of Ordinances.
7.     Curb cuts for driveways are not permitted on corner lots within 35 feet of the intersection of the projected curblines at the street corner, and no portion of the driveway surface may be constructed within the minimum sight line as prescribed in Chapter 10, Article 10.2500 [section 12.01.012], of the Code of Ordinances (see Figure 7-16).
Figure 7-11: Residential District Driveways
 
7.3.2. Circular Driveways.
A.     Applicability. Circular driveways are permitted on all residentially zoned lots, subject to the regulations of this section (7.3.2).
B.     Circular Driveways with Two Approaches. The following applies to circular driveways with 2 approaches off the same street. See Figure 7-12.
1.     Driveway requirements in Section 7.3.1.B apply.
2.     The approaches must be at least 10 feet in width and may not exceed 12 feet in width, measured at the property line.
3.     Circular driveway approaches on a single lot must be separated by a minimum distance of 20 feet, measured between radius points and approaches. See Figure 7-13 and Figure 7-14 for examples of side streets with driveways.
4.     The inside curve of the circular driveway must be located a minimum of 7.5 feet from the back of sidewalk, creating a landscape area of at least 125 square feet in area.
5.     Refer to 7.3.2.F for parking on circular driveways.
Figure 7-12: Circular Driveways with Two Approaches
 
Figure 7-13: Circular Driveway with Two Approaches on Side Street with Driveway
 
Figure 7-14: Circular Driveway with Two Approaches on Side Street with Driveway
 
C.     Circular Driveways on Smaller Lots. The following applies to circular driveways on smaller lots. See Figure 7-15.
1.     Driveway requirements in Section 7.3.1.B apply, unless otherwise stated herein.
2.     Circular driveway requirements in Section 7.3.2.A apply, unless otherwise stated herein.
3.     On lots 50 feet or less than 56 feet in width at the front property line, the circular driveway may be located at least 1 foot from abutting property lines.
4.     Parking pads or extensions beyond a 24 foot radius drive shall be located at least 3 feet from abutting property lines
5.     In the SF-A district, a circular driveway may be constructed and maintained across 2 adjoining lots to serve 2 dwellings that share a common wall if the driveway complies with all applicable regulations of this section and that the owners of each dwelling have executed and delivered to the community development director a recordable mutual access agreement for the circular driveway in a form approved by the city attorney.
Figure 7-15: Circular Driveways on Lots less than 56-Feet
 
D.     Circular Driveways on Corner Lots. The following applies to circular driveways with corner lots. See Figure 7-16.
1.     Driveway requirements in Section 7.3.1.B apply.
2.     The approaches must be at least 10 feet in width and may not exceed 12 feet in width, measured at the property line.
3.     Circular driveway approaches must be located a minimum of 35 feet from an intersection, measured from the back of curb of the perpendicular street..
4.     The inside curve of the circular driveway must be located a minimum of 7.5 feet from the back of sidewalk, creating a landscape area of at least 125 square feet in area.
5.     Refer to Section 7.3.2.F for parking on circular driveways.
Figure 7-16: Circular Driveways on Corner Lots
 
E.     Circular Driveways with One Approaches. The following applies to circular driveways with one approach. See Figure 7-17.
1.     Driveway requirements in Section 7.3.1.B apply.
2.     Approach Size. A single approach must be at least 10 feet in width and may not exceed 20 feet in width.
3.     The outside radius of the circle must be a minimum of 25 feet and the inside radius must be a minimum of 12 feet.
4.     Refer to Section 7.3.2.F for parking on circular driveways.
Figure 7-17: Single Approach Circular Drive
 
F.     Parking and Access.
1.     Parking areas on circular driveways must be at least 7.5 feet from back of sidewalk front street property lines.
2.     Parking on circular driveways is permitted in front and street side setbacks, but such parking may not be counted toward satisfying minimum parking requirements.
3.     Circular driveways must provide free, unrestricted ingress and egress and contain no dead-end or head-in parking areas that require maneuvering of a vehicle to negotiate or to utilize. The area between the sidewalk or property line and the curbline of the abutting street may not be used for parking including inset parking, provided that any existing inset parking may be maintained in good repair by the owner of the adjacent property.
4.     No unpaved surface may be used for parking or storage of vehicles.
7.3.3. Driveways Located in Street Yards.
A.     SF, SF-A and D Districts.
1.     Circular driveways and front-entry driveways with parking spaces located in the streetyard setback (up to the building line) are not included in impermeable surface calculations for the entire lot. These driveways may be counted in the impervious surface calculations for street yards and street setback areas. Refer to Article 2 for street yard zone regulations.
2.     Alternate paving materials expressly include single-size aggregates, permeable concrete, permeable asphalt, masonry or natural stone blocks/pavers, grass pavers, and other materials authorized by the specific paving standards promulgated by, and kept on file in, the community development department (“paving standards”). Alternate paving materials must be installed and used in a manner authorized by the paving standards.
3.     Circular and front-entry driveways constructed with an alternate paving material, must be retained with masonry curbs on reinforced concrete footings.
4.     One head-in parking space is permitted in the front yard setback. The parking space must be located on the subject lot, on private property and be at least 9 feet in width and 20 feet in length, measured from the back of sidewalk onto the lot. The approach to the space must comply with all requirements of Section 7.3.1.B. See Figure 7-18.
B.     SF and D Districts.
1.     Parking spaces that are located parallel to the front or (corner) side street in the required street setback must be located at least 15 feet 7.5 feet from the back of sidewalk. Parking spaces located in the front yard must be parallel to and set back from the back of sidewalk a minimum of 15 feet. No more than 2 spaces, with a maximum width of 9-feet each, may be provided (see Figure 7-19).
2.     Flag driveways located in the street setback are allowed (See Figure 7-19).
Figure 7-18: Front Yard Parking Space Perpendicular to Street
 
Figure 7-19: Flag Driveway
 
Figure 7-20: Circle Drive with Driveway Extension
 
Article 8. Fences, Walls and Screening
Sec. 8.1.     Applicability
The regulations of this article apply to all fences, walls and equipment screening installed after December 1, 1980.
Sec. 8.2.     Prohibited Locations
8.2.1. A fence, wall, screen or retaining wall may not encroach upon any public property, right-of-way or easement except by prior written approval by the city council, with the consent of any public utility or other public or private agency or entity having an interest in or right to use any such public property, right-of-way, or easement. Written approval of all affected public and private entities must be submitted to the community development director with the revocable license application.
8.2.2. All fences must be maintained in a vertical plane so as to not overhang or encroach upon any public property, right-of-way, or easement.
8.2.3. No portion of a fence, wall, screen, or retaining wall may be constructed or be allowed to remain in a position that will cause an obstruction or interference with the minimum sight line standards of Section 12.01.012 of the Code of Ordinances, or constitute a visibility hazard for any street, alley, or sidewalk.
Sec. 8.3.     Fences and Walls; General Regulations
8.3.1. All fence, wall, and screen heights, including any allowed ornamentation, must be measured vertically from natural grade along the nearest property line adjacent to the fence, wall, or screen. Fences, walls, and screens may need to step or slope along the property line in order not to exceed the maximum allowable height.
8.3.2. Columns, posts or supporting structures may extend a maximum of 6 inches above the adjoining screening surface of a fence or wall.
8.3.3. Lights, lamps, or any type of ornamentation mounted on any column, post, or supporting structure of a fence or wall may extend a maximum of 12 inches above the adjoining screening surface of such fence or wall. Such column, post or supporting structure and ornamentation shall not exceed a maximum of 9 feet in height.
8.3.4. Any combination or element of fence and retaining wall may not exceed a maximum of 8 feet in height in any location. To be considered a retaining wall, the wall must retain earth on one side. Any portion of the wall that does not retain earth will be considered part of a fence.
8.3.5. Fences or walls erected or located adjacent to or abutting on any structure or surface, constructed in such a manner so as to provide a raised or built-up surface higher than the grade or ground level of the fence line of the screening portion of a fence or wall, such as, but not limited to wood decks, patios, berms, pool decks, etc., may not exceed 8 feet in height and such height shall not be measured from any such built-up or raised surface.
8.3.6. Fences and walls located within the buildable area of the subject lot (i.e., outside required setbacks) are subject to applicable building height limits. They are not subject to fence/wall height limits.
Figure 8-1: Fence/Wall Height Measurement
 
Sec. 8.4.     Fences and Walls in Residential Districts
8.4.1. Front Yard. Fences and walls may not be constructed in the front yard in residential zoning districts, forward of the front wall of the main structure, except in the following circumstances:
A.     Decorative metal fencing and masonry walls not exceeding 5 feet in height, architecturally attached to the main building and extending not more than 6 feet into the front yard;
B.     Edging for flower or landscaping beds that does not exceed 12 inches in height;
C.     Retaining walls and masonry walls not exceeding 2 feet in height above the average natural grade of the front yard;
D.     When a special exception is approved by the board of adjustment in accordance with Section 9.6; or
E.     When otherwise expressly authorized in this zoning ordinance (see Section 8.4.4).
8.4.2. Side Yard.
A.     Fences or walls erected along an interior side lot line (between abutting) properties may not exceed 8 feet in height.
B.     Fences or walls erected along a street side lot line (corner lot) may not exceed 8 feet in height. However, if the existing grade of the lot slopes toward the street in such a way that a retaining wall is necessary, the maximum height of the retaining wall and fence in the street side yard behind the front building line may be up to 10 feet in height when measured from the adjacent grade on the street side, provided that the fence portion may not exceed 8 feet in height. Building up the ground surface or otherwise modifying the grade of a lot to justify the need for a retaining wall is prohibited. When fences or walls are built atop retaining walls, there must be a clear visual demarcation between the top of the retaining wall and the bottom of the fence or wall. Such demarcation may be provided in the form of different materials or a horizontal break between the retaining wall and the fence or wall or other technique approved by the community development director.
C.     Fences or walls erected on sloping ground may be stepped or constructed to adjust to grade, provided the maximum height does not exceed 8 feet.
D.     Fences or wing walls erected in a required side setback may not exceed 8 feet in height.
8.4.3. Rear Yard.
A.     A fence or wall constructed along a rear property line may not exceed 8 feet in height.
B.     When the existing grade of a lot slopes toward an abutting alley in such a way that a retaining wall is necessary for construction of a new fence, the maximum height of the retaining wall and fence located in the rear yard shall not exceed 10 feet in height when measured from the abutting grade on the alley side, provided the fence portion does not exceed 8 feet in height. Building up the ground surface or otherwise modifying the grade of a lot to justify the need for a retaining wall is prohibited.
Figure 8-2: Fences and Walls in Residential Districts
 
8.4.4. Special Exception for Front Yard Fences.
A.     SF-1 District.
1.     The board of adjustment is authorized to approve front yard fences on SF-1-zoned lots, in accordance with the special exception procedures of Section 9.6, if the board of adjustment determines that the proposed fence will not be contrary to the public interest and will comply with all applicable regulations of this subsection.
2.     Front yard fences may be approved only on SF-1-zoned lots with a minimum area of one acre.
3.     Front yard fences in SF-1 districts may not exceed 6 feet in height above grade at any point.
4.     Front yard fences must be constructed with openings of not less than 50% of the total area of the fence (maximum 50% opacity).
5.     Front yard fences must be dark in color, either black or dark green.
6.     Front yard fences in SF-1 districts must be constructed of a solid material, except wood or any wood product.
7.     The special exception application for a front yard fence must be accompanied by a site plan containing at least the following information:
a.     A layout of the fence on the property, including all gates; and
b.     A description of the fence, including material, colors, and all relevant design details.
8.     The special exception application for a front yard fence must also be accompanied by a landscape plan showing that the fence will be screened from view from any adjoining property by landscape material greater than 6 feet in height and planted on centers close enough to maintain a complete screening of the fence at all points, and including an irrigation system for such landscape materials, with:
a.     A recordable, written covenant executed by the property owner that the landscape material will be irrigated and maintained at all times as a condition to continuance of the special exception; and
b.     Written approval of the design of fence gates by the University Park Fire Department, which design must include a plan for access to the property through such gates in the event of fire or other emergency.
9.     As an alternative to a fence screened by landscape material, the board of adjustment may approve an open, wrought-iron or wrought-iron appearance fence under the following conditions:
a.     The fence must be kept in an “open” state that is not screened by a landscape barrier or hedge;
b.     The fence must be black or dark green metal picket fence, with brick column construction;
c.     The brick columns must be no greater than 2 feet in width;
d.     The fence must be constructed with openings of not less than 75% of the total area of the fence (maximum 25% opacity);
e.     The fence may not exceed 6 feet in height above grade at any point;
f.     The fence may be installed upon a brick “knee” or base wall, not exceeding 2 feet in height.
10.     Gates and columns abutting driveways in front yard areas may not exceed 8 feet in height above grade, including any light, lamp fixture, capstone, or other ornamentation mounted on the top thereof.
B.     SF-2 District.
1.     The board of adjustment is authorized to approve front yard fences on SF-2-zoned lots, in accordance with the special exception procedures of Section 9.6, if the board of adjustment determines that the proposed fence will not be contrary to the public interest and will comply with all applicable regulations of this subsection.
2.     Front yard fences may be approved only on SF-2-zoned lots adjacent to and facing the Dallas Country Club.
3.     Front yard fences may be approved only on SF-2-zoned lots with a minimum area of 14,500 square feet.
4.     Front yard fences may not exceed 8 feet in height above grade at any point.
5.     The fence must be constructed with openings of not less than 75% of the total area of the fence (maximum 25% opacity);
6.     Front yard fences must be dark in color, either black or dark green.
7.     Front yard fences must be constructed of metal rails and pickets.
8.     The special exception application for a front yard fence must be accompanied by a site plan containing at least the following information:
a.     A layout of the fence on the property, including all gates; and
b.     A description of the fence, including material, colors, and all relevant design details.
9.     The special exception application for a front yard fence must be accompanied by written approval of the design of the fence gates by the University Park Fire Department, which design must include a plan for access to the property through such gates in the event of fire or other emergency.
8.4.5. Trash and Recyclables Storage. Storage areas for trash and recyclable material receptacles must be provided in residential districts, as follows:
A.     Storage areas must be located completely on private property
B.     Storage areas must be unobstructed and have width of at least 5 feet and a depth of at least 3 feet. The property owner is responsible for providing a larger unobstructed storage area adequate in size for the approved trash and recycling receptacles generated by the occupants of the property.
C.     Storage areas must be located parallel to and abutting an alley.
D.     Storage areas must be installed when a new permit is issued for the installation of a new fence, or for the repair of an existing fence.
E.     Insets or other areas provided for storage of receptacles on private property must be completely unobstructed and easily accessible for collection from an alley right-of-way.
F.     Receptacles must be placed on a level surface, no more than one foot above the grade of the alley pavement.
Sec. 8.5.     Fences and Walls in UC, O, GR, RC, SC, C and PD Districts
Fences in UC, O, GR, RC, SC, C and PD districts may not exceed 8 feet in height in rear or side yards and may not be installed in front yard areas forward of the front wall of the main building (see also Section 3.4).
Sec. 8.6.     P District Walls
See Section 4.4.3.
Sec. 8.7.     Construction Fences
8.7.1. Construction fences are required around all residential sites upon which new construction, remodeling, alterations or building additions are occurring.
8.7.2. No signs with a commercial message are permitted on construction fences or barriers.
8.7.3. The community development director is authorized to waive the requirement for residential construction fences if the director determines that the proposed remodeling, alteration or addition will not adversely impact adjoining properties due to construction debris, traffic or other associated conditions.
8.7.4. Required construction fences must be at least 6 feet in height, with openings in the fence not exceeding 6 square inches. The community development director is authorized to require that construction fences be of a solid construction to ensure the safety of the public.
8.7.5. Gates in construction fences, when open, may not obstruct public sidewalks or alleys and must be locked when construction activities are not being conducted.
8.7.6. Temporary construction fences must be removed upon completion of the exterior of the facility and removal of construction debris, before final grading of the lot.
Sec. 8.8.     Tennis Court Fences
Fences or walls that exceed 8 feet in height must be set back from any front, side or rear lot line by at least 2 feet for every one foot that the fence or wall exceeds 8 feet in height.
Sec. 8.9.     Swimming Pool Enclosures
A.     General. All lot owners and tenants of lots on which a swimming pool, spa, or hot tub is located must maintain, at all times, a fence, wall, or other structure that completely surrounds the swimming pool, spa, or hot tub. Such fence or wall must comply with the regulations of this section (see also Section 5.3.10).
B.     Building Permits.
1.     A building permit must be obtained before the construction of a swimming pool, spa, or hot tub and before the installation of a fence around such pool, spa, or hot tub.
2.     As part of the permit procedure, the contractor of the swimming pool, spa, or hot tub and the contractor for the fence must sign an agreement acknowledging that they understand and agree to the conditions of this section.
3.     The property owner must agree, as a condition of the permit, to:
a.     Maintain in good working order the fence, gates, and doors granting access to the pool area from the outside, as prescribed in this section;
b.     Authorize city inspectors to make periodic or special inspections of the pool area to determine if all provisions of this section are being maintained; and,
c.     Agree to make whatever adjustment, repairs, or replacement to the fence, gates, or doors leading to the pool area as required by the inspector to conform to this section.
C.     Regulations.
1.     A fence, wall or other structure at least 6 feet in height must completely enclose the swimming pool, spa, or hot tub, and must have horizontal supporting members located on the inside or pool side and be designed so as to not allow children to climb such fence, wall or structure. A fence, wall or structure enclosing a swimming pool, spa, or hot tub may not have any openings, other than doors or gates, larger than 4 square inches. Fences comprised primarily of vertical members (i.e. picket type or wrought iron) may not have openings between members, measured horizontally, greater than 4 inches.
2.     All gates in a fence or wall enclosing a swimming pool, spa, or hot tub, and leading into the pool, spa, or hot tub area, must be single type, personnel gates not exceeding 48 inches in width, and be:
a.     Equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices capable of keeping such gates securely closed at all times; or
b.     Equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices installed on the gate at least 54 inches above grade.
3.     Double gates, sliding gates, or automated gates across driveways or parking areas do not satisfy the gate requirements of this section.
Sec. 8.10.     Municipal Facility Fences
Fences and walls constructed on or around municipal facilities may be constructed in the required front yard and may exceed required heights when deemed necessary for the safety or protection of the facilities.
Sec. 8.11.     Materials
A.     Permitted. Except as otherwise expressly stated in this zoning ordinance, fences, walls, screens, and retaining walls may be constructed of wood, masonry, concrete, wrought-iron, or chainlink. The community development director may approve the use of alternative materials, provided that the material offered is at least the equivalent of the above-prescribed materials in suitability, strength and durability. The community development director must require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claims that may be made regarding use of an alternative material.
B.     Prohibited. No fence, wall, screen, or retaining wall may be constructed of barbed wire, razor wire, ribbon wire, sheet metal, wire mesh, or any other similar material. No fence, wall, screen, may be electrically charged.
Sec. 8.12.     Inspection and Maintenance
A.     Inspections. All fences, walls, screens, or retaining walls must be inspected upon completion by the building inspection department. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to make a request for inspection to the department within 3 days after the work has been completed.
B.     Maintenance. All fences, walls, screens, or retaining walls constructed under the provisions of this article must be maintained so as to comply with the requirements of this article at all times. Such structures must be maintained by the owner or person in charge of the property in as near as possible the same condition as when such structure was erected, and must be maintained at a minimum. as follows:
1.     The structure may not be out of vertical alignment by more than 20 degrees; and
2.     All damaged or missing portions of such structure must be replaced with comparable materials of a color comparable to the remaining portions of such structure.
Article 9. Review and Approval Procedures
Sec. 9.1.     Common Provisions
9.1.1. Applicability. The common procedural provisions of this section apply to all of the procedures in this article unless otherwise expressly stated.
9.1.2. Review and Decision-making Authority. Table 9-1 provides a summary of the review and approval procedures of this article. In the event of conflict between this summary table and the detailed procedures contained elsewhere in this article, the detailed procedures govern.
Table 9-1: Review and Decision-making Authority
Procedure	CDD	BoA	P&Z	CC
Zoning Text/Map Amendment	R	–	R*	DM*
Specific Use Permit	R	–	R*	DM*
Planned Development	R	–	R*	DM*
Special Exception	R	DM*	–	–
Variance	R	DM*	–	–
Appeal of Administrative Decision	–	DM*	–	–

Table notes:
R = review and recommending authority
DM = decision-making authority
CDD = community development director
BOA = board of adjustment
P&Z = planning and zoning commission
CC= city council
* = public hearing
9.1.3. Preapplication Meetings.
A.     Purpose. Preapplication meetings provide an early (preapplication) opportunity for staff and applicants to discuss the procedures, standards and regulations required for development approval under this zoning ordinance.
B.     Applicability. Preapplication meetings are required whenever the provisions of this zoning ordinance expressly state that they are required. They are encouraged in all cases.
C.     Scheduling. Preapplication meetings must be scheduled with community development department staff.
D.     Guidelines. The community development director is authorized to establish guidelines for preapplication meetings, including information that should be provided and any available alternatives to face-to-face meetings, such as telephone conversations and email correspondence.
9.1.4. Applications and Fees.
A.     Owner-initiated Applications. Whenever the provisions of this zoning ordinance allow the filing of an application by the owner of the subject property, that application must be filed by all record title owners of the real properties that are the subject of the application or the property owners' authorized agent.
B.     Form of Application. Applications required under this zoning ordinance must be submitted in a form and in such numbers as required by the official responsible for accepting the application. Applications must include materials and information to assist authorized review and decision-making bodies in their consideration of the application, including at least the following:
1.     A list of the names and addresses of all owners of record of the property that is the subject of the application; and
2.     Maps, plats, surveys, dimensioned site plans, engineering documents, environmental reports, traffic studies, and other materials and information, as required by this zoning ordinance or application checklists established by the official responsible for accepting the application. Application forms and submittal requirements must be made available to the general public.
C.     Application Filing Fees and Notification Costs. All applications filed by property owner must be accompanied by the application fee that has been established by the city council. Application filing fees are intended to cover the cost of providing public hearing notices and other administrative costs relating to reviewing and processing applications.
D.     Application Completeness, Accuracy and Sufficiency.
1.     An application will be considered complete and ready for processing only if it is submitted in the required number and form, includes all required information and is accompanied by the required application filing and notification fees.
2.     The official responsible for accepting the application must make a determination of application completeness within 10 business days of application filing.
3.     If an application is determined to be incomplete, the official responsible for accepting the application must provide notice to the applicant along with an explanation of the application's deficiencies. Notice of an incomplete application may be provided by personal service, electronic mail or first-class mail.
4.     No further processing of incomplete applications will occur and incomplete applications will be pulled from the processing cycle. When the deficiencies are corrected, the application will be placed in the first available processing cycle. If the deficiencies are not corrected by the applicant within 60 days, the application will be deemed to have been withdrawn.
5.     Applications deemed complete will be considered to be in the processing cycle and will be reviewed by staff and other review and decision-making bodies in accordance with applicable review and approval procedures of this zoning ordinance.
6.     The official responsible for accepting the application may require that applications or plans be revised before being placed on an agenda for possible action if the community development director determines that:
a.     The application or plan contains one or more significant inaccuracies or omissions that hinder timely or competent evaluation of the plan's/application's compliance with zoning ordinance requirements or other regulations;
b.     The application contains multiple minor inaccuracies or omissions that hinder timely or competent evaluation of the plan's/application's compliance with zoning ordinance requirements or other regulations; or
c.     The decision-making body does not have legal authority to approve the application.
9.1.5. Application Processing Cycles. The community development director and other officials responsible for accepting applications, after consulting with review and decision-making bodies, is authorized to promulgate reasonable cycles and timelines for processing applications, including deadlines for receipt of complete applications.
9.1.6. Neighbor Communications.
A.     Neighbor communications are encouraged by the board of adjustment, planning and zoning commission and city council to help:
1.     Educate applicants and neighbors about one another's interests;
2.     Resolve issues in a manner that respects those interests; and
3.     Identify unresolved issues before initiation of formal public hearings.
B.     Applicants are encouraged to submit a summary of their neighbor communication activities at or before the first required public hearing. The recommended content of such summaries is as follows:
1.     Efforts to notify neighbors about the proposal (how and when notification occurred, and who was notified);
2.     How information about the proposal was shared with neighbors (mailings, work-shops, meetings, open houses, fliers, door-to-door handouts, etc.);
3.     Who was involved in the discussions;
4.     Concerns raised by neighbors; and
5.     What specific changes (if any) were considered and/or made as a result of the neighbor communications.
9.1.7. Public Hearing Notices.
A.     Newspaper Notice. Whenever the procedures of this article require that newspaper notice be provided, the notice must be published in the city's official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation within the city.
B.     Mailed Notice. Whenever the procedures of this article require that mailed notice be provided, a written notice must be sent by United States Postal Service first class mail to the owner of the subject property and owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the subject property. Addresses must be based on the most recently approved city tax roll.
C.     Content of Required Notice. All required public hearing notices must:
1.     Indicate the date, time and place of the public hearing that is the subject of the notice;
2.     Describe any property involved in the application by map, street address or legal description;
3.     Describe the action sought in the application or proposal;
4.     Identify who will conduct the hearing; and
5.     Indicate where additional information on the matter can be obtained.
D.     Constructive Notice.
1.     When the records of the city document the publication or mailing of notice, as required by this article, required notice of the public hearing will be presumed to have been given.
2.     Minor defects in required notices will not be deemed to impair the notice or invalidate proceedings pursuant to the notice. Minor defects in notice are limited to errors in a legal description or typographical or grammatical errors that do not impede communication of the notice to affected parties. If questions arise at the hearing regarding the adequacy of notice, the hearing body must make a formal finding about whether there was substantial compliance with the notice requirements of this zoning ordinance.
9.1.8. Hearing Procedures.
A.     At required public hearings, interested persons must be permitted to submit information and comments, verbally or in writing. The hearing body is authorized to establish reasonable rules and regulations governing the conduct of hearings and the presentation of information and comments.
B.     Once commenced, a public hearing may be continued by the hearing body. No re-notification is required if the continuance is set for specified date and time and that date and time is announced at the time of the continuance.
C.     If a public hearing is continued or postponed for an indefinite period of time from the date of the originally scheduled public hearing, new public hearing notice must be given before the rescheduled public hearing. If the applicant requests and is granted a continuance or postponement requiring renotification, the applicant must pay any costs of renotification.
9.1.9. Action by Review and Decision-Making Bodies.
A.     In taking action under the procedures of this article, review and decision-making bodies must act by simple majority vote of a quorum, unless otherwise expressly stated.
B.     Review and decision-making bodies may take any action that is consistent with:
1.     The regulations of this zoning ordinance and state law;
2.     Any rules or by-laws that apply to the review or decision-making body; and
3.     The notice that was given.
C.     Review and decision-making bodies are authorized to continue a public hearing or defer action in order to receive additional information or further deliberate.
9.1.10. Conditions of Approval. When the procedures of this article authorize approval with conditions, review bodies, including staff, are authorized to recommend conditions and decision-making bodies are authorized to approve the subject application with conditions. Any conditions recommended or approved must relate to a situation likely to be created or aggravated by the proposed use or development and must be roughly proportional to the impacts of the use or development.
9.1.11. Decision-Making Criteria; Burden of Proof or Persuasion. Applications must address relevant review and decision-making criteria. In all cases, the burden is on the applicant to show that an application or proposal complies with all applicable review or approval criteria.
9.1.12. Required Time-frames for Action. Any time limit specified in this zoning ordinance for any decision or action on behalf of a review or decision-making body may be extended if the applicant agrees to an extension. Unless otherwise expressly stated, if a review or decision-making body does not render a decision or take action within any time period required under this zoning ordinance and the applicant has not agreed to an extension of that time limit, the application is deemed denied.
Sec. 9.2.     Zoning Ordinance Text Amendments
9.2.1. Authority to Initiate. Amendments to the text of this zoning ordinance may be initiated only by the city council, the planning and zoning commission or community development director.
9.2.2. Community Development Director Review. The community development director must prepare a report and recommendation on proposed zoning ordinance text amendments. The report must be transmitted to the planning and zoning commission before its public hearing on the proposed amendment.
9.2.3. Planning and Zoning Commission Hearing and Recommendation.
A.     The planning and zoning commission must hold a public hearing on the proposed zoning ordinance text amendment.
B.     Notice of the planning and zoning commission's public hearing on a zoning ordinance text amendment must be published at least 10 days before the public hearing, in accordance with Section 9.1.7.
C.     Following the close of the public hearing, the planning and zoning commission must act to recommend that the proposed text amendment be approved, approved with modifications, or denied and transmit its report and recommendations to the city council. Motions to approve, approve with modifications or deny zoning ordinance text amendments may be approved by a simple majority vote of a quorum.
9.2.4. City Council Hearing and Action.
A.     Following receipt of the planning and zoning commission's report and recommendation, the city council must hold a public hearing on the proposed zoning ordinance text amendment.
B.     Notice of the city council's public hearing on a zoning ordinance text amendment must be published at least 15 days before the public hearing, in accordance with Section 9.1.7.
C.     Following the close of the public hearing, the city council must act to approve the proposed zoning ordinance text amendment, approve the proposed text amendment with modifications or deny the proposed text amendment. The city council is also authorized to remand the proposed text amendment back to the planning and zoning commission for further consideration. Zoning ordinance text amendments may be approved by a simple majority vote of a quorum.
9.2.5. Review and Approval Criteria. The decision to amend the zoning ordinance text is a matter of legislative discretion that is not controlled by any one standard. In making recommendations and decisions about zoning ordinance text amendments, review and decision-making bodies must consider all relevant factors, including at least the following:
A.     Whether the proposed text amendment is in conformity with city policy and the public interest; and
B.     Whether the proposed zoning ordinance text amendment corrects an error or inconsistency or is necessary or desirable to meet the challenge of a changed or changing condition and is in the public interest.
Sec. 9.3.     Zoning Map Amendments
9.3.1. Authority to Initiate. Amendments to the zoning map may be initiated only by the city council, the planning and zoning commission or the owner of the real property that is the subject of the proposed zoning map amendment or by the subject property owner's authorized agent.
9.3.2. Owner-initiated Applications. Property owner-initiated applications for approval of a zoning map amendment must be filed with the community development director.
9.3.3. Community Development Director Review. Following receipt of a complete zoning map amendment application or other initiation of zoning map amendment, the community development director must prepare a report and recommendation on the proposed zoning map amendment. The report must be transmitted to the planning and zoning commission before its public hearing on the proposed amendment.
9.3.4. Planning and Zoning Commission Hearing and Recommendation.
A.     The planning and zoning commission must hold a public hearing on the proposed zoning ordinance text amendment.
B.     Notice of the planning and zoning commission's public hearing on a zoning map amendment must be published and mailed at least 10 days before the public hearing, in accordance with Section 9.1.7.
C.     Following the close of the public hearing, the planning and zoning commission must act to recommend that the proposed zoning map amendment be approved, approved with modifications, or denied and transmit its report and recommendations to the city council. Motions to approve, approve with modifications or deny zoning map amendments may be approved by a simple majority vote of a quorum.
Figure 9-1: Zoning Map Amendment Process (Generally)
 
9.3.5. City Council Hearing and Action.
A.     Following receipt of the planning and zoning commission's report and recommendation, the city council must hold a public hearing on the proposed zoning map amendment.
B.     Notice of the city council's public hearing on a zoning map amendment must be published at least 15 days before the public hearing, in accordance with Section 9.1.7.
C.     Following the close of their public hearing, the city council must act to approve the proposed zoning map amendment, approve the proposed amendment with modifications, including approval of a less intensive zoning district, or deny the proposed amendment. The city council is also authorized to remand the proposed zoning map amendment back to the planning and zoning commission for further consideration.
D.     Zoning map amendments may be approved by a simple majority vote of a quorum, except as stated in Section 9.3.6.
9.3.6. Protest Petitions.
A.     If a valid protest petition is filed against any proposed zoning map amendment, passage of the zoning map amendment by the city council requires a favorable vote of three-fourths of the members of the entire city council.
B.     A protest petition will be deemed valid if it is signed by any of the following:
1.     The owners of 20% or more of the area of the lots included in proposed zoning map amendment area; or
2.     The owners of 20% or more of the area of the lots within 200 feet of the exterior boundaries of the area included in the proposed zoning map amendment area.
C.     A written protest petition opposing a zoning map amendment must be submitted to the community development director at least 3 business days before the city council's vote.
9.3.7. Review and Approval Criteria. The decision to amend the zoning map is a matter of city council discretion that is not controlled by any single standard or criterion. In making recommendations and decisions on zoning map amendments, review and decision-making bodies must consider all relevant factors, including at least the following:
A.     Whether the proposed zoning map amendment is consistent with the policy and intent of comprehensive plan; and
B.     Whether the proposed zoning map amendment corrects an error or inconsistency or is necessary or desirable to meet the challenge of a changed or changing condition and is in the public interest.
9.3.8. Successive Applications. If a zoning map amendment application has been denied by the city council, no new zoning map amendment application that includes all or part of the same property may considered by planning and zoning commission or the city council for at least one year from the date of final action by the city council, unless the city council finds that conditions have changed or that the application involves different considerations from the previous application and thereby justifies a waiver of the time period prior to a new application.
Sec. 9.4.     Specific Use Permits
9.4.1. Authority to File. Applications for approval of a specific use permit (SUP) may be filed only by the subject property owner or the subject property owner's authorized agent.
9.4.2. Application Filing. Applications for approval of an SUP must be filed with the community development director.
9.4.3. Community Development Director Review. Following receipt of a complete SUP application, the community development director must prepare a report and recommendation on the proposed SUP. The report must be transmitted to the planning and zoning commission before its public hearing on the proposal.
9.4.4. Planning and Zoning Commission Hearing and Recommendation.
A.     The planning and zoning commission must hold a public hearing on the proposed specific use permit.
B.     Notice of the planning and zoning commission's public hearing must be mailed at least 10 days before the public hearing, in accordance with Section 9.1.7.
C.     Following the close of the public hearing, the planning and zoning commission must act to recommend that the proposed SUP be approved, approved with conditions, or denied and transmit its report and recommendations to the city council. Motions to approve, approve with conditions or deny requested specific use permits may be approved by a simple majority vote of a quorum.
9.4.5. City Council Hearing and Action.
A.     Following receipt of the planning and zoning commission's report and recommendation, the city council must hold a public hearing on the proposed specific use permit.
B.     Notice of the city council's public hearing must be published at least 15 days before the public hearing, in accordance with Section 9.1.7.
C.     Following the close of their public hearing, the city council must act to approve the proposed SUP, approve the proposed SUP with conditions, or deny the proposed SUP. The city council is also authorized to remand the SUP application back to the planning and zoning commission for further consideration.
D.     Specific use permit applications may be approved by a simple majority vote of a quorum.
9.4.6. Review and Approval Criteria. A specific use permit may be approved by the city council upon a determination that the following criteria are met:
A.     The proposed use in the proposed location is in keeping with purposes of this zoning ordinance; and
B.     The proposed use will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
9.4.7. Successive Applications. If a specific use permit application has been denied by the city council, no new SUP application that includes all or part of the same property may considered by planning and zoning commission or the city council for at least one year from the date of final action by the city council, unless the city council finds that conditions have changed or that the application involves different considerations from the previous application and thereby justifies a waiver of the time period prior to a new application.
9.4.8. Mapping of Specific Use Permits. All specific use permits approved in accordance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance must be referenced on the zoning map and a list of such permits must be maintained and be available for public inspection in the office of the community development director.
Sec. 9.5.     Planned Developments
9.5.1. Overview.
A.     Planned developments are approved through the concurrent approval of:
1.     A PD (planned development) district zoning map amendment, in accordance with the zoning map amendment procedures of Section 9.3; and
2.     A conceptual site plan in accordance with the procedures of this section.
B.     Approval of a detailed site plan is required after approval of the PD zoning map amendment and conceptual site plan.
9.5.2. Conceptual Site Plans.
A.     General. Conceptual site plans serve to establish the overall development plan for the planned development and provide the regulatory framework (e.g., allowed uses, densities, floor area, building heights, and overall site design) for future development of the property.
B.     Preapplication Meeting. Before submitting an application for a PD rezoning, the applicant must schedule a meeting with the community development director to discuss the proposed project and the required process (see Section 9.1.3)
C.     Application Filing. Complete applications for conceptual site plan approval must be filed with the community development director at the same time that the PD zoning map amendment application is filed. The zoning map amendment procedures of Section 9.3 apply to PD zoning map amendments and PD conceptual site plans except as expressly modified by the PD approval procedures of this section.
D.     Application Contents. An application for a PD district rezoning and conceptual site plan must contain all items of information specified in the preapplication meeting and include at least the following information:
1.     Use categories and/or specific uses;
2.     Streets and alleys, proposed and existing;
3.     Lot arrangements, if applicable;
4.     Building footprints;
5.     Building heights;
6.     Layout and description of vehicular access and parking, including a breakdown of required parking by use category;
7.     Topographical or spot elevations of the site;
8.     Pertinent physical features of the site, if any;
9.     Any proposed building or buildings including distances from property lines;
10.     General landscape development plans;
11.     General elevations of proposed buildings;
12.     General description of the site, including area, dimensions and surroundings;
13.     Signage as appropriate; and
14.     Traffic impact studies if deemed necessary by the community development director.
E.     Planning and Zoning Commission Hearing and Recommendation. See Section 9.3.4.
F.     City Council Hearing and Action. See Section 9.3.5.
G.     Review and Approval Criteria. See Section 9.3.7.
H.     Lapse of Approval.
1.     Unless a longer time period or a phasing plan is approved at the time of approval of a conceptual site plan, a complete application for detailed site plan approval must be filed within 1 year of the date of conceptual site plan approval. If an application for detailed site plan approval is not filed within the required time period, no further detailed site plans may be approved for the project until the subject property owner has filed the original or amended conceptual site plan for re-review and reconsideration by the planning and zoning commission and city council. Such re-review and reconsideration must follow the conceptual site plan review procedures of this zoning ordinance. Following re-review and reconsideration, the planning and zoning commission is authorized to recommend and the city council is authorized to approve any of the following actions based on surrounding land use patterns and other relevant information presented at the time of reconsideration by the planning and zoning commission and city council:
a.     An extension of time for filing a detailed site plan; or
b.     An amendment to the approved PD conceptual site plan or rezoning to another zoning district in accordance with the zoning map amendment procedures of Section 9.3.
2.     For projects to be developed in phases, phase limits must be shown on the conceptual site plan and approved by the city council. The city council may impose conditions upon the phasing plan as deemed necessary to ensure orderly development, including requirements for financial guarantees ensuring construction of all required improvements.
9.5.3. Detailed Site Plans.
A.     Before the issuance of any building permits for development within an approved PD district, a detailed site plan must be submitted for approval, except that in cases where the conceptual site plan is deemed adequate, the planning and zoning commission may recommend a waiver of the requirement for a detailed site plan. At the time the amending ordinance is approved by the city council, any conditions of such waiver must be expressly identified.
B.     The detailed site plan must include final plans for development within planned development district and conform to the approved conceptual site plan. Approval of the detailed site plan must occur before issuance of any building permits within the districts.
C.     The detailed site plan may be submitted for the total area of the PD district or for any section or phase approved on the conceptual site plan. Unless the requirement for a detailed site plan is waived, the detailed site plan must be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and approved by the city council, but no public hearings are required.
D.     The detailed site plan must include all of the information required for conceptual site plans, with additional detail as required by the community development director to allow for a competent and thorough review. The detailed site plan must be a scaled drawing with adequate dimensions to assure compliance with the amending ordinance. It must also include expanded information regarding utility locations, utility easements, size of utility lines, dimensioned locations of ingress and egress, and an accurate topographical survey of the tract with contour intervals of not more than 5 feet.
E.     The detailed site plan must locate the proposed buildings, showing the location of the buildings on the site and the distances between buildings and other buildings, if any, property lines, street lines and alleys. In addition, the detailed site plan must include scaled drawings of the provisions for off-street parking.
F.     The detailed site plan must expand the landscape development plan to include special site construction, special paving, street furniture, lighting, site signage, screening walls, ornamental planting, and types and location of trees to be planted.
G.     As a supplemental document to the detailed site plan, architectural plans showing the elevations of the buildings must be submitted and approved with the detailed site plan.
H.     After approval of the detailed site plan, changes of detail that do not materially alter the basic relationship of the proposed development to adjacent property and that do not alter the uses permitted may be authorized by the community development director.
9.5.4. Phased Development. If deemed appropriate by the city council, PD districts may be developed in phases or sections. When phasing is desired, the applicant must submit the proposed phasing plan with the PD rezoning application and conceptual site plan. A detailed site plan for each phase must be submitted and reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and approved by the city council. The initial phase must include provisions for all utilities, thoroughfares, alleys and streets for the entire PD district unless otherwise expressly the city council.
9.5.5. Mapping of PD Districts. All PD districts approved in accordance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance must be referenced on the zoning map and a list of such districts must be maintained and be available for public inspection in the office of the community development director.
Sec. 9.6.     Special Exceptions
9.6.1. Authorized Special Exceptions. Only those special exceptions expressly authorized in this zoning ordinance may be approved as special exceptions.
9.6.2. Authority to File. Applications for special exception approval may be filed only by the owner of the subject property or by the property owner's authorized agent.
9.6.3. Application Filing. Complete applications for special exceptions must be filed with the community development director.
9.6.4. Community Development Director Review. Following receipt of a complete application, the community development director must prepare a report on the requested special exception. The report must be transmitted to the board of adjustment before their required public hearing.
9.6.5. Board of Adjustment Hearing and Decision.
A.     The board of adjustment must hold a public hearing on the special exception request.
B.     Notice of the board of adjustment's public hearing must be given to all parties in interest and published and mailed at least 10 days before the public hearing, in accordance with Section 9.1.7.
C.     Following the close of the public hearing, the board of adjustment must act to approve the requested special exception, approve the special exception with conditions, or deny the special exception request based on the applicable standards and review criteria of Section 9.6.6.
D.     Approval of a special exception requires an affirmative vote of at least 4 members of the board of adjustment.
E.     In approving a special exception, the board of adjustment is authorized to impose such conditions and restrictions as the board determines to be necessary to ensure compliance with the standards and criteria of Section 9.6.6, to reduce or minimize the effect of the special exception upon other properties in the area, and to better carry out the general purpose and intent of this zoning ordinance.
9.6.6. Standards and Review Criteria. A special exception may be approved by the board of adjustment only if the board determines that all of the following criteria are met:
A.     The special exception is expressly authorized under this zoning ordinance and satisfies applicable standards for approval;
B.     The development or activity allowed by the special exception will be in keeping with purposes of this zoning ordinance; and
C.     The proposed special exception will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
9.6.7. Filing and Effect of Decisions.
A.     Written decisions of the board of adjustment must be filed promptly following the board's action and be open to public inspection. Written decisions must describe the action taken, the vote of each board member participating and the reasons for such action, specifying the manner in which the applicant satisfied or failed to satisfy each of the applicable standards and review criteria of Section 9.6.6.
B.     The board of adjustment's decision on a special exception becomes final and effective after the board's written decision is filed in the board office.
9.6.8. Transferability. Approved special exceptions run with the land and are not affected by changes of tenancy, ownership, or management.
9.6.9. Amendments. A request for changes in the specific nature of the approved special exception or changes to any conditions attached to an approved special exception must be processed as a new application, including all requirements for fees, notices and public hearings.
9.6.10. Appeals. Appeals of board of adjustment decisions are taken to court in accordance with Section 10.1.4.H.
Sec. 9.7.     Variances
9.7.1. Intent. A variance is a grant of relief to a property owner from strict compliance with the regulations of this zoning ordinance when such relief would not be contrary to the public interest, and when, due to the special conditions of the subject property, literal enforcement of the zoning ordinance would result in an unnecessary hardship. The intent of a variance is not to simply remove an inconvenience or financial burden, but rather to alleviate an unnecessary hardship that would result if strict compliance with one or more zoning regulations was required.
9.7.2. Authorized Variances. The board of adjustment is authorized to grant a variance to any regulation in this zoning ordinance in accordance with the variance procedures of this section, except that the variance procedures may not be used to do any of the following:
A.     Allow a principal or an accessory use in a zoning district that is not otherwise allowed in that zoning district (i.e., “use variances” are prohibited);
B.     Allow an accessory use on a lot that is not occupied by the principal use that such accessory use serves;
C.     Waive, modify or amend any definition or use classification;
D.     Waive, modify or otherwise vary any of the review and approval procedures of this zoning ordinance;
E.     Waive, vary, modify or otherwise override a condition of approval or requirement imposed by an authorized decision-making body or the state or federal government; or
F.     Waive, vary or modify applicable residential density regulations, provided that this provision is not intended to prohibit variances to minimum lot area or width requirements that apply to lots occupied by a single dwelling unit.
9.7.3. Authority to File. Variance applications may be filed only by the owner of the subject property or by the property owner's authorized agent.
9.7.4. Application Filing. Complete applications for variances must be filed with the community development director.
9.7.5. Community Development Director Review. Following receipt of a complete application, the community development director must prepare a report on the requested variance. The report must be transmitted to the board of adjustment before the required public hearing.
9.7.6. Board of Adjustment Hearing and Decision.
A.     The board of adjustment must hold a public hearing on the variance request.
B.     Notice of the board of adjustment's public hearing must be given to all parties in interest and published and mailed at least 10 days before the public hearing, in accordance with Section 9.1.7.
C.     Following the close of the public hearing, the board of adjustment must make its findings and act to approve the requested variance, approve the variance with conditions, or deny the variance request based on the applicable standards and review criteria of Section 9.7.7.
D.     Approval of a variance requires an affirmative vote of at least 4 members of the board of adjustment.
E.     In approving a variance, the board of adjustment is authorized to impose such conditions and restrictions as the board determines to be necessary to ensure compliance with the standards and criteria of Section 9.7.7, to reduce or minimize the effect of the variance upon other properties in the area, and to better carry out the general purpose and intent of this zoning ordinance.
F.     Decisions of the board of adjustment must be supported by a written testimony or evidence.
9.7.7. Standards and Review Criteria. No variance may be approved unless the board of adjustment determines that all of the following facts have been established by the owner of the subject property:
A.     Literal enforcement of the ordinance will result in an unnecessary hardship;
B.     The hardship is not self-imposed or of the subject property owner's own making;
C.     The condition is unique to the subject property and not common to other properties within the area;
D.     The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or otherwise have a significant negative impact on adjacent properties;
E.     The requested variance, if granted, will not be contrary to the public interest or to orderly development in the area.
9.7.8. Filing and Effect of Decisions.
A.     Written decisions of the board of adjustment must be filed promptly following the board's action and be open to public inspection. Written decisions must describe the action taken, the vote of each board member participating and the reasons for such action, specifying the manner in which the applicant satisfied or failed to satisfy each of the applicable standards and review criteria of Section 9.7.7.
B.     The board of adjustment's decision on a variance becomes final and effective after the board's written decision is filed in the board office.
9.7.9. Transferability. Approved variances run with the land and are not affected by changes of tenancy, ownership, or management.
9.7.10. Amendments. A request for changes in the specific nature of the approved variance or changes to any conditions attached to an approved variance must be processed as a new variance application, including all requirements for fees, notices and public hearings.
9.7.11. Appeals. Appeals of board of adjustment decisions are taken to court in accordance with Section 10.1.4.H.
Sec. 9.8.     Appeals of Administrative Decisions
9.8.1. Authority. Except as otherwise expressly stated in this zoning ordinance, the board of adjustment is authorized to hear and decide all appeals where it is alleged there has been an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the community development director or any other administrative official in the administration, interpretation or enforcement of this zoning ordinance.
9.8.2. Right to Appeal. Appeals of administrative decisions may be filed by any person aggrieved by the administrative official's decision or action. The board of adjustment is authorized to make determinations about whether individuals filing appeals are “aggrieved” by the decision or action.
9.8.3. Application Filing. Appeals of administrative decisions must be filed with the community development director within 15 days of the date of the decision being appealed.
9.8.4. Effect of Filing. The filing of a complete notice of appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the community development director or the administrative official who made the decision being appealed certifies to the board of adjustment, after the appeal is filed, that, because of facts stated in the certification, a stay would cause immediate peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings will not be stayed unless by a restraining order, which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record based on due cause shown.
9.8.5. Record of Decision. Upon receipt of a complete application of appeal, the community development director or other administrative official whose decision is being appealed must transmit to the board of adjustment all papers constituting the record related to decision being appealed
9.8.6. Hearing and Final Decision.
A.     The board of adjustment must hold a public hearing on the appeal.
B.     Notice of the board of adjustment's public hearing must be given to all parties in interest and published and mailed at least 10 days before the public hearing, in accordance with Section 9.1.7.
C.     Following the close of the public hearing, the board of adjustment must make its findings and take action on the appeal.
D.     In exercising the appeal power, the board of adjustment has all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. The board of adjustment may affirm or may, upon the concurring vote of at least 4 members, reverse, wholly or in part, or modify the decision being appealed.
E.     In acting on the appeal, the board of adjustment must grant to the official's decision a presumption of correctness, placing the burden of persuasion of error on the appellant.
9.8.7. Review Criteria. The decision being appealed may be reversed or wholly or partly modified only if the board of adjustment finds that the community development director or other administrative official erred.
9.8.8. Appeals. Appeals of board of adjustment decisions are taken to court in accordance with Section 10.1.4.H.
Sec. 9.9.     Certificates of Occupancy and Compliance
9.9.1. Applicability. A certificate of occupancy and compliance must be obtained before any nonresidential building or site is used, occupied, or changed to another use.
9.9.2. Issuance. Applications for certificates of occupancy and compliance must be submitted to the community development director. The community development director is authorized to issue the requested certificate of occupancy and compliance after determining that the use, occupancy, or change in use has been completed in full compliance with all applicable regulations. The certificate must be posted in a public location in the place of business.
9.9.3. Record. A record of all certificates of occupancy and compliance must be maintained in the office of the community development director and be available for public inspection during normal office hours.
Sec. 9.10.     Fence and Wall Permits
A.     A fence or wall permit must be obtained for all new fences and walls and for any repair or replacement of a fence or wall that affects more than 25% of the total existing fence or wall length on any one side. Retaining walls less than 48 inches in height are exempt from this permit requirement.
B.     Plans and specifications for all installation, repair or replacement of fences, walls and retaining walls must be submitted to the community development director. Applications for retaining walls more than 3 feet in height must be accompanied by a detailed drawing of the construction of the wall, signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in Texas.
C.     If the application and the accompanying plans and specifications comply with all applicable regulations, the community development director must issue the permit. Fence or wall permits must be reviewed and approved, or disapproved with a statement of the reasons for disapproval, by the community development director within 10 days of receipt of a complete fence or wall permit application.
Article 10. Administration and Enforcement
Sec. 10.1.     Review and Decision-Making Bodies
10.1.1. City Council.
A.     Powers and Duties. The city council has the powers and duties expressly set forth in this zoning ordinance, including hearing and taking final action on the following:
1.     Specific use permits;
2.     Planned development districts;
3.     Zoning ordinance text amendments; and
4.     Zoning map amendments.
B.     Appointments. The city council is responsible for appointing and removing members of the planning and zoning commission and board of adjustment.
10.1.2. Planning and Zoning Commission.
A.     Powers and Duties.
1.     The planning and zoning commission has the powers and duties expressly set forth in this zoning ordinance as well as:
a.     All the powers and duties of the zoning commission, as set forth in Section 211.007 of the Texas Local Government Code; and
b.     All the powers and duties of the planning commission as set forth in Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government Code.
2.     The planning and zoning commission acts as an advisory board to the city council relating to public improvements; civic improvements; city planning; opening, widening and changing of streets; routing of public utilities; controlling and regulating traffic on public streets and ways; and such other matters relating to city improvements as the planning and zoning commission and the city council may deem beneficial.
3.     The planning and zoning commission is empowered to make its own rules and regulations governing the platting of new subdivisions, or the replatting of old undeveloped subdivisions, and also has the power to vary those regulations when, in its judgment, it is necessary in order to ensure appropriate development of the subject area.
B.     Required Public Hearings. Before entering any orders affecting the property rights of any person, the planning and zoning commission must conduct a public hearing. At such public hearing, any and all persons have a right to appear and object to the proposed order or action of the planning and zoning commission.
10.1.3. Community Development Director.
A.     Powers and Duties. The community development director has the powers and duties expressly set forth in this zoning ordinance, including the following:
1.     To administer and enforce the provisions of this zoning ordinance;
2.     To conduct inspections of buildings, structures and uses of land to determine compliance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance;
3.     To issue certificates of occupancy and compliance;
4.     To make written interpretations of this zoning ordinance;
5.     To act on fence and retaining wall permits;
6.     To process all applications for development approval under the procedures of Article 9;
7.     To review and make recommendations on:
a.     Special exceptions;
b.     Specific use permits;
c.     Planned development districts;
d.     Zoning ordinance text amendments; and
e.     Zoning map amendments.
8.     To approve amending and minor plats.
B.     Appeals. Decisions of the community development director related to administration and enforcement of this ordinance are subject to the procedures of Section 9.8.
10.1.4. Board of Adjustment.
A.     Organization, Appointment and Terms. The board of adjustment consists of 5 members, each to be appointed by the city council for a term of 2 years. Board of adjustment members may be removed by the city council for cause upon written charges and after public hearing.
B.     Vacancies. Vacancies on the board of adjustment must be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose place becomes vacant.
C.     Alternates. The city council may appoint 4 alternate members of the board of adjustment to serve in the absence of one or more of the regular members when requested to do so by the community development director, so that all cases to be heard can be heard by a minimum of at least 4 members. The regulations governing appointment, terms, removal and vacancies for alternate members are the same as apply to regular board of adjustment members.
D.     Rules. The board of adjustment must adopt rules to govern its proceedings. The board's rules must be consistent with this zoning ordinance and state law.
E.     Meetings and Procedures.
1.     Meetings of the board of adjustment are held at the call of the chair and at such other times as the board may determine. The chair, or in the chair's absence, the acting chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
2.     All meetings of the board of adjustment must be open to the public.
3.     The board of adjustment must keep records of its proceedings and official actions. Records must indicate the vote of each member on each question (including absences and abstentions), all of which must be open public records on file in the office of the board of adjustment.
F.     Powers and Duties. The board of adjustment has the powers and duties that are expressly identified in this zoning ordinance, including hearing and acting on applications for special exceptions, variances and appeals of administrative decisions.
G.     Actions. The affirmative vote of 4 members of the board of adjustment is required to revise any order, requirement, decision or determination of the community development director, or to decide in favor of the applicant on a special exception, variance of other matter upon which it is required to act under this zoning ordinance.
H.     Appeals of Board Decisions. Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment, or any taxpayer or any officer, department or board of the city may present to a court of competent jurisdiction a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition must be presented to the court within 10 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board of adjustment.
I.     Lapse of Approval. When the board of adjustment authorizes a building permit to be granted as a result of its action on a special exception, variance or other matter, such authorization lapses and has no further effect if a complete application for such building permit is not filed within 90 days from the effective date of the board's decision to authorize the permit, unless the board of adjustment expressly authorizes a longer period of time at the time of its hearing.
Sec. 10.2.     Violations, Penalties and Enforcement
10.2.1. Responsibility for Enforcement. The community development director and any other officials or agencies designated by the city manager have responsibility for enforcing this zoning ordinance. All departments, officials, agencies and employees vested with the authority to review, recommend or issue development approvals, permits or licenses must act in accordance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance.
10.2.2. Violations. Unless otherwise expressly allowed by this zoning ordinance or state law, any violation of a provision of this zoning ordinance - including any of the following - is subject to the remedies and penalties provided for in this zoning ordinance:
A.     To use land, buildings or other structures in any way not consistent with the requirements of this zoning ordinance;
B.     To erect a building or other structure in any way inconsistent with this zoning ordinance[;]
C.     To engage in the use of a building, structure or land, or any other activity that require permits or approvals under this zoning ordinance without obtaining such permits or approvals;
D.     To engage in the use of a building, structure or land, or any other activity for which a permit or approval has been granted under this zoning ordinance or under previous zoning ordinances of the city in any way inconsistent with such permit or approval or any conditions imposed on the permit or approval;
E.     To violate the terms of any permit or approval granted under this zoning ordinance or under previous zoning ordinances of the city or any condition imposed on the permit or approval;
F.     To obscure, obstruct or destroy any notice required to be posted under this zoning ordinance;
G.     To violate any lawful order issued by any authorized public official; or
H.     To continue any violation after receipt of notice of a violation.
10.2.3. Continuing Violations. Each day that a violation continues constitutes a separate violation of this zoning ordinance.
10.2.4. Remedies and Enforcement Powers. The city has all remedies and enforcement powers allowed by law, including, without limitation, all of those identified in this section.
A.     Fines. Any person violating any provisions of this zoning ordinance or failing to comply with any of its requirements may be fined, upon conviction, an amount not to exceed $2,000.00 per day.
B.     Withhold Permit.
1.     The community development director may deny or withhold all permits, certificates or other forms of authorization on any land or structure or improvements upon which there is an uncorrected violation of a provision of this zoning ordinance or of a condition or qualification of a permit, certificate, approval or other authorization previously granted by the city. This enforcement provision may be used regardless of whether the current owner or applicant is responsible for the violation in question.
2.     Instead of withholding or denying a permit or other authorization, the community development director may grant such authorization subject to the condition that the violation be corrected.
C.     Revoke Permits.
1.     A permit, certificate or other form of authorization required under this zoning ordinance may be revoked by the community development director when the community development director determines:
a.     That there are unapproved significant, material departures from approved plans or permits;
b.     That the development permit was procured by false representation or was issued by mistake; or
c.     That any of the provisions of this zoning ordinance or approval previously granted by the city are being violated.
2.     Written notice of revocation must be served upon the owner, the owner's agent or contractor, or upon any person employed on the building or structure for which such permit was issued. If no person can reasonably be served with notice, the notice must be posted in a prominent location on the building or structure.
D.     Stop Work. With or without revoking permits, the community development director may stop work on any building or structure on any land on which there is an uncorrected violation of a provision of this zoning ordinance or of a permit or other form of authorization issued under this or previous zoning ordinances.
E.     Injunctive Relief. The city may seek an injunction or other equitable relief in court to stop any violation of this zoning ordinance or of a permit, certificate or other form of authorization granted under this or previous zoning ordinances.
F.     Abatement. The city may seek a court order in the nature of mandamus, abatement, injunction or other action or proceeding to abate or remove a violation or to otherwise restore the premises in question to the condition in which they existed prior to the violation.
G.     Other Remedies and Powers.
1.     The city may seek such other penalties and remedies as are provided by law.
2.     In addition to penalties and remedies provided in this article, any owner of property in any district where such property may be affected by a violation of the terms of this zoning ordinance may bring suit in such courts having jurisdiction and seek to obtain such remedies as may be available at law or in equity for the protection of the owner's rights.
10.2.5. Previous Enforcement Actions. Nothing in this zoning ordinance prohibits the continuation of previous enforcement actions, undertaken by the city pursuant to previous valid ordinances and laws.
10.2.6. Remedies Cumulative. The remedies and enforcement powers established in this zoning ordinance are cumulative, and the city may exercise them in any combination or order.
10.2.7. Persons Subject to Penalties. Any owner of any building or premises who participates in or knowingly and willingly permits a violation of this ordinance, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person, or corporation who assists in the commission of any such violation is guilty of a separate offense, and, upon conviction will be subject to all available penalties and remedies provided in this ordinance.
10.2.8. Enforcement Procedures.
A.     Non-Emergency Matters. In the case of violations of this zoning ordinance that do not constitute an emergency or require immediate attention, the subject property owner must be given notice of the nature of the violation by personal service, U.S. first-class mail or by posting notice on the premises. Notices of violation must state the nature of the violation and the time period for compliance and may state the corrective steps necessary and the nature of subsequent penalties and enforcement actions should the situation not be corrected.
B.     Emergency Matters. In the case of violations of this zoning ordinance that constitute an emergency situation as a result of immediate public health or safety hazards if not remedied immediately, the city may use the enforcement powers available under this zoning ordinance without prior notice to the subject property owner.
10.2.9. Appeals. A determination made by the community development director or other administrative officials that a zoning ordinance violation has occurred may be appealed by the affected party in accordance with Section 9.8.
Sec. 10.3.     Nonconformities
10.3.1. General.
A.     Intent. Nonconformities are created when the zoning regulations that apply to a particular property are changed to no longer allow uses, structures or other development features that have already been lawfully established. The nonconformity regulations of this article are intended to explain the effect of this nonconforming status and help differentiate nonconformities, which have legal status under this zoning ordinance, from zoning violations, which are illegal and subject to penalties and enforcement action. The regulations of this article are also intended to:
1.     Recognize the interests of landowners in continuing to use their property for uses and structures that were lawfully established;
2.     Promote maintenance, reuse and rehabilitation of existing buildings; and
3.     Place reasonable limits on nonconformities that have the potential to adversely affect surrounding properties.
B.     Authority to Continue. Any nonconformity that existed on the effective date specified in Section 1.3 or any lot, structure use or situation that becomes nonconforming upon adoption of any amendment to this zoning ordinance or any amendment of the zoning map after the effective date specified in Section 1.3 may be continued, subject to the regulations of this article.
C.     Determination of Nonconforming Status. The burden of proving that a nonconformity exists (as opposed to a zoning ordinance violation) rests entirely with the subject property owner.
1.     The community development director is authorized to determine whether reliable evidence of nonconforming status has been provided by the subject property owner.
2.     Common examples of evidence that the community development director may accept as reliable evidence include but are not limited to the following:
a.     Building permits;
b.     Lawfully recorded plats;
c.     Lawfully recorded instruments of conveyance;
d.     Professional registrations or business licenses;
e.     Utility billing records;
f.     Rent records;
g.     Advertisements in dated publications;
h.     Listings in telephone or business directories; and
i.     Affidavits affirming the date of lawful establishment of the use, structure or development features.
3.     The community development director's determination of nonconforming status may be appealed to the board of adjustment in accordance with Section 9.8.
D.     Repairs and Maintenance.
1.     Repairs and normal maintenance necessary to keep a nonconformity in sound condition are permitted unless the work increases the extent of the nonconformity or is otherwise expressly prohibited by this zoning ordinance.
2.     If a nonconforming structure or a structure occupied by a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance, and a final order of vacation or demolition is entered by any duly authorized official by reason of physical condition, it may not thereafter be used, restored, or repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the provisions of the zoning district in which it is located.
3.     Nothing in this article is intended to prevent nonconformities from being structurally strengthened or restored to a safe condition in accordance with an order from a duly authorized public official.
E.     Change of Tenancy or Ownership. Nonconforming status runs with the land and is not affected by changes of tenancy, ownership or management.
10.3.2. Nonconforming Lots.
A.     Description. A nonconforming lot is a lawfully created lot, shown on a plat recorded with the Dallas County Deed Records, that does not comply with applicable lot area or lot width requirements of the subject zoning district.
B.     Lots in Residential Zoning Districts. In residential zoning districts, a single detached house may be erected on a nonconforming lot without complying with the applicable lot area or lot width requirements of the subject zoning district. All other lot and building regulations apply.
C.     Lots in Nonresidential Zoning Districts. In nonresidential zoning districts, a nonconforming lot may be used as a building site and developed with a use allowed in the subject zoning district. If the zoning allows a variety of uses or a variety of intensities of uses and one or more uses or intensities would comply with applicable lot area, lot width, or street frontage requirements, while others would not, then only the uses or intensities that comply with applicable regulations are permitted. All other lot and building regulations apply.
10.3.3. Nonconforming Uses.
A.     Description. A nonconforming use is a use that was lawfully established in accordance with all zoning regulations in effect at the time of its establishment but that is no longer allowed by the use regulations of the zoning district in which the use is located.
B.     Change of Use.
1.     A nonconforming use may be changed to a use that is allowed in the subject zoning district.
2.     Once changed to a conforming use, the previous nonconforming use is deemed to have been abandoned and may not be re-established.
C.     Expansion. Unless otherwise expressly stated, nonconforming uses may not be expanded or extended to occupy a greater area than was occupied at the time the use became nonconforming unless the expansion reduces or eliminates the nonconformity. A nonconforming use of a portion of a building may be expanded or extended into the remaining portions of the building if the community development director determines that the area of the building in which the expansion is proposed was manifestly arranged and designed for the use.
D.     Movement. A nonconforming use may be moved in whole or in part to another location on the same lot only if the movement or relocation does not create additional or new nonconformities. A nonconforming use may be moved to another lot only if the use would comply with the zoning regulations that apply to that (relocation) lot. Once moved to another location, the nonconforming use in its previous location is deemed to have been abandoned and may not be re-established in that previous location.
E.     Loss of Nonconforming Rights.
1.     If a nonconforming use is discontinued for a continuous period of 6 months more or more for any reason whatsoever, the nonconforming use is deemed to have been abandoned and may not be re-established.
2.     Whenever a nonconforming use is abandoned, all nonconforming rights are surrendered and any new or re-established use must comply with all applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance.
10.3.4. Nonconforming Structures
A.     Description. A nonconforming structure is a structure, other than a sign, that was lawfully established but that no longer complies with applicable zoning regulations because of the adoption or amendment of zoning regulations after the structure was established.
B.     Use. A nonconforming structure may be used for any use allowed in the zoning district in which the structure is located, including a lawfully established nonconforming use.
C.     Movement. A nonconforming structure may be moved in whole or in part to another location only if the structure would comply with the zoning regulations that apply to the new location. Once moved to another location, the nonconforming structure in its previous location is deemed to have been abandoned and may not be re-established in that previous location.
D.     Alteration, Enlargement or Expansion.
1.     Nonconforming principal buildings and structures may be enlarged or expanded if the proposed alteration or expansion complies with all applicable lot and building regulations and does not increase the extent of the nonconformity.
2.     Nonconforming accessory buildings and structures may not be enlarged or expanded
E.     Damage or Destruction. If a nonconforming structure is damaged, dismantled, demolished or destroyed by fire, the elements, natural disaster or intentional action to the extent of 50% or more of its replacement cost at time of damage, the nonconforming structure may not be re-established. If the structure is damaged or destroyed by fire, the elements, or natural disaster to the extent of less than 50% of its replacement cost at time of damage, the nonconforming structure may be re-established to the extent it existed before the damage, provided that a permit application to allow the re-establishment is filed within 12 months of the damage.
10.3.5. Nonconforming Development Features.
A.     Description. A nonconforming development feature is any aspect of a development - other than a nonconforming lot, nonconforming structure or nonconforming use - that was lawfully established in accordance with zoning regulations in effect at the time of its establishment but that no longer complies with one or more applicable zoning regulations. Common examples are off-street parking areas that contain fewer spaces than required by current regulations and sites that do not comply with current landscaping, screening or outdoor lighting regulations.
B.     General. Nonconforming development features may remain except as otherwise expressly stated in this zoning ordinance, but the nature and extent of nonconforming development features may not be increased.
Article 11. Measurements and Definitions
Sec. 11.1.     General
Words and terms expressly defined in this zoning ordinance have the specific meanings assigned unless the context clearly indicates another meaning. Words and terms that are not expressly defined in this zoning ordinance have their ordinary dictionary meaning.
Sec. 11.2.     Use Definitions
See Section 5.2 for an explanation of the use categorization system used in this zoning ordinance and for use type definitions.
Sec. 11.3.     Measurement-Related Terms
11.3.1. Fractions and Rounding. When calculations required under this zoning ordinance result in fractions, the results must be rounded as follows:
A.     Minimum Requirements. When a regulation is expressed in terms of a minimum requirement, any fractional result must be rounded up to the next consecutive whole number. For example, if a minimum requirement of 3.33 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area is applied to a use that occupies 2,500 square feet of floor area, the resulting fractional requirement of 8.32 spaces is rounded up to 9 required spaces.
B.     Maximum Limits. When a regulation is expressed in terms of maximum limits, any fractional result must be rounded down to the preceding whole number.
11.3.2. Lot Area. Lot area is measured as the total ground-level surface area contained within the property lines of a lot.
11.3.3. Lot Width. Lot width is measured as the average (mean) horizontal distance between the side property lines of a lot (see Figure 11-1).
11.3.4. Lot Depth. Lot depth is measured as the average (mean) horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines of a lot.
11.3.5. Floor Area. The floor area of a building is measured as the sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors within the building, including basements, as measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating 2 buildings. Off-street parking areas are not included in the measurement of floor area.
11.3.6. Floor Area Ratio. The ratio of the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot to the subject lot area.
11.3.7. Frontage or Street Frontage. Street frontage is measured between side property lines of a lot along the property line that abuts the street (see Figure 11-2).
11.3.8. Setbacks.
A.     Measurement. Required setbacks are measured from the applicable lot line, right-of-way, or location referred to below. Building setbacks are measured to the nearest exterior building wall. Minimum setbacks that apply to other features (parking areas, fences, storage areas) are measured from the nearest point of the area or feature for which a setback is required. Unless otherwise expressly stated, no part of any structure may be located within the street right-of-way.
1.     Front setbacks are measured from the back of curb. See Figure 11-6.
2.     Side setbacks are measured from the a side lot line (see Figure 11-3).
3.     Rear setbacks are measured from the rear lot line, except on double-frontage lots (see Figure 11-4).
4.     On double-frontage lots, the required front setback must be provided on both streets unless the building line for accessory buildings has been established along one street by ordinance, approved plat, or by usage, in which event, only one required front yard shall be observed (see Figure 11-5).
5.     On lots with 3 or more street frontages, the front of the lot is the lot frontage across the street from the blockface with the most front yards.
B.     Setbacks on Irregular Lots. Setbacks are measured from the lot line towards the center of the lot, except as follows:
1.     When lot lines are curvilinear, setbacks must be measured parallel to the curvilinear lot line (see Figure 11-7).
2.     When there are multiple rear lot lines, the rear setback must be measured from each of rear lot lines (see Figure 11-8).
3.     When there is no rear lot line, the rear setback must be measured as a radial distance from the intersection of side lot lines at the rear of the lot (see Figure 11-9).
C.     Average Front Setback by Block. The average front setback on a block is established by the average depth of existing front yards of all the lots on the subject blockface.
1.     The average depth is measured from the back of the sidewalk to the front facade of the building closest to the street.
2.     In calculation of the average of the block, all buildings will be used to establish an initial average, then any structure with a setback greater than 10 feet from the initial average will not be used in computing the final block average.
3.     Any vacant lot or lot on which a structure is to be demolished or removed will be considered to have a front yard depth equal to the average front yard depth on that block for purposes of computing the average front setback.
4.     When a blockface includes 2 or more zoning districts, the required front setback may not be less than the minimum setback of the most restrictive district.
5.     A listing of computed average front setbacks must be maintained by the community development department.
11.3.9. Rear Half of the Lot. The rear half of the lot is defined as the portion of the lot that falls between a line joining the midpoint of one side lot line with the midpoint of the opposite side lot line and the rear lot line. A building element required to be located in the rear half of the lot shall still comply with all other lot setbacks.
11.3.10. Building Coverage. Building coverage is the total area of a lot covered by principal and accessory buildings and all structures that are 30 inches or more above grade.
11.3.11. Impermeable Coverage. Impermeable lot coverage is the total area of the lot or zone on the lot covered by impermeable surfaces, such as buildings, driveways and sidewalks. Semi-permeable materials are not included in this calculation. See the Permeability Requirements of Chapter 3, Article 3.100 [Article 3.02, Divisions 2 and 3] of the Code of Ordinances.
11.3.12. Building Height.
A.     Measurement.
1.     Building height is measured as the vertical distance from the average ground elevation along the exterior building wall to the highest point of the subject building (see Figure 11-10). For purposes of measuring height:
a.     The average ground elevation is the mid-point between the highest and lowest ground elevations along the exterior building wall; and
b.     The highest point of the building is the coping of a flat roof, the top of a mansard roof or shed roof, or the peak of the highest gable of a gable, gambrel, or hip roof.
B.     Exceptions.
1.     Chimneys, elevators, equipment penthouses, monitors, cooling towers and ventilators may exceed maximum building height limits, provided they are not intended for human occupancy and they do not extend more than 12 feet above the top of the principal structure to which they are attached.
2.     Belfries, clock towers, cupolas, domes and spires may exceed maximum building height limits, provided they are not intended for human occupancy and they are not more than 25% taller than the applicable height limit.
3.     Fire separation walls may extend up to 36 inches above maximum district height limits.
11.3.13. Other Height Measurements.
A.     Top Plate Height. Top plate height is measured from the elevation of the first floor front door threshold to the top of the highest top plate (see Figure 11-11).
B.     First Floor Elevation. The elevation of the front door threshold shall establish the finished floor elevation and be no more than 18 inches above the average elevation of the minimum front setback line. The height of the finished floor elevation, whether on a slab or a pier and beam foundation, shall be no higher than the average of the finished floor elevations of the houses located on either side of the subject lot.
C.     Fences and Walls. See Section 8.3.
D.     Other Structures. The height of structures other than buildings, fences or walls is measured as vertical distance from the average finished grade at the base of the structure to the highest point of the structure. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the height of a structure may not exceed the maximum building height allowed in the subject zoning district.
Figure 11-1: Lot Width Measurement
 
Figure 11-2: Street Frontage Measurement
 
Figure 11-3: Side Setback Measurement
 
Figure 11-4: Rear Setback Measurement
 
Figure 11-5: Double Frontage Lot Measurement
 
Figure 11-6: Front Setback Measurement
 
Figure 11-7: Setbacks from Curvilinear Lot Lines
 
Figure 11-8: Setbacks from Multiple Rear Lot Lines
 
Figure 11-9: Rear Setback Measurement When There is No Rear Lot Line
 
Figure 11-10: Building Height Measurement
 
Figure 11-11: Top Plate Height Measurement
 
Sec. 11.4.     Terms Beginning with “A”
Abut or Abutting: to touch or share a contiguous boundary or border.
Accessory Use or Structure: a use or structure that meets the criteria of Section 5.3.1.
Alcoholic Beverage Uses: Sale and possession of mixed beverages by a holder of a mixed beverage permit issued by the state alcoholic beverage commission in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 28 of the Alcoholic Beverage Code, provided the holder also holds a food and beverage certificate under Section 28.18 (“mixed beverages with food and beverage certificate”); Sale at retail for off-premises consumption only of ale, wine and vinous liquors by the holder of a wine only package store permit issued by the state alcoholic beverage commission in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 24 of the Alcoholic Beverage Code (“wine only package store”); Sale for off-premises consumption only of wine, beer and malt liquors containing not more than 17% alcohol by volume by the holder of a wine and beer retailer's off-premises permit issued by the state alcoholic beverage commission in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 26 of the Alcoholic Beverage Code, and sale of beer in lawful containers to consumers by the holder of a retail dealer's off-premises license issued by the state alcoholic beverage commission in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 71 of the Alcoholic Beverage Code (“off-premises beer and wine sales”).
Alley: a public space or thoroughfare that affords only secondary means of access to abutting property.
Applicant: the owner of the subject property or an agent authorized by the subject property owner to submit an application on the owner's behalf.
Sec. 11.5.     Terms Beginning with “B”
Basement: a level of a building having at least 50% of its height below the average natural grade of the lot on which it is located.
Belt Course: a horizontal band usually marking the floor levels on the exterior facade of a building.
Berm: A mound of earth with sloping sides that is located between areas of approximately the same elevation.
Block: an area enclosed by dedicated rights-of-way and occupied by or intended for buildings; or if said word is used as a term of measurement, it shall mean the distance along a side of a street between the nearest 2 dedicated rights-of-way which intersect said street on said side.
Blockface: all lots abutting one side of a street between the 2 nearest intersecting streets.
Breezeway or Covered Walkway: an unenclosed or partially enclosed (maximum 50%) passage or walkway covered by a roof connecting a principal residential building with a detached structure or accessory building and that is open on the sides to permit unobstructed passage between portions of the rear yard located on either side of the breezeway.
Building: any structure built for the support, shelter and enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind. When subdivided in a manner sufficient to prevent the spread of fire, each portion so subdivided may be deemed a separate building.
Building Envelope: the area formed by the front, side, and rear building restriction or setback lines of a lot within which the principal building must be located.
Building Line: a line parallel or approximately parallel to the street line marking the minimum distance from the street line that a building may be erected.
Sec. 11.6.     Terms Beginning with “C”
Carport: a parking space having a roof but not enclosed by walls. Parking garages and parking structures are not carports.
Certificate of Occupancy and Compliance: an official certificate issued by the city through the community development director that indicates conformance with the zoning regulations and authorizes legal use of the premises for which it is issued.
Commercial Message: any sign, wording, logo, or other representation that directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service or other commercial activity.
Sec. 11.7.     Terms Beginning with “D”
Development: any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
Dormer: a roofed vertical projection, containing a window and projecting through a sloped roof.
Dwelling Unit: a building or portion of a building that is arranged, occupied, or intended to be occupied as living quarters for an individual household independent of any other household and that contains kitchen, bath and sleeping facilities.
Sec. 11.8.     Terms Beginning with “E”
RESERVED
Sec. 11.9.     Terms Beginning with “F”
Family: See “household.”
Floor Area: See Section 11.3.5.
Floor Area Ratio: Section 11.3.6.
Frontage: that portion of the lot or tract abutting a street.
Sec. 11.10.     Terms Beginning with “G”
Gable: the triangular part of a wall beneath the inverted “V” of the roofline.
Garage: an accessory building or part of a principal building that is enclosed on at least 3 sides and that is used or designed for the private storage of motor vehicles.
Grade, Average Natural: the reference point on a lot determined by measuring 6 inches below the finished first floor elevation.
Grade, Finished: the vertical location of the ground or pavement surface after site grading work is completed in accordance with an approved plan.
Sec. 11.11.     Terms Beginning with “H”
Habitable Area: floor area used for any purpose other than storage or utilities.
Height: See Section 11.3.12 and Section 11.3.13.
Hipped Gable: a gable with a sloping roofline perpendicular to the plane of the gable wall, beginning at the uppermost ridge of the gable.
Home Occupation: An accessory use of a dwelling unit for business or commercial purposes. Home occupations are subject to the regulations of Section 5.3.14.
Hot Tub: a hydrotherapy unit designed and assembled in the traditional manner of tubs or casks, with side and bottoms formed of separate boards and the whole shaped to join together by pressure of the surrounding hoops, bands or rods as distinct from spa units formed of plastic, concrete, metal or other materials.
Household: any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, in which not more than 2 individuals are unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption. An individual may be considered a family.
Sec. 11.12.     Terms Beginning with “I”
RESERVED
Sec. 11.13.     Terms Beginning with “J”
RESERVED
Sec. 11.14.     Terms Beginning with “K”
RESERVED
Sec. 11.15.     Terms Beginning with “L”
Lawfully Established: a use, structure, lot or sign (as the context indicates) that was established in conformance with all applicable zoning ordinance regulations in effect at the time of its establishment.
Lot: land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings, including such open spaces as are required under this zoning ordinance and having its principal frontage upon a public street or officially approved place. A lot to be used for building purposes must qualify as a building site in accordance with Section 1.9.
Lot Area: See Section 11.3.2.
Lot, Corner: a lot abutting 2 or more streets at their intersection or upon 2 segments of the same street, when such segments form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. The point of intersection of street rights-of-way lines is the corner.
Lot Depth: See Section 11.3.4.
Lot, Double-frontage: an interior lot with frontage on more than one street or a corner lot with frontage on more than 2 streets. Sometimes referred to as a “through lot.”
Lot, Interior: a lot other than a corner lot.
Lot Lines: the lines bounding a lot.
Lot Line, Front: the boundary of a lot that abuts the street.
Lot Line, Street: the boundary of a lot that abuts a street. A lot may have more than one street lot line, and a street lot line may also be a front lot line.
Lot Line, Rear: the boundary of a lot that is most distant from and most nearly parallel to the front lot line.
Lot Line, Side: any boundary of a lot that is not a street lot line or a rear lot line.
Lot of Record: a lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Dallas County, Texas; or a parcel of land, the deed for which was recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Dallas County prior to November 7th, 1977, provided however, that such parcel, if not constituting a single platted lot, shall be finally platted by approval by the City of University Park of a final plat, an amending plat or replat of such parcel in the manner provided by law.
Lot Width: See Section 11.3.3.
Sec. 11.16.     Terms Beginning with “M”
Main Building: same as “principal building.”
Sec. 11.17.     Terms Beginning with “N”
Nonconforming Development Feature: See Section 10.3.5.
Nonconforming Lot: Section 10.3.2.
Nonconforming Structure: Section 10.3.4.
Nonconforming Use: Section 10.3.3.
Nonconformity: A nonconforming lot, nonconforming use, nonconforming structure or nonconforming development feature (see Section 10.3).
Nonresidential Zoning District: Any zoning district other than a residential zoning district or a planned development (PD) district that is primarily residential in nature.
Sec. 11.18.     Terms Beginning with “O”
Occupancy: the use or intended use of land or buildings by owners or tenants.
Open Space: unoccupied area on the lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky from a point 30 inches above grade, except for those exceptions provided for in this zoning ordinance.
Outdoor Customer Seating/Dining Area: the area of all unenclosed areas used or intended to be used for seating and dining by customers and guests, including standing table areas.
Sec. 11.19.     Terms Beginning with “P”
Parapet or Parapet Wall: a wall-like barrier at the edge of a roof that acts as a vertical extension of an exterior building wall extending above the roof height of the building. Parapets may serve as a safety, visual screening or architectural feature.
Parking Area: the area that includes off-street parking spaces, the maneuvering areas necessary to enter and exit the parking spaces and the drives providing access to the parking spaces and maneuvering areas from a street or other parking areas.
Parking Space, Off Street: a space on a lot intended and reserved for the parking of a motor vehicle.
Parking Space, Required Off-Street: a space on a lot reserved for parking required by this zoning ordinance.
Parkway: the landscaped area in the city right-of-way between the edge of the pedestrian sidewalk or property line and the back of the curb of the adjacent street.
Plate, Top (or Plate Line): the top of the top structural support on which the rafters and/or joists rest.
Porte Cochere: an unencumbered opening in a principal residential structure which will allow a vehicle to pass from the street to a required off-street parking area, or from the street back to the street, or from the front street to the side street on a corner lot. A porte cochere must be designed and constructed in general conformance with the architecture of the principal structure. “Unencumbered” shall mean not closed or blocked at any time by a fence, wall, gate or other structure limiting the free flow of vehicles through the porte cochere.
Principal Building: a building or combination of buildings of primary importance or function on a lot. In general, the principal use is carried out in the principal building.
Principal Use: a use or activity or combination of which that are of primary importance on the lot; one of the main purposes for which the land, buildings or structures are intended, designed or ordinarily used.
Sec. 11.20.     Terms Beginning with “Q”
RESERVED
Sec. 11.21.     Terms Beginning with “R”
Residential Zoning District: Any of the zoning districts included in Article 2.
Sec. 11.22.     Terms Beginning with “S”
Setback: A required open area or distance between set point and a building. See Section 11.3.8
Spa: a unit primarily designed for therapeutic use which is not drained, cleaned or refilled for each individual. It may include, but is not limited to, hydrojet circulation, hot water, cold water, mineral baths, air induction bubbles, or any combination thereof. Industry terminology for spa includes, but is not limited to, therapeutic pool, hydrotherapy pool, whirlpool, hot spa, etc.
Spa Pool: a pool, not under medical supervision, that incorporates water jets and/or an aeration system used for hydro-massage.
Story: the height between the successive floors of a building or from the top floor to the roof. Parking that is located below the average grade or which is at grade and below the structure and enclosed is not counted in determining the allowed number of stories. A basement is also not considered a story.
Story, Half: Space under at least 2 sloping roofs having an average height not exceeding 8 feet and a floor area not greater than 50% of the area of the floor immediately below.
Street: any thoroughfare, road, highway or public driveway, other than an alley, where at least 30 feet of right-of-way has been dedicated or deeded to the public use expressly or by implication.
Street Frontage: See Section 11.3.7.
Street Line: a dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and an abutting street right-of-way.
Structural Alterations: any change in any supporting member of a building, a bearing wall, column, beams or girders.
Structure: anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or that is attached to something located on the ground, including but not limited to buildings of all types, advertising signs, fences, walls, paved surfaces, decks and swimming pools.
Swimming Pool: any constructed or prefabricated pool used for swimming or bathing, 24 inches or more in depth.
Sec. 11.23.     Terms Beginning with “T”
Temporary Construction Structure: a temporary building, trailer office or temporary building material storage area used for construction purposes and authorized by permit for a specific period of time and subject to periodic renewal by the community development director and used in connection with a development or building project for temporary storage, on-site administration and supervisory functions. Temporary construction structures are subject to the regulations of Section 5.4.2.
Tennis Court, Private: a surface designed and constructed for playing the game of tennis along with all fencing, nets and related appurtenances but excluding lighting for night play except as may be otherwise allowed or limited by an approved specific use permit
Terrace: an external, typically raised, open, flat area in a yard or adjacent to a building.
Sec. 11.24.     Terms Beginning with “U”
RESERVED
Sec. 11.25.     Terms Beginning with “V”
RESERVED
Sec. 11.26.     Terms Beginning with “W”
Wall, Parapet: that part of any exterior wall of a building that is entirely above the roofline of the subject building.
Sec. 11.27.     Terms Beginning with “X”
RESERVED
Sec. 11.28.     Terms Beginning with “Y”
Yard: an actual (as opposed to “required”) open, unoccupied space that exists on a lot between a building and a lot line.
Yard, Front: A yard extending along the full length of the front lot lines between the side lot lines, including the required setback.
Yard, Side: a yard extending along a side lot line between the front yard and the rear lot line, including the required setback.
Yard, Rear: a yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line between the side lot lines, including the required setback.
Sec. 11.29.     Terms Beginning with “Z”
RESERVED
(Ordinance 18/038 adopted 11/6/18)
