7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/283
City of Vernon
Code of Ordinances
Current through Ordinance 1702 adopted 2/14/17
PART II
CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. How Code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the
“Code of Ordinances, City of Vernon, Texas,” and may be so cited. (1969 Code, sec. 1-1)
State Law reference- Authority to publish code, V.T.C.A., Government Code sec. 53.001.
Sec. 1-2. Catchlines of sections.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any
part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections,
including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1969 Code, sec. 1-2)
Sec. 1-3. Rules of construction and definitions.
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city commission, the
following rules shall be observed and the following definitions shall apply, unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city commission:
Generally. The provisions of this Code shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes expressed therein or
implied from the expression thereof. In case of doubt or ambiguity in the meaning of such provisions, the
general shall yield to the particular. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the
contrary is clearly indicated.
City. The term “the city” or “this city” means the City of Vernon, in the County of Wilbarger, and the State of
Texas.
City commission, commission, city council or council. The term “city commission,” “commission,” “city council”
or “council” means the City Commission of Vernon, Texas, constituting the governing body of the city.
City officers and departments. Whenever reference is made to an officer or a department, the same shall be
construed as if followed by the words “of the City of Vernon, Texas.”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/283
Computation of time. In computing any period of time mentioned in the provisions of this Code, the day of the
act, event or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be included, and the last
day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it is a Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the
period runs until the end of the next day which is neither a Sunday nor a holiday.
County. The term “the county” or “this county” means the County of Wilbarger, Texas.
Gender. A term importing the masculine gender only shall extend to and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males.
Highway. The term “highway” includes any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge,
viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use.
Month. The term “month” means a calendar month.
Number. Any term importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural
number shall include the singular.
Oath. The term “oath” includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for
an oath, and in such cases the terms “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the terms “affirm” and
“affirmed.”
Or, and. The term “or” may be read as “and,” and the term “and” may be read as “or,” if the sense requires it.
Owner. The term “owner,” applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common,
tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
Person. The term “person” extends and may be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships, and
bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. Where criminal prosecution may lie, the officers of any
corporation shall jointly and severally be subject to prosecution as being included within the term “person.”
Police chief or chief of police. The term “police chief” or “chief of police” refers to the marshal of the city.
Preceding, following. The terms “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
Roadway. The term “roadway” means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular traffic.
Sidewalk. The term “sidewalk” means any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the
roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. The term “signature” or “subscription” includes a mark when a person cannot write.
Standard time. All hours of time mentioned in this Code refer to and shall be determined by Central Standard
Time, or Central Daylight Savings Time, as the case may be, except that, if at any future time any different
standard of time is established by the state for an area which includes this city, all such hours shall be
determined by such officially proclaimed standard, so long as the same remains in effect.
State. The term “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The term “street” includes any highway, alley, street, avenue, or public place or square, bridge, viaduct,
underpass, overpass, tunnel and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use.
Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” includes any representation of words, letters, or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.
Year. The term “year” means a calendar year.
(1969 Code, sec. 1-3)
Sec. 1-4. Amendments to Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/283
(a) All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal, or in any way affect this Code may
be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When
subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section, or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed
portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as
numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent
ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a
new Code by the city commission.
(b) Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific
reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: “Section ____________ of the Code of
Ordinances, City of Vernon, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows:....” The new provisions shall then be
set out in full as desired.
(c) In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall
be used: “That the Code of Ordinances, City of Vernon, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be
numbered ____________ , which said section reads as follows:....” The new section shall then be set out in full
as desired.
(1969 Code, sec. 1-4)
Sec. 1-5. Specific reference to ordinances in amending or repealing required.
No ordinance shall be amended or repealed by any general term or by implication, but the ordinance intending
to repeal or amend an ordinance shall set forth clearly the ordinance desired to be changed. (1969 Code, sec.
1-5)
Sec. 1-6. General penalty; continuing violations.
(a) Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor; the
violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by fines not to exceed a
penalty greater than is indicated for a like offense by the laws of the state, except that the commission may
provide a different penalty for the obstruction of its streets, alleys, avenues and highways from that provided by
the state law.
(b) Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code or of any
ordinance set forth herein that is punishable by a fine that does not exceed the amount authorized by section
12.23 of the Texas Penal Code (V.T.C.A., Penal Code sec. 12.23) does not require a culpable mental state, and
a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense.
(c) Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code or of any
ordinance set forth herein that is punishable by a fine that exceeds the amount authorized by section 12.23 of
the Texas Penal Code (V.T.C.A., Penal Code sec. 12.23) shall require a culpable mental state of criminal
negligence.
(1969 Code, sec. 1-6; Ordinance 1542, sec. 1, adopted 9/28/10)
Sec. 1-7. Annexation procedures on petitions.
Upon the filing with the city secretary of a written petition signed by all of the owners of real property situated in
the territory sought to be annexed to the city, the city commission may, in regular or special called session,
without notice, pass an ordinance annexing such territory to the city. (1969 Code, sec. 1-8; Ordinance 724, sec.
1, adopted 11/12/65)
Sec. 1-8. Commission initiative.
In the event the city commission shall desire to annex to the city any territory adjacent to the city, the owners of
which have not filed a petition for annexation to the city, it may do so by ordinance describing such territory by
metes and bounds; provided the city shall provide an opportunity for all interested persons to be heard at a
public hearing to be held not more than 20 days nor less than ten days prior to the first reading of the ordinance
of annexation. Notice of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the city
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/283
and in the territory proposed to be annexed. The notice shall be published at least once in such newspaper not
more than 20 days nor less than ten days prior to such hearing. The minimum number of public hearings
required under state law must be held. (1969 Code, sec. 1-9; Ordinance 724, sec. 2, adopted 11/12/65)
Sec. 1-9. Severability of parts of Code.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city commission that the sections, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses, and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of
this Code, or of any secondary code adopted herein, shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid
judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect
any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Code, or of such secondary
code, since the same would have been enacted by the commission without the incorporation in this Code of
any such invalid or unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section. (1969 Code, sec. 1-10)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 2-1. City seal.
The seal of the city shall be in design the same as usual seals, with the words inscribed, “City of Vernon,
Texas,” in a circle. (1969 Code, sec. 2-1)
Sec. 2-2. Installation of officers.
All officers elected at an annual election shall be installed at the first regular meeting of the city commission
after said election; except in case some officer is absent he is to be installed at first meeting thereafter, provided
it be within 30 days of his election. All officers who are appointed shall be installed within 30 days after
appointment. (1969 Code, sec. 2-3)
Sec. 2-3. Turning over books, etc., on leaving office.
When the duties of any officer of this city shall cease from any cause, whatsoever, he shall turn over to his
successor in office, if he has a successor, and if not, then to the city secretary, all books, records, papers and
appurtenances of his office. (1969 Code, sec. 2-3)
Sec. 2-4. City attorney-Attending court.
It shall be the duty of the city attorney to attend all prosecutions before the corporation court, when notified of
the pendency of such prosecutions, and to prosecute when notified on behalf of the corporation, and he is
entitled to appear in every case where the defendant fails to plead or enters the plea of guilty, or where the
defendant enters the plea of not guilty. (1969 Code, sec. 2-4)
Sec. 2-5. Same-Summoning offenders and witnesses and filing complaints.
Whenever the city attorney hears of any violation of the law or ordinances of the city, or when he has reason to
believe that said laws or ordinances have been violated, he may cause any person whom he may believe to be
in possession or knowing the facts or having witnessed such violation of said laws or ordinances, to be
summoned before the recorder, instant, for the purpose of being interrogated, under oath, either by the recorder
or city attorney, in reference to any such offense which such person so summoned may know has been
committed within the corporate limits of the city against the laws or ordinances of the city. If he finds from said
examination that an offense has been committed within said corporate limits he may file complaint against the
offender. (1969 Code, sec. 2-5)
Sec. 2-6. Same-Attending commission meetings; furnishing advice.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/283
It shall also be the duty of the city attorney to attend all meetings of the city commission and give the members
thereof all such legal advice and information as they may at any time require. He may be required to submit his
opinion upon any legal question in writing. (1969 Code, sec. 2-6)
Sec. 2-7. Duties of city secretary at commission meetings.
The city secretary shall attend every meeting of the city commission and keep account of the proceedings
thereof in a book to be provided for that purpose by the city, and to engross and enroll all laws, resolutions and
ordinances of the city commission; to take charge of and preserve and keep in order all books, records, papers,
documents and files of the commission, and to countersign all commissions issued to city officers, and all
licenses issued, and keep a record or register thereof; and to make out all notices required under any regulation
or ordinance of the city relating to his office. (1969 Code, sec. 2-7)
Sec. 2-8. Duties of city finance manager.
The city finance manager shall draw all warrants on the treasurer and countersign the same and keep an
account in a book to be furnished him by the city. He shall be general accountant of the corporation and shall
keep in books regular accounts of the receipts and disbursements for the city separately under proper hands
and also account with each person, including officers who have money transactions with the city, crediting
amounts with the city, crediting amounts allowed by proper authority and specifying the particular transaction to
which such entries apply. He shall also keep a register of bonds and bills issued by the city, and all entries of
debt and payments to it; noting the particulars thereof and facts connected therewith, as they occur. (1969
Code, sec. 2-8; Ordinance 1083 adopted 3/12/85)
Sec. 2-9. Keeping contracts; other duties.
The city secretary shall carefully keep all contracts made by the city commission on behalf of the city and he
shall do and perform such other duties as may be required by law, ordinances, resolutions, or orders of the city
commission or city manager. (1969 Code, sec. 2-9)
Sec. 2-10. Planning and zoning commission-Membership.
There is created and established for the city a planning and zoning commission, which shall be composed of
seven members. The members shall be resident citizens, taxpayers, and qualified voters of the city, all of whom
shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the city commission. The terms of office shall be for
two years, except that of the first commissioners so appointed, the terms of three members shall be for two
years and the terms of four members shall be for three years. All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term
in the same manner as provided for the original appointments. All expired terms shall be filled for terms as
provided for the original appointments and in the same manner. Members of the commission may be removed
by the mayor, with the consent of the city commission, after public hearing and for cause assigned in writing.
The members of the commission shall serve without compensation. (1969 Code, sec. 2-10; Ordinance 664,
sec. 1, adopted 3/14/61)
Sec. 2-11. Same-Organization; employees; procedure.
The planning and zoning commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from its membership and shall
have power to employ such qualified persons as may be necessary for the proper conduct and undertakings of
the commission and to pay for their services and such other necessary expenses; provided the cost of such
services and expenses shall not exceed the amount appropriated by the city commission for the use of the
commission. It shall also have the power to make rules, regulations, and bylaws for its own government, which
shall conform as nearly as possible with those governing the city commission. Such bylaws shall include,
among other items, provisions for:
(1) Regular and special meetings, open to the public;
(2) Records of its proceedings, to be open for inspection by the public;
(3) Reporting to the city commission and the public, from time to time and annually; and
(4) The holding of public hearings on its recommendations.
(1969 Code, sec. 2-11; Ordinance 664, sec. 2, adopted 3/14/61)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/283
Sec. 2-12. Same-Powers and duties.
The planning and zoning commission shall have the power and it shall be its duty to make and recommend for
adoption a master plan, as a whole or in part, for the future development and redevelopment of the municipality
and its environs and shall have power and it shall be its duty to prepare a comprehensive plan and ordinance
for zoning the city in accordance with state law. The commission shall perform such other duties as may be
prescribed by ordinance or state law. (1969 Code, sec. 2-12; Ordinance 664, sec. 3, adopted 3/14/61)
Sec. 2-13. Purchases-Office of purchasing agent created.
The office of purchasing agent is created. (1969 Code, sec. 2-13; Resolution 484, sec. 1, adopted 6/12/34)
Sec. 2-14. Same-Commission approval; policy.
(a) Commission approval. It shall be the duty of the purchasing agent to contract for and purchase all
supplies, materials, goods, wares and merchandise, and things necessary for the use of the city in any of its
departments; provided, however, he shall not make any purchase in an amount in excess of $5,000.00, without
first having submitted the same to the city commission for its approval; and no separate purchase in an amount
in excess of $5,000.00 made without the approval of the city commission shall be binding on the city.
(b) Purchasing policy.
(1) Goods or services costing up to and including $500.00 may be purchased by department
heads or their authorized representatives.
(2) Goods and services costing more than $500.00 and up to and including $5,000.00 will require
a requisition from the requesting department. Departments will be responsible for placing an order
after soliciting at least three bids.
(3) Goods and services costing more than $5,000.00 and up to the amount as set out in V.T.C.A.,
Local Government Code sec. 252.021 will require a requisition from the requesting department.
Each department will be responsible for soliciting at least three written bids and placing an order for
the items as authorized by the city commission.
(4) Goods and services costing more than the amount as set out in V.T.C.A., Local Government
Code sec. 252.021 will require a requisition from the requesting department and must be purchased
in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 252.
(c) Method of buying; emergency purchase order. In those instances where an emergency purchase order is
required to secure parts, service or repairs to restore equipment to operating condition, and the determination
of the total charges cannot be made in advance of the procurement of the parts, service or repairs, an
emergency purchase order authorization procedure shall apply. The emergency purchase order authorization
procedure is as follows:
(1) The requesting department will call the purchasing department for an emergency purchase
order number.
(2) The purchasing department will complete an emergency purchase order authorization. The
original may also be picked up at the purchasing department the same day.
(3) After obtaining the emergency purchase order number from the purchasing department, the
requesting department may contact the vendor and authorize the purchase of needed parts,
maintenance service of combination thereof, issuing the emergency purchase order number to the
vendor as the city's authorization for the product or service.
The original copy of the payment authorization form shall be attached to the vendor invoice and forwarded to
the accounting department for prompt payment. The duplicate copy of the payment authorization form is to be
maintained in the requesting department's file as a permanent file record of the completed repair transaction.
The emergency purchase order may not exceed the amount as set out in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code
sec. 252.021, and any amount in excess of $5,000.00 must have final approval of the finance director and the
city manager.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/283
(1969 Code, sec. 2-15; Resolution 484, sec. 3, adopted 6/12/34; Ordinance 1022, secs. 1, 2, adopted 5/10/83;
Ordinance 1096 adopted 6/20/85; Ordinance 1120 adopted 6/10/86; Ordinance 1501, secs. 1-3, adopted
6/2/08)
Sec. 2-15. Record of accounts.
The finance manager shall keep strict account of all invoices paid by him for and on behalf of the city, showing
the articles purchased, the amount to be paid therefor and to whom payable, and shall submit same to the city
commission for review with his approval endorsed thereon. (1969 Code, sec. 2-16; Resolution 484, sec. 4,
adopted 6/12/34; Ordinance 1097 adopted 7/9/85)
Sec. 2-16. Liability for property damage or personal injury.
The city shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or for personal injury, whether such personal
injury results in death or not unless the person damaged or injured, or someone in his behalf, or in the event the
injury results in death, the person who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death or
injury, shall, within six months from the date the damage or injury was received, give notice in writing to the
mayor and city commission of the following facts:
(1) The date and time when the injury occurred and the place where the injured person or
property was at the time when the injury was received.
(2) The nature of the damage or injury sustained.
(3) The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained.
(4) A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury
occurred.
(5) The amount for which each claimant will settle.
(6) The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state on the date
the claim is presented.
(7) In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who,
according to the knowledge or information of the claimant witnessed the happening of the injury or
any part thereof and the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is committed.
(8) In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim
was submitted along with the names and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of
the damage or any part thereof.
(1969 Code, sec. 2-18; Ordinance 1273, sec. 18, adopted 6/21/95)
Sec. 2-17. Adoption of policy; prohibitions; penalty; liability.
(a) The city hereby adopts and will enforce the policy prohibiting the use of excessive force by the law
enforcement agencies within its jurisdiction against any individual engaged in nonviolent civil rights
demonstrations. The city also prohibits the physical barring of any entrance or exit of such a facility and will
enforce all applicable state laws regarding the same.
(b) Any person found to be violating any provision of this section shall be served by the city with written
notice stating the nature of the violation.
(c) Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon
conviction shall be punished by a penalty as provided in section 1-6 for each violation. Each day in which any
such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
(d) Any person violating any provision of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or
damage to the city by reason of such violation.
(1969 Code, sec. 2-19; Ordinance 1313, secs. 1-4, adopted 12/23/97)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/283
Sec. 2-18. Collection policy.
The city manager, or his agent, is hereby directed to collect or contract with a third party agency, all delinquent
balances. The city manager is also authorized to designate certain accounts as charged-off for municipal
accounting purposes and take any steps to attempt additional collection thereafter.
The city manager in conjunction with the finance director shall develop individual collection time tables for each
type of receivable and annually review and update the accounting records and aging schedules for accounts
still outstanding from prior years and report these amounts to the finance committee for approval.
(Ordinance 1659, sec. 1, adopted 4/28/15)
Secs. 2-19—2-37. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. MAYOR
Sec. 2-38. Enforcement of commission rules.
The mayor shall have powers as president of the city commission to enforce such rules for the regulation of its
proceedings in the order of business, discussion, order and decorum as the commission may adopt. (1969
Code, sec. 2-39)
Sec. 2-39. Process or notice of proceedings against city.
Whenever any process or notice shall be served upon the mayor in any legal or other proceeding against the
city or in which the city is a party, he shall deliver the same, or a note thereof, to the city attorney in order that
same may be attended to. (1969 Code, sec. 2-40)
Sec. 2-40. Execution of instruments.
Whenever it shall be necessary by any law or ordinance of the city to execute any bond or other instrument in
any such suit or action at law, begun, or about to be instituted, or for any purpose, or whenever the city shall be
a party to any contract or agreement the same may be executed and signed by the mayor in the name of the
city and attested by the city secretary and the seal of the city affixed, and such signing, execution and
attestation, shall be valid to all intents and purposes upon the city. (1969 Code, sec. 2-41)
Secs. 2-41—2-70. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 2-71—2-90. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. LAW ENFORCEMENT ADVISORY BOARD
Sec. 2-91. Creation and establishment.
(a) There is hereby created and established a law enforcement advisory board for the purpose of reviewing
applications for financial assistance grants or projects from local, regional, state and federal agencies. This
board shall be composed of seven members. Composition of the board shall be as follows:
(1) The police chief;
(2) A representative of the Wilbarger County Crime Stoppers;
(3) An employee of the Vernon Independent School District;
(4) A representative of the local court system;
(5) An employee of the county sheriff's office;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/283
(6) Chaplain of the police department; and
(7) A representative of the county attorney's office.
(b) The board members shall be resident citizens, taxpayers, and qualified voters of the city, all of whom shall
be appointed by the city commission. Terms of office shall be three consecutive years with staggered terms.
The first two board members appointed are for a one-year term, the next two board members appointed are for
a two-year term, and the last three board members appointed are for a three-year term. All vacancies shall be
filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as provided for in the original appointments. All expired terms
shall be filled for three-year terms. Members may be removed by the governing body, and serve at the pleasure
of the city commission. The members of this board shall serve without compensation.
(Ordinance 1292, sec. I, adopted 1/28/97)
Sec. 2-92. Officers of the board.
This board shall elect a chair and a vice-chair from its membership. (Ordinance 1292, sec. II, adopted 1/28/97)
Sec. 2-93. Duties and responsibilities.
The board's duties shall be for the review of law enforcement projects or applications requesting financial
assistance (grants) from local, regional, state and federal agencies. In the review of these types of projects, the
board should review these projects for duplication of services and be consistent with any approved criminal
justice long range plans for the county. Any public hearings required by a grantor agency may be held before
this body. This board shall serve in an advisory role to the city commission. All board action shall be in the form
of a recommendation to the city commission.
(Ordinance 1292, sec. III, adopted 1/28/97)
Secs. 2-94—2-116. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. MAIN STREET ADVISORY BOARD
Sec. 2-117. Board creation and establishment.
There is hereby created and established a Main Street Advisory Board for the purpose of reviewing Main Street
projects to effectuate such program. This board shall be composed of seven members. The city manager, or his
designee, is hereby assigned to coordinate the activities of this advisory board. The board members shall be
resident citizens, or owners of businesses within the city, all of whom shall be appointed by the city commission.
Terms of office shall be for three consecutive years with staggered terms. The first two board members
appointed are for a one-year term, the next two board members appointed are for a two-year term, and the last
three board members appointed are for a three-year term. All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in
the same manner as provided for in the original appointments. All expired terms shall be filled for three-year
terms. Members may be removed by the city commission, and serve at the pleasure of the city commission.
The members of this board shall serve without compensation.
(1969 Code, sec. 2-81; Ordinance 1299, sec. I, adopted 1/28/97; Ordinance 1574, sec. 1, adopted 12/20/11)
Sec. 2-118. Board officers.
This board shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from its membership. (1969 Code, sec. 2-82;
Ordinance 1299, sec. II, adopted 1/28/97)
Sec. 2-119. Board's duties and responsibilities.
The board's duties shall be for the review of the projects developed for the Vernon Main Street Program. In the
review of these types of projects, the board should review them for duplication of services and consistency with
the Texas Main Street Program, as defined by the state historical commission. Any public hearings required by
this state agency or any other governmental entity may be held before this body. This board shall serve in an
advisory role to the city commission, as needed. All board action shall be in the form of a recommendation to
the city commission. (1969 Code, sec. 2-83; Ordinance 1299, sec. III, adopted 1/28/97)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/283
Sec. 2-120. Operational guidelines.
The city commission may adopt operating procedures and/or rules for the Main Street Advisory Board not
inconsistent with provisions of this section. A copy of which shall be kept on file in the office of the city
secretary. (Ordinance 1574, sec. 2, adopted 12/20/11)
Secs. 2-121—2-124. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. TOURISM ADVISORY BOARD
Sec. 2-125. Board creation and establishment.
There is hereby created and established a tourism advisory board for the purpose of reviewing tourism projects
funded through the hotel occupancy tax funds to effectuate such program. This board shall be composed of five
members. The city manager, or his designee, is hereby assigned to coordinate the activities of this advisory
board. The board members shall be resident citizens of the county or owners of businesses within the city, all of
whom shall be appointed by the city commission. Terms of office shall be for three consecutive years with
staggered terms. The first two board members appointed are for a one-year initial term, the next two board
members appointed are for a two-year initial term, and the last board member will be appointed for a three-year
term. All vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as provided in the original
appointments, except for the fact that all expired terms shall be filled for three-year terms. Members may be
removed by the city commission, and serve at the pleasure of the city commission. The members of this board
shall serve without compensation. (Ordinance 1651, sec. 1, adopted 10/21/14)
Sec. 2-126. Board officers.
The board shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson from its membership. (Ordinance 1651, sec. 2,
adopted 10/21/14)
Sec. 2-127. Board's duties and responsibilities.
The board's duties shall be for the review of the projects developed for the city tourism program. In review of
these types of projects, the board should review them for duplication of services and consistency with V.T.C.A.,
State Tax Code sec. 156. Any public hearings required by this section of the tax code or any other applicable
statute may be held before this body. This board shall serve in an advisory role to the city commission, as
needed. All board action shall be in the form of a recommendation to the city commission. (Ordinance 1651,
sec. 3, adopted 10/21/14)
Sec. 2-128. Operational guidelines.
The city commission may adopt operating procedures and/or rules for the tourism advisory board not
inconsistent with provisions of this division. A copy of which shall be kept on file in the office of the city
secretary. (Ordinance 1651, sec. 4, adopted 10/21/14)
Secs. 2-129—2-136. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM*
Sec. 2-137. City records.
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic
tapes, electronic media, or other information regarding media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and
of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or
any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to
be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions
of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. (1969 Code, sec. 2-105; Ordinance 1502,
sec. 1, adopted 6/2/08)
Sec. 2-138. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/283
Department head means the officer, who by ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of an office of
the city that creates or receives records.
Essential record means any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the
city in an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the
protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
Permanent record means any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is
given as permanent.
Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management
officer listing the records maintained by the city, the retention periods, and other records disposition information
that the records management program may require.
Records liaison officer means a person designated under section 2-146.
Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance,
retention, preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the
efficiency of recordkeeping. The term “records management” includes the development of records control
schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and
permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation
and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic
and other records storage systems.
Records management committee means the committee established in section 2-142.
Records management officer means the person designated under section 2-141.
Records management plan means the plan developed under section 2-143.
Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or
the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(1969 Code, sec. 2-106; Ordinance 1502, sec. 2, adopted 6/2/08)
Sec. 2-139. City records declared public property.
All city records as defined in section 2-137 are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No city official or
employee has, by virtue of his position, any personal or property right to such records even though he may
have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is
prohibited. (1969 Code, sec. 2-107; Ordinance 1502, sec. 3, adopted 6/2/08)
Sec. 2-140. Policy.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over
the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from creation to ultimate
disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records
management practice. (1969 Code, sec. 2-108; Ordinance 1502, sec. 4, adopted 6/2/08)
Sec. 2-141. Designation of records management officer.
The city secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management officer for the
city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his name with the director and
librarian of the state library within 30 days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable.
(1969 Code, sec. 2-109; Ordinance 1502, sec. 5, adopted 6/2/08)
Sec. 2-142. Establishment of records management committee: duties.
A records management committee consisting of the city manager, finance director, and city secretary is hereby
established. The committee shall:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/283
(1) Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures
governing the records management program;
(2) Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and
improvements if needed;
(3) Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer;
(4) Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control
schedule; and
(5) Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city.
(1969 Code, sec. 2-110; Ordinance 1502, sec. 6, adopted 6/2/08)
Sec. 2-143. Records management plan development, approval; authority of plan.
(a) The records management officer and the records management committee shall develop a records
management plan for the city for submission to the city commission. The plan must contain policies and
procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the
essential records of the city, and to properly preserve those records of the city that are of historical value. The
plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his duties prescribed by state law
and this article effectively.
(b) Once approved by the city commission, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices,
departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and
records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan.
(c) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department
head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of
this article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as
a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city.
(1969 Code, sec. 2-111; Ordinance 1502, sec. 7, adopted 6/2/08)
Sec. 2-144. Duties of records management officer.
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall:
(1) Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in
its implementation;
(2) Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and
procedures;
(3) In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan
for each city office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish
operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
(4) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historical valuable records of
the city;
(5) Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies;
(6) Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design
and control system for the city;
(7) Provide records management advice and assistance to all city departments by preparation of a
manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation;
(8) Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Texas State Library
and Archives Commission to determine if the records management program and the city's records
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/283
control schedules are in compliance with state regulations;
(9) Disseminate to the city manager and department heads information concerning state laws and
administrative rules relating to local government records;
(10) Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records
management plan and their duties in the records management program;
(11) Direct record liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of record inventories in
preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this
article;
(12) Ensure the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of the
records of the city is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records
management program and the requirements of state law;
(13) Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control
schedules, or through records destruction authorization requests, the volume of records microfilmed
or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or
disposition;
(14) Report annually to the city commission on the implementation of the records management
plan in each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled
under subsection (13) of this section; and
(15) Bring to the attention of the city commission, noncompliance by department heads or other
city personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the Local
Government Records Act.
(1969 Code, sec. 2-112; Ordinance 1502, sec. 8, adopted 6/2/08)
Sec. 2-145. Duties and responsibilities of department heads.
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall:
(1) Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures
established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out
the requirements of this article;
(2) Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs,
and duties for which the department head and his staff are responsible; and
(3) Maintain the records in his care and carry out preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other
disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program
of the city and the requirements of this article.
(1969 Code, sec. 2-113; Ordinance 1502, sec. 9, adopted 6/2/08)
Sec. 2-146. Designation of records liaison officers.
Each department head, or a person within the department designated by the department head, shall serve as
records liaison officer for his department. (1969 Code, sec. 2-114; Ordinance 1502, sec. 10, adopted 6/2/08)
Sec. 2-147. Duties and responsibilities of records liaison officers.
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records liaison officers shall:
(1) Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in
preparation for the development of records control schedules;
(2) In cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and implement the policies
and procedures of the records management program in their departments; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/283
(3) Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program.
(1969 Code, sec. 2-115; Ordinance 1502, sec. 11, adopted 6/2/08)
Sec. 2-148. Records control schedules developed, approved; state filing.
(a) The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads, shall prepare records control
schedules on a department-by-department basis listing all records created or received by the department and
the retention period for each record.
(b) Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended, as needed, by the records management
officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state
and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records
management program of the city.
(c) Before its adoption, a records control schedule, or amended schedule, for a department must be
approved by the department head and the members of the records management committee.
(d) Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted and accepted for filing by the director
and librarian as provided by state law.
(1969 Code, sec. 2-116; Ordinance 1502, sec. 12, adopted 6/2/08)
Sec. 2-149. Records control schedule implementation; destruction of records under schedule.
(a) A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-143
shall be implemented by department heads according to the policies and procedures of the records
management plan.
(b) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an
open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law
suit, or the department head requests in writing to the records management committee that the record be
retained for an additional period.
(c) Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the
destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the records management committee.
(1969 Code, sec. 2-117; Ordinance 1502, sec. 13, adopted 6/2/08)
Sec. 2-150. Destruction of unscheduled records.
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed, if its
destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the
records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved
destruction authorization request. (1969 Code, sec. 2-118; Ordinance 1502, sec. 14, adopted 6/2/08)
CHAPTER 4
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
Sec. 4-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. A term defined in the state
alcoholic beverage code has the meaning it has in the state alcoholic beverage code, except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/283
Place of business means the location of the business identified in the application for the permit or license to sell
alcohol under this chapter.
(1969 Code, sec. 3-1; Ordinance 1434, sec. 1, adopted 1/25/05)
Sec. 4-2. Construction consistent with state law.
This chapter shall be construed to be consistent with the state alcoholic beverage code, rules, and regulations
promulgated under its authority. (1969 Code, sec. 3-2; Ordinance 1434, sec. 2, adopted 1/25/05)
Sec. 4-3. Restriction on sale or use of alcohol.
A person commits an offense if the person sells, stores, handles for the purpose of sale an alcoholic beverage,
unless the use is authorized by and complies with the applicable provisions of this Code and the state alcoholic
beverage code. (1969 Code, sec. 3-3; Ordinance 1434, sec. 3, adopted 1/25/05)
Sec. 4-4. Minimum distance from certain uses.
(a) Except as provided by the state alcoholic beverage code, a person may not sell or engage in the
business of selling an alcoholic beverage at a place of business located within 300 feet from the following:
(1) A private school;
(2) A day care center;
(3) A childcare facility;
(4) A church; or
(5) A public hospital.
(b) Except as provided by the state alcoholic beverage code, a person may not sell or engage in the
business of selling an alcoholic beverage at a place of business located within 1,000 feet of a public school.
(c) Distances under this section shall be calculated using the method prescribed by the state alcoholic
beverage code.
(1969 Code, sec. 3-4; Ordinance 1434, sec. 4, adopted 1/25/05)
Sec. 4-5. Exceptions to required minimum distances.
(a) Section 4-4 (minimum distances from certain uses) does not apply to:
(1) The renewal or transfer of a permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages, if the permit or
license being renewed or transferred was originally issued before the date a private school, church,
public hospital, day care center, or child care facility use was established within 300 feet or a public
school use was established within 1,000 feet from the place of business named in the permit or
license; or
(2) A new application at a location, if the sale of alcoholic beverages at the proposed place of
business was authorized not less than one year before the date a private school, church, public
hospital, day care center, or child care facility use was established within 300 feet or a public school
use was established within 1,000 feet from the place of business, and the new application is filed no
later than 90 days after the previous permit or license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages at
that location expired or was terminated.
(b) Section 4-4 (minimum distances from certain uses) does not apply to a permit or license holder who sells
alcoholic beverages if:
(1) The permit or license holder's place of business and the private school, day care center or
child care facility are located on different stories of a multistory building; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/283
(2) The permit or license holder's place of business and the private school or day-care center or
child-care facility are located in separate buildings and either the permit or license holder's place of
business or the private school or day care center or child care facility is located on the second story
or higher of a multistory building.
(1969 Code, sec. 3-5; Ordinance 1434, sec. 5, adopted 1/25/05)
Sec. 4-6. Approval of certificate for permit or license.
Before the city secretary shall sign any certificate for an applicant for a permit or license required by the state
alcoholic beverage code, such certificate shall be submitted to the community development director to ensure
that the application complies with this chapter. (1969 Code, sec. 3-6; Ordinance 1434, sec. 6, adopted 1/25/05)
Sec. 4-7. Permit fees and issuance.
(a) Unless state law exempts a permittee or licensee from payment of a fee established by this section, a
permittee or licensee must pay the city an annual permit or license fee of one-half the amount of the state fee
for each permit and license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages.
(b) An applicant shall pay the fees established under subsection (a) of this section to the community
development director no later than the 30th day after the date the applicant's payment of a state permit or
license fee is due.
(c) A permittee or licensee who sells an alcoholic beverage at a business location before the applicant pays
the fees established by this section commits a class C misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with this
chapter.
(d) The community development director shall issue and deliver a receipt under this section to the permittee
or licensee authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages under this chapter and a state permit or license, if the
permittee or licensee:
(1) Pays the fees established by subsection (a) of this section; and
(2) Exhibits the permit or license issued by the state.
(1969 Code, sec. 3-7; Ordinance 1434, sec. 7, adopted 1/25/05)
Sec. 4-8. Penalty.
A person who violates this chapter commits an offense punishable under section 1-6. An offense under this
chapter is a class C misdemeanor. (1969 Code, sec. 3-8; Ordinance 1434, sec. 8, adopted 1/25/05)
CHAPTER 6
AMBULANCES*
Sec. 6-1. Equipment, service supervised by fire chief.
The ambulance service equipment held by the city shall be utilized as an ambulance service for persons
requesting or utilizing such service, which shall be subject to the further provisions of this chapter, and such
ambulance service shall be under the immediate supervision of the fire chief, and such equipment shall be
maintained at locations under direction of such fire chief, subject to the approval of the city manager. (1969
Code, sec. 3 ½-1; Ordinance 936, sec. 1, adopted 1/10/78; Ordinance 975, sec. 1, adopted 4/14/81)
Sec. 6-2. Service rates.
(a) Payment of services; amounts specified. Any person who utilizes the emergency medical service of the
city, whether such person requested the same or not by reason of emergency then existing, shall pay for said
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/283
service the amounts specified below:
FEE SCHEDULE
Basic life support ..... $700.00
Advanced life support ..... 825.00
Advanced life support 2 ..... 960.00
Specialty care transport ..... 1,150.00
Mileage (per mile) ..... 15.00
Treatment/no transport ..... 125.00
Out-of-county resident fee ..... 100.00
Basic life support routine disposable ..... 60.00
Advanced life support routine disposable ..... 80.00
Oxygen therapy ..... 100.00
(b) Special events rate. Any organization, community event or activity requiring standby ambulance service
shall be charged $55.00 for the first four hours of the event and thereafter $27.50 per hour. No exceptions shall
be allowed.
(1969 Code, sec. 3 ½-2; Ordinance 936, sec. 2, adopted 1/10/78; Ordinance 975, sec. 2, adopted 4/14/81;
Ordinance 1034, sec. 1, adopted 9/28/83; Ordinance 1174, sec. 1, adopted 10/11/88; Ordinance 1216 adopted
9/26/91; Ordinance 1276 adopted 9/20/95; Ordinance 1296, sec. I, adopted 12/11/96; Ordinance 1317, sec. 1,
adopted 4/28/98; Ordinance 1376, secs. 1, 2, adopted 10/23/01; Ordinance 1424, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/04;
Ordinance 1450, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/05; Ordinance 1459, sec. 1, adopted 4/25/06; Ordinance 1530, sec. 1,
adopted 10/27/09; Ordinance 1537, secs. 1, 2, adopted 6/26/10; Ordinance 1580, sec. 1, adopted 1/24/12;
Ordinance 1621, sec. 1, adopted 10/22/13; Ordinance 1659, sec. 2, adopted 4/28/15)
Sec. 6-3. Display of street number required.
(a) Every person shall display the street number of the residence or business conspicuously above or on the
main entrance to the residence or business.
(b) Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in
section 1-6.
(1969 Code, sec. 3 ½-5; Ordinance 1202, secs. 1, 2, adopted 11/14/90)
CHAPTER 8
ANIMALS AND FOWL
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 8-1. Definitions.
Terms as used in this chapter shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Animal means any live, nonhuman, vertebrate creature, be it domestic, wild, livestock, reptile, or other.
Animal control officer means:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/283
(1) An employee of the city police department authorized to enforce all ordinances and state laws
pertaining to the ownership, care, and management of animals by exercising lawful authority to issue
citations, notices of violation, and seizing animals, and obtaining warrants or court orders pertaining
to animals;
(2) Any state peace officer acting to enforce this chapter or state laws pertaining to animals.
At large means any animal not restrained, including, without limitation, domestic, wild, and livestock animals as
defined herein and estrays as defined in state law.
Commercial feeding means the feeding of livestock for gain other than as may be naturally grown on the
premises with nominal, seasonal, or drought feeding of supplemental food.
Dangerous animal. Any animal shall be deemed dangerous upon the occurrence of any of the following events:
(1) An unprovoked attack on a person, domestic animal, or livestock causing serious bodily injury
by an animal outside a secure enclosure in which the attacking animal is kept;
(2) An unprovoked attack of aggression by an animal outside a secure enclosure which causes a
person to reasonably believe the animal will attack and cause serious bodily injury to a human or to
a domestic animal or livestock; or
(3) Certification by a doctor of veterinary medicine that an animal poses a danger to human life,
animal life, or property based on a reasonable medical probability after observation.
Domestic animal means those animals which are naturally tame and gentle or which, by long association with
man, have become thoroughly domesticated and are now reduced to such a state of subjection to his will that
they no longer possess the disposition or inclination to escape. The term “domestic animal” specifically includes
household pets, such as dogs and cats and miniature animals.
Kennel means any place where five or more animals, not wild, livestock, or estray, over the age of four months,
are raised, trained, boarded, harbored, or kept. A farm, ranch, horse lot (private or commercial), private stable,
veterinary clinic, animal hospital, and an animal pound, as defined in the zoning ordinance outlined in appendix
A to this Code, are specifically excluded from this definition.
Livestock means:
(1) Any species or family of bovine, ox, cattle, swine, pig, horse, equine, tapir, elephant, deer, or
antelope;
(2) Other grass- or plant-eating single- or cloven-hoofed mammals, whether indigenous to this
state or not;
(3) Any species or family of domestic barnyard animal, such as, a duck, chicken, goose, pigeon,
guinea, rabbit, other bird or fowl, emu, ostrich, or any other animal (not listed in this chapter as
domestic or wild) which may be raised for human consumption in the United States of America; and
(4) Any animal designated or defined by state law as an estray when straying or at large.
Microchip means a passive electronic device that is injected into an animal by means of a hypodermic-type
device. Each microchip must contain a unique and original number that is readable by an electronic scanning
device for purposes of animal identification. The microchip shall be supplied with a tag that must be attached to
the animal's collar to notify others of the presence of the microchip.
Miniature animals means those animals, not wild or livestock, which when fully grown do not exceed 18 inches
in height at shoulder level and weight no more than 90 pounds are considered to be miniature.
Neutered means any animal, male or female, rendered incapable of breeding or being bred.
Owner means any person who owns, keeps, harbors, controls (physically or by verbal or hand commands),
feeds, shelters or aids any animal; or any person who is the owner's agent left in charge of an animal or any
person who states that he will be responsible for an animal.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/283
Restrain. Any animal shall be deemed to be restrained when it is:
(1) Confined on the premises of the owner within a fenced enclosure, capable of confining the
animal, and pursuant to and in compliance with all applicable city ordinances regarding such fenced
enclosures;
(2) Under the control of a person by a leash of at least five and not more than ten feet in length
and of sufficient strength to control the animal while the animal is being walked; or
(3) Within a vehicle being driven or parked.
Serious bodily injury means an injury characterized by severe bite wounds or severe ripping and tearing of
muscle that would cause a reasonably prudent person or animal owner to seek treatment from a medical
professional or veterinarian and would require hospitalization or clinic treatment or veterinarian services.
Sterilized. See Neutered.
Wild animal means any animal of a wild nature or disposition to require to be reclaimed and made tame by art,
industry, or education, or else must be kept in confinement to be brought within the immediate control of the
owner. Without limiting the general definition just stated, this term specifically includes poisonous reptiles, a wolf
hybrid, or any nondomestic animal whose normal bodyweight at maturity is typically 15 pounds or more.
(1969 Code, sec. 4-1; Ordinance 556, sec. 3, adopted 5/14/47; Ordinance 658, sec. 2, adopted 5/10/60;
Ordinance 1320, sec. 1, adopted 7/28/98; Ordinance 1386, sec. 1, adopted 1/22/02; Ordinance 1419, sec. 1,
adopted 10/28/03; Ordinance 1472, sec. 1, adopted 1/23/07; Ordinance 1500, sec. 1, adopted 4/15/08)
Sec. 8-2. Inhumane treatment.
It is unlawful and a violation of this article to cruelly treat an animal, as defined in V.T.C.A., Penal Code sec.
42.09. Upon discovering or being notified by any person that an animal is or may be cruelly treated as
prescribed by V.T.C.A., Penal Code sec. 42.09, or successor statute, an animal control officer shall investigate
such charges. If probable cause is found for an allegation of cruelty to an animal, then the animal control officer
may issue a citation for the violation of this section, or refer the matter to the county attorney for prosecution in
the county court, or seize the animal pursuant to V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 821, or a combination of
these. The animal control officer shall follow V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 821, or successor statute, as
it relates to hearings, seizure and disposition of such allegedly cruelly treated animal. The remedies for
inhumane or cruel treatment of animals are under this chapter. V.T.C.A., Penal Code sec. 42.09, or V.T.C.A.,
Health and Safety Code ch. 821, are cumulative and the use of one does not preclude use of another in a given
case. (1969 Code, sec. 4-1.1; Ordinance 937, sec. 1, adopted 2/14/78; Ordinance 1472, sec. 2, adopted
1/23/07)
Sec. 8-3. Setting traps prohibited.
No person shall expose an open trap or metal jaw trap that shall be liable to injure any domestic animal or
person. (1969 Code, sec. 4-1.2; Ordinance 1472, sec. 4, adopted 1/23/07)
Sec. 8-4. Proper care of animals.
Every owner or other person having care and control of any animal shall provide the following for each animal
under his care and control:
(1) Sufficient nutritious and wholesome food served to the animal in clean containers, to maintain
the animal in good health;
(2) Clean and wholesome water served to the animal in a clean container, such water to be
available to the animal at all times;
(3) Adequate shelter which shall allow the animal to remain dry and protected from the elements
at all times and which shall provide either natural or artificial shade for the animal to avoid direct
sunlight. If the shelter is provided by enclosure, the enclosure shall allow for adequate ventilation;
and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/283
(4) Veterinary care, as needed to prevent suffering.
(1969 Code, sec. 4-1.3; Ordinance 1500, sec. 2, adopted 4/15/08)
Sec. 8-5. Nuisance animals.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to own or maintain an animal in such a manner as to constitute a public
nuisance. The following acts shall constitute a public nuisance:
(1) Failure to restrain an animal, except and unless the animal is under control and obedience to
oral command in the course of:
a. Duties or training as a working or service animal; or
b. While performing in an organized exhibition or training event is scheduled and held in a
public venue or business.
(2) Damage to property caused by an animal.
(3) Maintaining a domestic animal or livestock in an unsanitary environment, which shall include
but not be limited to the failure to remove urine and feces daily from the confinement area to
minimize the breeding of flies and rodents.
(4) Permitting an animal to bark, whine, howl, crow, cackle, or make any other noise which causes
annoyance or interference with the reasonable use and enjoyment of a premises.
(5) Herding of animals along or upon any public right-of-way, except by any officer, agent or
employee of the federal, state or local government or agency thereof, if such herding is done in the
performance of his official duties.
(b) It shall be a nuisance and unlawful for any person to keep livestock within any enclosure within the limits
of the city that contains less than 1,600 square feet of floor or ground space for each head of livestock, except
for keeping of livestock upon the premises of public and private schools, fairs, livestock shows, of a licensed
veterinarian's office, or of a United States Department of Agriculture's inspected meat processing facility. For
purposes of this section, the term “livestock” shall include swine, horses, donkeys, mules, goats, sheep, and
other animals of the ox kind or bovine species.
(c) It shall be a nuisance and unlawful for any person to keep livestock within any enclosure within the limits
of the city that is within 50 feet of a occupied residence, except for keeping of livestock upon the premises of
public and private schools, fairs, livestock shows, of a licensed veterinarian's office, or of a United States
Department of Agriculture's inspected meat processing facility.
(d) All domestic animals authorized to be kept shall be confined to the premises of the owner or custodian of
such domestic animal, and it shall be unlawful for any person to allow such domestic animal to run or fly at
large, or go upon the premises of another person, or to allow any shelter or cage for any animal to be located in
violation of applicable building setback lines, as set forth in zoning appendix A. No domestic animal shall be
kept within a front yard of a residential dwelling as this term is defined in zoning appendix A.
(e) It shall be a nuisance and unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal which has been killed or died,
and which is not intended as food for human consumption, to permit or suffer any such dead animal to remain
upon any premises.
(1969 Code, sec. 4-2; Ordinance 223, sec. 1, adopted 6/13/1906; Ordinance 1472, sec. 4, adopted 1/23/07)
Sec. 8-6. Vaccination.
(a) No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog or cat, within the city limits unless a licensed veterinarian shall
have vaccinated the dog or cat with antirabies vaccine.
(b) The minimum requirements are that dogs and cats shall be so vaccinated at the ages and intervals
specified by regulations of the state department of health or its successor agency.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/283
(1969 Code, sec. 4-3; Ordinance 223, sec. 7, adopted 6/13/1906; Ordinance 1472, sec. 6, adopted 1/23/07)
Sec. 8-7. Vaccination tag.
Upon complying with the vaccination provisions of this chapter, there shall be issued to the owner a numbered
metallic tag stamped with the number and year of vaccination. Dogs and cats shall at all times wear the rabies
vaccination tag issued to that animal. (1969 Code, sec. 4-4; Ordinance 223, sec. 8, adopted 6/13/1906;
Ordinance 1472, sec. 7, adopted 1/23/07)
Sec. 8-8. Dangerous animals.
(a) As a public safety requirement. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any dangerous
animal within the corporate limits of the city without complying with V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code sec.
822.042, as amended, whether the animal be a dog or of another species. In addition, the owner must comply
with each of the following local requirements, at the owner's expense, before the animal is released from the
county humane society's animal shelter:
(1) Obtain liability insurance coverage or showing financial responsibility in an amount of at least
$250,000.00 to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous animal causing bodily
injury to a person or for damages to any person's property resulting from the keeping of such
dangerous animal. A certificate of insurance or other evidence of meeting the above requirements
shall be filed with the police department. The policy must require the company to give advance
notice to the city of cancellation or non-renewal of the policy;
(2) Register with the city by providing:
a. The name and address of the owner;
b. The breed, age, sex, color and any other identifying marks of the animal;
c. The location where the animal is to be kept, if it is not at the address of the owner; and
d. Two color photographs that clearly identify the dangerous animal;
(3) Have the animal sterilized;
(4) Construct a cage, pen, or enclosure for the dangerous animal that has secure sides; a secure
top attached to the sides; and a secure bottom which is either attached to the sides or else the sides
of the structure must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet. The pen or enclosure must
be completely encircled by a fence constructed in such a manner as to prevent a person or child
from being able to reach the animal's pen or enclosure;
(5) Not allow the animal to go outside of its cage, pen, or enclosure unless the animal is under
physical restraint. No person shall permit a dangerous animal to be kept outside of its cage, pen, or
enclosure on a chain, rope, or other type of leash unless a person is in physical control of the chain,
rope, or other type of leash and the person is of competent strength to control the animal at all times.
Dangerous animals shall not be leashed to inanimate objects, such as trees, posts, buildings, etc. All
dangerous animals outside their cage, pen, or enclosure must be securely fitted with a muzzle that
will not cause injury to the animal nor interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent the
animal from biting other animals or human beings;
(6) Post signs giving notice of a dangerous animal on the premises in which such animal is
confined. Such signs shall be conspicuously posted at both the front and rear property entrances
and shall bear letters not less than two inches high, stating “dangerous animal on premises.” Such
signs shall also display a symbol, that is understandable by small children, that warns of the
presence of a dangerous animal;
(7) Attach a fluorescent orange tag provided by the police department to the animal's collar that is
worn at all times so that the animal can be easily identified;
(8) Implant a microchip into the animal which is compatible with a scanning equipment used by
the animal control authority and register it for life with the city's police department and a recognized
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/283
national animal registry;
(9) Pay the appropriate dangerous animal permit fee annually, not later than five business days
prior to the annual expiration renewal date;
(10) Pay the impoundment and daily care fees accrued during the investigation and any appeal of
the dangerous animal determination process; and
(11) Present proof of current vaccination or pay the fee for vaccination.
In the event the owner or keeper fails or refuses to timely comply with these requirements in
accordance with state law, then the animal control officers shall humanely destroy the dangerous
animal.
(b) Complaint. When a person reports a dangerous animal to the animal control authorities, the authorities
shall investigate the report and notify the owner of the report. The animal control authority shall obtain a sworn
written statement from at least one witness, describing at a minimum:
(1) The animal;
(2) The facts of the complaint;
(3) Identity of any other known witness; and
(4) Other information necessary or helpful to the investigation.
(c) Investigation. The animal control authorities shall conclude the investigation no longer than ten days after
receipt of the report or sworn statement, which ever occurs later. Upon completion of investigation the animal
control authorities shall either:
(1) Close the case if it is determined that the report or complaint is unsubstantiated; or
(2) Declare the animal to be a dangerous animal.
(d) Seizure pending disposition. Upon sworn application of the animal control authorities or a peace officer
stating probable cause that the animal is dangerous and there is some reason to believe that the animal may
endanger other persons before the investigation and any hearings or appeals can be completed, then a
municipal court judge may issue a warrant authorizing the animal control authorities or peace officer to:
(1) Retain the animal if it has been captured at large; or
(2) Enter the building, dwelling, other structure or enclosure to seize the animal and detain same,
until disposition of the investigation and any hearing and appeal.
(e) Notice. The police chief or his designee shall promptly notify the owner or keeper of the animal of his
determination on the dangerousness of the animal, by a written notice mailed to or posted on the front door of
the last known address of the owner or keeper or other means reasonably calculated to give actual notice of the
determination to the owner.
(f) Appeal.
(1) The owner may appeal the dangerous animal determination by filing a written notice of appeal
to municipal court within 15 days after the determination, for a trial de novo. The consequences of
the determination shall be suspended pending the municipal court judge's final decision, but the
animal control authority shall retain the custody and care of the animal until all appeals are
exhausted. An owner may appeal a decision of the municipal court to the county court at law, in
accordance with V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 30, as amended. Following a final judicial
determination that the animal is dangerous, each day the owner fails to comply with subsection (a)
of this section shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter.
(2) The municipal court judge may compel the attendance of complainant, any known witnesses,
the animal owner against whom the complaint was filed, and the police chief or his representative
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/283
who investigated. The city shall be represented by the city attorney or assistant in all appeals of a
dangerous animal determination.
(1969 Code, sec. 4-5; Ordinance 223, sec. 2, adopted 6/13/1906; Ordinance 1320, sec. 2, adopted 7/28/98;
Ordinance 1472, sec. 8, adopted 1/23/07)
Sec. 8-9. Female dogs and cats in heat.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any female dog or cat in heat to fail to keep such animal confined in a
building or in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel, in such a manner that another dog or cat cannot come
into contact with it, except for controlled breeding purposes. (1969 Code, sec. 4-6; Ordinance 223, sec. 3,
adopted 6/13/1906; Ordinance 1075 adopted 12/11/84; Ordinance 1320, sec. 3, adopted 7/28/98; Ordinance
1472, sec. 9, adopted 1/23/07)
Sec. 8-10. Guard dogs.
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Guard dog means any dog trained or used to protect persons, premises, or property by attacking or threatening
to attack any person found within the area patrolled by the dog and that is either securely enclosed within the
area at all times or under the continuous control of a trained handler.
Nonresidential or multifamily use means the placing of guard dogs on any nonresidential or multifamily property,
whether the dogs are owned by the property owner, tenant, or other person with the right of possession or
control of the property, or whether the dogs are owned by another.
(b) Requirements for use of guard dogs. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain guard dogs in
any area for the protection of person or property unless the following provisions are met:
(1) The dogs shall be confined to an enclosed area adequate to ensure they will not escape.
(2) They shall be under the absolute control of a handler at all times when not securely enclosed.
(3) The owner or other persons in control of a premises upon which a guard dog is maintained
shall post a warning sign at each entrance to the area under guard with lettering clearly visible from
a distance of 50 feet, and shall additionally, in the case of the nonresidential or multifamily land uses,
contain a telephone number where some person responsible for controlling such guard dog can be
reached 24 hours a day.
(4) Prior to the placing of guard dogs on any nonresidential or multifamily property, the persons
responsible for the placing shall inform the police department in writing of their intention to post such
dogs, the number of dogs to be posted, the location where dogs will be posted, and the approximate
length of time the dogs will be guarding the area.
(1969 Code, sec. 4-7; Ordinance 223, sec. 4, adopted 6/13/1906; Ordinance 1472, sec. 10, adopted 1/23/07)
Sec. 8-11. Records.
It shall be the duty of the police department to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of the
following:
(1) Impounding and disposition. Records shall be kept that detail the impoundment and
disposition of all animals coming into the county humane society's custody. Such records shall be
kept for a period of at least three years and shall give the description of all animals impounded, date
of impounding, date of sale or other disposition, the amount realized for such animal and the name
and address of the purchaser.
(2) Bite cases. All bite cases reported to the police department and the investigation of the same.
(3) Monies received by the county humane society. All monies received under the provisions of
this chapter. Such records shall be open to inspection at reasonable times by persons responsible
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/283
for similar records of the city, and shall be audited annually in the same manner as other city records
are audited.
(1969 Code, sec. 4-8; Ordinance 223, sec. 5, adopted 6/13/1906; Ordinance 1472, sec. 11, adopted 1/23/07)
Sec. 8-12. Fees.
(a) Impoundment fees. Any animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter may be reclaimed by the
owner or person taking custody of such animal upon complying with section 8-80 and payment of the following
fees based upon owner impoundment records within a two-year period:
(1) Impoundment of any animal, except those outlined in subsection (a)(2) and (3) of this section:
(A) First impoundment: $15.00.
(B) Second impoundment and thereafter: $75.00.
(2) Impoundment of livestock: double the fees listed in subsection (a)(1) of this section, per head.
(3) Daily care fees (excluding first day of impoundment): $10.00 per day.
(b) Other fees.
(1) Rabies vaccination fee, pursuant to section 8-6 (with humane society receipt): $10.00.
(2) Bite animal, impoundment, and observation, ten days: $100.00.
(3) Requested pathological examination: $80.00.
(4) Any impounded animal other than livestock that is adopted by a person, other than the original
owner, must pay for the neutering of the animal: $65.00.
(5) Registration of dangerous animal: $100.00.
(c) Computation of boarding day. For fee computation purposes, each boarding day shall begin at 12:01 p.m.
The daily fee rate shall be applicable when an animal is kept for any portion of a day.
(1969 Code, sec. 4-9; Ordinance 223, sec. 6, adopted 6/13/1906; Ordinance 1472, sec. 12, adopted 1/23/07)
Sec. 8-13. Commercial feeding of livestock.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in commercial feeding operations of livestock unless the premises
are zoned as a heavy industrial district as set forth in zoning appendix A. (1969 Code, sec. 4-10; Ordinance
240, sec. 1, adopted 7/13/1909; Ordinance 1472, sec. 13, adopted 1/23/07)
Secs. 8-14—8-44. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. WILD ANIMALS AND LIVESTOCK
Sec. 8-45. Applicability.
This article shall be applicable only to wild animals and livestock, as defined in section 8-1. (1969 Code, sec. 4-
21; Ordinance 1472, sec. 14, adopted 1/23/07)
Sec. 8-46. Keeping or harboring.
(a) It shall be unlawful to keep, harbor or maintain within the city limits the following:
(1) Any animal designated by the state department of health as an animal with a high-risk of
having rabies.
(2) Any wild animal.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/283
(b) This section shall not apply to or prohibit the following:
(1) A publicly or privately owned zoo maintained or operated by a nonprofit organization or
governmental entity.
(2) A publicly or privately maintained circus, traveling show or rodeo, which does not remain in the
city longer than 15 consecutive days.
(3) A retail or commercial business located in a C-C, C-A/R, C-G, C-F, I-L, or I-H zoning district as
defined by the zoning appendix A, and displaying one poisonous snake on its premises solely for
purposes of educating the general public, provided:
a. An application to display the snake has been submitted to and approved by the police
chief;
b. The display area/controlled environment wherein the snake is to be displayed has been
inspected by the police department; and
c. The display area/controlled environment wherein the snake is displayed is maintained in
such a manner as to ensure the safety of the general public and the health of the snake and
meets the following minimum requirements:
1. The display area/controlled environment must be lock secured to prevent
movement.
2. The display area/controlled environment must be so placed as to prevent any
physical contact by the public.
3. The length of the display area/controlled environment must be equal to or exceed
the length of the snake's body, with a depth and height equal to or exceeding half the
snake's length.
(4) A television or motion picture production company in possession or custody of a wild animal
during the filming of a television or motion picture within the city limits.
(5) A research facility, as defined by section 2(e) of the Animal Welfare Act (7 USC 2132(e)), as
amended, that is licensed by the Secretary of Agriculture under that Act.
(c) In the event a wild animal allowed within the city limits, pursuant to one of the exceptions found in this
section, should escape from its cage, confinement, or other restraint, then the owner or person in custody of the
wild animal shall immediately notify either the city police department, or county sheriff. Failure to immediately
make this notification is an offense.
(1969 Code, sec. 4-22; Ordinance 1472, sec. 14, adopted 1/23/07)
Sec. 8-47. Impoundment.
Any animal control officer may take up and impound at the county humane society's animal shelter any of the
following found within the city limits:
(1) A wild animal (unless excepted by section 8-46(b);
(2) An excepted wild animal, which has escaped and is at large;
(3) Livestock at large found within the city limits in violation of either this chapter or V.T.C.A.,
Agriculture Code ch. 142, or successor statute.
(1969 Code, sec. 4-23; Ordinance 1472, sec. 14, adopted 1/23/07)
Sec. 8-48. Sale of impounded animals; notice; disposition of proceeds.
(a) The police department may sell any animal impounded under the provisions of this article at public
auction for cash after having held such animal for at least five days and after having published notice of such
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/283
sale together with a general description of the animal to be sold. Such notice shall appear one time at least five
days prior to the date of the sale and shall state that such animal will be sold to defray cost if not reclaimed prior
to such date.
(b) The proceeds of any such sale shall be used to defray sale expenses and expenses of taking up and
keeping of such animal. The balance, if any, shall be paid to the owner of the animal, if known, and if such
owner if unknown, such balance shall be paid into the city treasury. Within six months after such sale, an owner
may, upon proof of such ownership satisfactory to the city's police chief, be entitled to receive the amount paid
into the city treasury because of such sale.
(1969 Code, sec. 4-24; Ordinance 1472, sec. 14, adopted 1/23/07)
Sec. 8-49. Disposition of unclaimed, unadopted or unsold impounded animal.
Any impounded animal which is:
(1) Not timely reclaimed or adopted;
(2) Found to be infected with rabies;
(3) Seriously injured; or
(4) Determined by the police chief, or designee, to be unsalable or unadoptable;
shall forthwith be destroyed. The police chief or designee shall make all decisions as to the condition, status,
and disposition of such animal.
(1969 Code, sec. 4-25; Ordinance 1472, sec. 14, adopted 1/23/07)
Sec. 8-50. Redemption of impounded animals after sale.
The owner of any animal impounded under the provisions of this article may redeem the animal by reimbursing
the purchaser for the adoption fee as well as the reasonable costs for keeping the animal as determined by the
police chief, or designee. The owner must redeem the animal within 30 days after the date of the sale;
otherwise, the animal becomes the absolute property of the purchaser. (1969 Code, sec. 4-26; Ordinance 1472,
sec. 14, adopted 1/23/07)
Sec. 8-51. Confinement of animal by owner of private premises; notice to department.
If any animal is found upon the premises of any person, the owner or occupant of the premises shall have the
right to confine such animal temporarily pending its release to the police department or to the true owner of
such animal. (1969 Code, sec. 4-27; Ordinance 1472, sec. 14, adopted 1/23/07)
Secs. 8-52—8-75. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. DOMESTIC ANIMALS
Sec. 8-76. Unlawful restraint of dogs or other domestic animals on private property.
A person may not restrain a dog or other domestic animal with a chain, rope or tether. (1969 Code, sec. 4-40;
Ordinance 1472, sec. 15, adopted 1/23/07; Ordinance 1500, sec. 3, adopted 4/15/08)
State Law reference- Unlawful restraint of dog, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code sec. 821.077.
Sec. 8-77. Impoundment when found at large.
Animal control officer is authorized to take up all domestic animals found not to be restrained by their owners
and impound such animals in the county humane society's shelter. All such animals shall be confined in a
humane manner. (1969 Code, sec. 4-41; Ordinance 1472, sec. 15, adopted 1/23/07)
Sec. 8-78. Notice of violation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/283
Where the ownership of an animal found at large is known, a notice of such violation may be issued by an
animal control officer, or if a peace officer, then a citation may be issued. Upon issuance of a notice of violation,
the police department shall report the same to the municipal court and request that the violator be summoned
to appear in such court and answer to such charges. (1969 Code, sec. 4-42; Ordinance 1472, sec. 15, adopted
1/23/07)
Sec. 8-79. Notice of impoundment of tagged animals.
Upon impounding an animal found at large with current vaccination or other identifying tags, the police
department or the county humane society shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner of such animal,
and of the conditions whereby the owner may regain custody of such animals. (1969 Code, sec. 4-43;
Ordinance 1472, sec. 15, adopted 1/23/07)
Sec. 8-80. Redemption requirements.
(a) Any animal impounded under the provisions of this article may be reclaimed by the owner upon the
payment of required impoundment fees set forth in this chapter, and based upon impoundment records
maintained by the county humane society.
(b) Any domestic or miniature animal over the age of four months which does not have a current rabies
vaccination may not be redeemed, transferred or adopted until it has been so vaccinated.
(1969 Code, sec. 4-44; Ordinance 1472, sec. 15, adopted 1/23/07)
Sec. 8-81. Disposition of animals.
(a) Unclaimed or unredeemed. After the requirements of notice as set forth in this article and the expiration of
three days, any impounded animal that is unclaimed or unredeemed shall become the property of the county
humane society. The society shall have the following powers:
(1) Authority to transfer ownership. The society may transfer ownership of any impounded animal
that is unclaimed or unredeemed. In the event of such transfer of ownership, the person or agency
to whom ownership is transferred shall pay for such animal's food and care while in the animal
shelter and shall comply with the applicable vaccination provisions.
(2) Right to destroy. The county humane society may humanely destroy any impounded animal
that is unclaimed or unredeemed.
(b) Donated, sick, unweaned or injured animals. The county humane society may destroy any animal by a
humane method if the animal is unweaned, so sick or injured that its cure is considered by the police
department or the county humane society to be impracticable or if death is imminent. In any of such events,
such destruction may be done immediately without notice of any waiting period.
(1969 Code, sec. 4-45; Ordinance 1472, sec. 15, adopted 1/23/07)
Secs. 8-82—8-105. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. RABIES CONTROL*
Sec. 8-106. Administration; report by veterinarian.
(a) The police chief is designated as the rabies control authority of the city for the purposes of administering
the Rabies Control Act of 1981, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 826.
(b) It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the police department his diagnosis of any
animal observed by him as a rabies suspect.
(1969 Code, sec. 4-50; Ordinance 1472, sec. 16, adopted 1/23/07)
Sec. 8-107. Report of bite cases.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/283
(a) It shall be the duty of every physician or other practitioner to report to the police department the names
and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as will be
helpful in rabies control.
(b) It shall be the duty of every person owning or having custody of an animal, which has bitten a human
being to report the same to the police department, and to confine it in an enclosure or to securely hold the
animal by the means of a chain or other device for observation and examination by the police department. No
person having the custody or possession of such animal shall fail, refuse, or neglect to allow an animal control
officer to make an inspection or examination of such animal for determining whether such animal has rabies.
(1969 Code, sec. 4-51; Ordinance 1472, sec. 16, adopted 1/23/07)
State Law reference- Reports of rabies, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 826.
Sec. 8-108. Quarantine regulations; pathological examination.
(a) No person may keep an animal within the city which has bitten a person or which is suspected of having
bitten a person unless the bite or suspected bite shall have been immediately reported to the police
department. A dog or cat shall after such report be securely quarantined for a period of ten days. Any other
biting animal shall be humanely killed, and its brain shall be tested for rabies. In lieu thereof the police chief
may allow the biting animal to be confined for 30 days for observation, should such confinement conform to the
regulations of the state department of health.
(b) Quarantining shall be at the following places:
(1) The county humane society's animal shelter, in which case the owner of the suspected animal
shall pay the county humane society a fee as set forth in this chapter.
(2) A licensed veterinary hospital at the expense of the owner, upon the owner's request.
(3) Home quarantine where all of the following requirements are met:
a. The animal owner is a resident of the city and has a facility in the city limits to provide
absolute security and isolation for the animal. If the owner of a biting animal fails to keep the
animal so confined, an offense shall have been committed;
b. The owner of the biting animal agrees that he will have the animal inspected by a licensed
veterinarian on the first day of isolation and on the day immediately following the ten-day
isolation period. The owner further agrees to furnish the police department with a certificate of
health showing the animal to be free of rabies. If the owner of the biting animal fails to have the
animal inspected on the first day of and on the day immediately following this ten-day
observation period as required, an offense shall have been committed;
c. The biting animal was currently vaccinated and was not at large at the time of the bite;
d. If an animal dies while in home quarantine, the police department shall be notified
immediately, and the animal will be surrendered to the department for testing; and
e. Failure to comply with the home observation requirements shall constitute an offense.
(4) An animal of unknown ownership will be quarantined at the county humane society's animal
shelter.
(c) Upon the demand made by the police department, it shall be unlawful for the owner to fail to surrender
any animal which has bitten a human or another animal, or which is suspected of having been exposed to
rabies, for quarantine, which expense shall be borne by the owner.
(d) The quarantined animal may be reclaimed by the owner if adjudged free of rabies, upon payment of the
fees set forth in this chapter and upon compliance with the vaccination provisions of this chapter.
(e) When an animal under quarantine, diagnosed by a licensed veterinarian as being rabid or suspected of
being rabid, dies while under observation, the police department shall immediately send the head of such
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/283
animal to the state health department for pathological examination. The police department shall notify the
proper public health officer of reports of human contacts and the diagnosis made of the suspected animal after
the pathological examination has been made.
(f) Any unvaccinated animal bitten by another animal suspected of or known to be rabid shall be immediately
destroyed or shall be surrendered to the police department for a period of three months' quarantine, and shall
be vaccinated during the third and eighth week of quarantine. Any vaccinated animal bitten by another animal
suspected of being or known to be rabid shall be immediately vaccinated and surrendered to the police
department for a period of 45 days' quarantine. When the biting animal is determined not to be rabid, the bitten
animal shall be released. All animals quarantined shall be at the owner's expense. Upon surrender of an animal
for quarantine, the owner shall be required to pay in advance one month's quarantine fee to defray a portion of
the expense of care and feeding of the animal. Additional quarantine expenses shall be paid at the beginning of
each subsequent month's quarantine. If an owner fails to pay for any expense of quarantine when due, the
animal shall become the property of the city and shall be subject to immediate disposal. The police chief is
authorized to permit the quarantine of a bitten animal at a licensed veterinary clinic for the necessary
quarantine period at the owner's option and expense.
(1969 Code, sec. 4-52; Ordinance 1472, sec. 16, adopted 1/23/07)
Sec. 8-109. Citywide quarantine.
(a) Conditions warranting; period. A citywide quarantine may be invoked for a period of 30 days by the city
commission upon the recommendation of the police department after it has been notified by the state health
department of a positive diagnosis of rabies of an animal or after an investigation it has determined there exists
an immediate threat of rabies.
(b) Extending time. If there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring during the 30-day period of the
citywide quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended for an additional reasonable period of time.
(c) Animals bitten by rabid animals. During such period of citywide rabies quarantine, every animal bitten by
an animal suspected of being rabid shall be quarantined for six months as provided in this chapter at the
owner's expense. The expense shall be paid at the end of each month's quarantine or the animal shall become
the property of the city and shall be forthwith disposed of.
(d) Animals in public. It shall be unlawful for any person to take or permit any animal in the streets or any
other public place during the period of quarantine.
(1969 Code, sec. 4-53; Ordinance 1472, sec. 16, adopted 1/23/07)
Sec. 8-110. Unauthorized killing of suspected animals; surrender to city.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to kill, or cause to be killed, any rabid animal, any animal suspected of
having been exposed to rabies or any animal which has bitten a human or is suspected to have bitten a human,
except as provided in this article, nor to remove same from the city limits without written permission from the
police department.
(b) The carcass of any dead animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies shall, upon demand, be
surrendered to the police department.
(c) The police department shall direct the disposition of any animal found to be infected with rabies.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine, destruction or
disposal as required herein when demand is made therefore by the police department.
(1969 Code, sec. 4-54; Ordinance 1472, sec. 16, adopted 1/23/07)
Secs. 8-111—8-133. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. PENALTY
Sec. 8-134. Penalty for violation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/283
It is an offense to violate any provision or requirement of this chapter by failing, refusing, or neglecting to
perform or comply with any restriction, obligation, or duty imposed by this chapter, punishable upon conviction
by a penalty as setout in section 1-6. This municipal criminal penalty is cumulative with and not exclusive of any
civil action or penal charge available under state law or other remedies provided by law or equity. (1969 Code,
sec. 4-60; Ordinance 1472, sec. 17, adopted 1/23/07)
CHAPTER 10
BUILDINGS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 10-1. Fire limits.
The fire limits of the city are declared to be as follows:
Beginning at the alley in block 11, OT Addition where it intersects Marshall Street; thence east with Marshall
Street to its intersection with Fannin Street; thence south on Fannin Street to its intersection with Paradise
Street; thence east on Paradise Street to its intersection with the alley in block 30, OT Addition; thence north
with said alley line to its intersection with Marshall Street; thence east on Marshall Street to the Southeast
corner of block 14, OT Addition, corner of Marshall and Mesquite Streets; thence north along Mesquite Street to
its intersection with East Texas Street; thence west on Texas Street to the alley in block 5, OT Addition; thence
north along said alley to Olive Street; thence west on Olive Street to Cumberland Street; thence north on
Cumberland Street to Wanderers Street; thence west on Wanderers Street to the alley in block 65, OT addition;
thence north along said alley to Harrold Street; thence west on Harrold Street to the alley in block 18, North
Addition; thence south along said alley to Dawson Street; thence west on Dawson Street to the alley in block
67, OT Addition; thence south with said alley to the point of beginning.
(1969 Code, sec. 6-1; Ordinance 441, sec. 1, adopted 4/20/27)
Sec. 10-2. Building code adopted; penalty.
(a) There is hereby adopted a building code known as the International Building Code, with the most current
published edition. Such code is published in book form and is to be maintained in the community development
director's office and is referred to, incorporated herein, and made a part hereof for all purposes. Provided,
however, that in the event any conflict may arise between the provisions of the code adopted by the provisions
of this article and any other applicable provisions of this Code, state law, or city ordinance, rule, or regulation,
the provisions of this Code, state law, or city ordinance, rule, or regulation shall prevail and be controlling.
(b) Any person violating the provisions of said building code shall be punished as provided in section 1-6.
(1969 Code, sec. 6-2; Ordinance 1364, sec. 1, adopted 3/6/01)
Sec. 10-3. Construction in fire limits.
Construction in the fire limits, Ordinance No. 441 (adopted 4/20/27), is hereby amended in its entirety and the
appendix of the International Building Code, latest published edition, is hereby adopted.
Sec. 10-4. International Existing Building Code adopted.
(a) There is hereby adopted an existing building code known as the International Existing Building Code, with
the most current published edition. Such code is published in book form and is to be maintained in the
community development director's office and is referred to, in corporate herein, and made a part hereof for all
purposes. The International Existing Building Code regulates and governs the repair, alteration, change of
occupancy, addition and relocation of existing buildings, including historic buildings within the city.
(b) The following sections of the International Existing Building Code are hereby revised:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/283
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Vernon
Section 1301.2 Insert: 1927
(Ordinance 1577, secs. 1, 2, adopted 12/20/11)
Sec. 10-5. Exterior masonry construction requirements.
(a) Definitions.
Masonry means the form of construction composed of stone, brick, brick veneer, concrete, hollow clay tile,
decorative concrete block or tile, glass block or other similar building units or materials or a combination of
these materials laid up unit by unit and set in mortar. For the purposes of this definition, stucco is not
considered masonry. Synthetic products (e.g., EIFS - exterior insulation and finish systems, hardi plank, or
other materials of similar characteristics) shall not be considered a masonry material.
(b) Exterior masonry construction requirements. Buildings requiring masonry on all sides: All buildings
constructed on property zoned CBD (Central Business District) under the city's comprehensive zoning
ordinance shall have all exterior walls constructed using a masonry material covering at least 80 percent of said
walls, exclusive of all windows, doors, roofs, glass construction materials, or sidewalk and walk-way covers.
(c) Nonconforming buildings. Where a lawful building exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this section and said building could not be built under the terms of this section, it may continue so long as it
remains lawful, subject to the following provisions:
(1) Such building may not be enlarged in a way which increases its nonconformity unless the
enlargement is in conformity with the provisions of this section;
(2) The exterior walls of such building may not be modified, altered, or enlarged in a way which
increases its nonconformity unless the modification, alteration, or enlargement is in conformity with
the provisions of this section;
(3) Should such building be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its
replacement cost at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with
the provisions of this section;
(4) Should such building be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter
conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located after it is moved.
(Ordinance 1579, sec. 1, adopted 12/20/11)
Secs. 10-6—10-9. Reserved.
Sec. 10-10. Construction board of appeals (CBOA).
(a) Board creation and establishment. There is hereby created a construction board of appeals for the city.
(b) Board members and term. The construction board of appeals shall consist of five regular members and
two alternates that reside or maintain a business within the city limits selected as follows:
(1) One building contractor;
(2) One master electrician;
(3) One master plumber;
(4) One fire/explosives expert;
(5) One utility representative;
(6) Alternate 1: Tradesperson;
(7) Alternate 2: Vernon citizen.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/283
The city commission shall appoint members of the construction board of appeals. It is the declared policy of the
city commission that it will consider and appoint only those persons who have demonstrated their civic interest,
general knowledge of the community, independent judgment, and availability to prepare for and attend
meetings. The members of the board shall regularly attend meetings of the board and shall serve without
compensation.
Appointees to the construction board of appeals shall serve until replaced by the city commission.
(c) Board duties and responsibilities. The construction board of appeals shall hear appeals on decisions by
the fire marshal, fire chief, and building official as they concern the fire, building, electrical, mechanical and
plumbing codes adopted by the city; determine the suitability of alternate materials and alternate types of
construction; establish licensing regulations; establish fee schedules; and interpret the fire, building, electrical,
mechanical and plumbing codes adopted by the city.
(d) Meetings and quorum. Meetings of the construction board of appeals shall be scheduled as required.
Four of the members (members and/or alternates) shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business.
(e) Requests for board considerations. Any person who desires to schedule any item before the construction
board of appeals shall submit a written request to the fire marshal, fire chief, or building official. Appeals of
decisions of the fire marshal, fire chief, or building official shall also include a $50.00 application fee. Such
request shall include justification for the action requested of the board.
An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of the code or the rules legally adopted
thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of the adopted code do not fully apply or an equally
good or better form of construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of the
adopted code.
(f) Appeals of decisions of the construction board of appeals. Any person who is dissatisfied with a decision
of the construction board of appeals may appeal to the city commission within ten days from the date of
notification of the board's ruling by filing a written request with the city secretary that the appeal be heard by the
city commission.
Upon appeal the fire marshal, fire chief, or building official shall transmit to the city commission all papers for
the record of the appealed action. The city secretary shall thereupon fix a time for a hearing before the city
commission and shall notify those known to be interested. The decision of the city commission concerning the
appeal shall be final.
(Ordinance 1578, sec. 1, adopted 12/20/11)
Secs. 10-11—10-22. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ABATEMENT OF DILAPIDATED, SUBSTANDARD STRUCTURES*
Sec. 10-23. Order to remove; city's remedy on default.
(a) Whenever in the opinion of the city commission any building, fence, shed, awning, or any other
improvement of any kind, or any part thereof, is likely to collapse and endanger persons or property or is an
otherwise dangerous structure, the city commission may order the owner, agent, or occupant of the dangerous
structure or the premises on which it stands or to which it is attached to take down and remove the same or any
part hereof within ten days after notice is served or published as directed by order of the city commission.
(b) If the owner, agent or occupant shall fail or refuse to remove the same after notice is served or published,
the city commission shall have the power to remove the same at the expense of the city and assess the
expenses on the land on which it stood or to which it was attached in such manner as may be directed by the
order of the city commission.
(c) All buildings or structures which are:
(1) Structurally unsafe;
(2) Not provided with adequate egress;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/283
(3) Constitute a fire hazard; or
(4) Otherwise dangerous to human life, or which by way of existing use, constitute a hazard to
safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance or dilapidation or
obsolescence or fire hazard or abandonment;
are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal
in accordance with the procedure specified in this article.
(1969 Code, sec. 6-21; Ordinance 1302, sec. II(A), adopted 2/25/97)
Sec. 10-24. Notice; service.
(a) The community development director shall examine or cause to be examined every building or structure
or portion thereof reported as dangerous, damaged or unsafe and, if such is found to be unsafe and, if such is
found to be unsafe or dangerous, the community development director shall give the owner of such building or
structure written notice stating the defects found to exist.
(b) The notice from the community development director shall require the owner or person in charge of the
building or premises to obtain the proper permit and commence the required repairs, improvements or
demolition and removal of the building or structure or portions thereof within 15 days from the date such notice
is received by the owner or person in charge of such building or premises. Such notice may also require the
building, structure or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith and not occupied until the required repairs and
improvements are completed, inspected and approved by the community development director.
(c) Service of notice may be by certified mail or personal service.
(d) The community development director shall cause to be posted at each entrance at any building ordered
to be vacated, a notice to read:
“Danger-This building is deemed unsafe for human occupancy.”
Such notice shall not be removed without written permission of the community development director, except for
the purpose of making the required repairs or demolishing the building.
(e) In case the owner shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the notice to repair, rehabilitate or to
demolish the building or structure or portion thereof, the community development director may proceed to
prosecute the owner or person in charge of the building or structure as a violator of this article.
(f) In case the owner shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with the notice to repair, rehabilitate or to
demolish and remove the building or structure or portion thereof, the community development director shall
notify the city commission of such fact. The city commission may order the community development director to
proceed with the work specified in such notice, or order such building or structure demolished or removed and
may cause the cost of such work to be levied as a special assessment against the property. The decision shall
be made at a public hearing before the city commission.
(g) Notice shall be given to the owner or person in charge of such building or structure of the public hearing
before the city commission and the order directing the community development director to proceed with the
work and assessing the cost thereof against the property.
(h) Notice of the public hearing to be held before the city commission shall be given by causing a notice of
such hearing to be mailed at least ten days before the date of such hearing to the owner, agent, or occupant of
the dangerous building or structure at his last known address and by publication of a notice of such hearing at
least one time in a newspaper of general circulation of the city prior to the date of such hearing.
(i) If the owner, agent or occupant of the dangerous building or structure or of the premises on which it stands
shall appear before the city commission at such hearing, no further notice shall be required, but if he fails to
appear, the notice of the order of the city commission made at such hearing shall be delivered by mailing a
copy of such order to the owner, agent, or occupant of the dangerous building or structure or the premises on
which it stands at his last known address by certified mail and by publication of a copy of such order at least
one time in a newspaper of general circulation of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/283
(1969 Code, sec. 6-22; Ordinance 1302, sec. II(B), adopted 2/25/97)
Sec. 10-25. Procedure after service of notice.
Upon the expiration of ten days from the date of service of the order of the city commission upon the owner or
person in charge of a dangerous structure and the publication thereof as required herein, the community
development director shall proceed with the work specified in the order of the city commission. (1969 Code,
sec. 6-23; Ordinance 1302, sec. II(C), adopted 2/25/97)
Sec. 10-26. Default of owner.
If the owner, agent or occupant of the premises shall fail or refuse to pay or discharge the expenses as
determined by this article after a period of 30 days, then the city shall file a lien, which shall bear interest at the
rate of ten percent per annum, against such property in the county deed of records. In no case shall the city
foreclose such lien by forced sale. (1969 Code, sec. 6-24; Ordinance 1302, sec. II(D), adopted 2/25/97;
Ordinance 1479, sec. 1, adopted 5/22/07)
Sec. 10-27. Charges after abatement by city.
Any residential property as defined by the city zoning ordinance specified in appendix A to this Code, the
owner, agent, or occupant of such premises at the minimum, at the discretion of the community development
director, shall be invoiced for the solid waste charges incurred by the city in abating the said dilapidated and
substandard structure. Any commercial property as defined by the city zoning ordinance, the owner, agent, or
occupant of such premises at the minimum, at the discretion of the community development director, shall be
invoiced for the solid waste charges, equipment usage and manpower incurred by the city in abating the said
dilapidated and substandard structure. (1969 Code, sec. 6-25; Ordinance 1475, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/07)
Sec. 10-28. Administrative charges after abatement by city.
A $25.00 administrative fee shall be invoiced to any (residential or commercial) property owner after the city
abates a dilapidated and substandard structure. (1969 Code, sec. 6-26; Ordinance 1479, sec. 2, adopted
5/22/07)
Secs. 10-29—10-59. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. ZONING, SUBDIVISION AND BUILDING PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES
Sec. 10-60. Zoning change application fee.
Any person applying for a change in the zoning district classification of any property or a specific use permit, or
a planned unit development permit, shall be required to pay an application processing fee of $100.00 at the
time of the filing of an application. In the event the application is withdrawn prior to the mailing of the required
written notification or publication in the local newspaper, the fee shall be refunded. (1969 Code, sec. 6-41;
Ordinance 1087, sec. 1, adopted 3/28/95)
Sec. 10-61. Subdivision regulation inspection fees.
(a) Inspection. The community development director (director) shall provide for inspection of required
improvements during construction and ensure satisfactory completion. The applicant shall pay to the city an
inspection fee of two percent of the amount of the performance bond or the estimated cost of required
improvements, and the subdivision plat shall not be signed by the chairperson of the planning and zoning
commission unless such fee has been paid at the time of application. These fees shall be due and payable
upon demand of the city and no building permits or certificates of occupancy shall be issued until all fees are
paid. If the city engineer finds upon inspection that any of the required improvements have not been
constructed in accordance with the city's construction standards and specifications, the applicant shall be
responsible for completing the improvements. Whenever the cost of improvements is covered by a performance
bond, the applicant and bonding company shall be severally and jointly liable for the improvements according to
specifications.
(b) Certificate of satisfactory completion. The following applies to the certificate of satisfactory completion:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/283
(1) The city will not accept dedication of required improvements nor release nor reduce a
performance bond, until the city's engineer has submitted a certificate stating that all required
improvements have been satisfactorily completed and until the applicant's engineer or surveyor has
certified to the city engineer, through submission of the detailed as-built survey plat of the
subdivision, indicating location, dimension, materials, and other information required by the planning
and zoning commission or city engineer, that the layout of the line and grade of all public
improvements are in accordance with the construction plans for the subdivision and that a title
insurance policy has been furnished to and approved by the city attorney indicating that the
improvements shall have been completed, are ready for dedication to the city and are free and clear
of any and all liens and encumbrances. Upon such approval and recommendation, the city
commission shall thereafter accept the improvements for dedication in accordance with the
established procedure.
(2) A performance bond shall be reduced upon actual dedication of public improvements and then
only to the ratio that the public improvements dedicated bear to the total public improvements for the
plat. In no event shall a performance bond be reduced below 25 percent of the principal amount.
(c) Acceptance of escrow funds. The following applies to escrow funds:
(1) Whenever, by reason of the season of the year, any lot improvements required by the
subdivision regulations cannot be performed, the director may issue a certificate of occupancy,
provided there is no danger to health, safety, or general welfare upon accepting a cash escrow
deposit in an amount to be determined by the city engineer for the cost of said improvements. The
performance bond covering such lot improvements shall remain in full force and effect.
(2) Procedures on escrow fund are as follows:
a. All required improvements for which escrow monies have been accepted by the director at
the time of issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be installed by the developer within a
period of 12 months from the date of deposit and issuance of the certificate of occupancy. In
the event that the improvements have not been properly installed, at the end of the time
period, the director shall give two weeks written notice to the developer requiring him to
properly install same. If not properly installed, the director may request the city commission to
authorize the city to proceed to contract out the work for the installation of the necessary
improvements in a sum not to exceed the amount of the escrow deposit.
b. At the time of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for which escrow monies are
being deposited with the director, the applicant shall obtain and file with the director prior to
obtaining the certificate of occupancy a notarized statement from the purchaser of the
premises authorizing the director to install the improvements at the end of the 12-month period
in the event that the same have not been duly installed by the developer.
(d) Sketch plan application fee. Sketch plans shall be accompanied by a fee of $10.00 per lot.
(e) Preliminary plat. Preliminary plats shall require a fee of $10.00 per lot.
(f) Final plat. Applicant shall file a fee of $15.00 per lot for final approval, together with an additional fee of
$12.00 per lot for reproduction of plans.
(1969 Code, sec. 6-42; Ordinance 1087, sec. 2(B)-2(F), adopted 3/28/95)
Sec. 10-62. Building permit fees.
(a) Permit fees schedule. The building permit fee schedule is as follows:
Total Valuation Fee
$100.00 and less No fee, unless inspection required, in which case a $5.00 fee for each
inspection shall be charged.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/283
$101.00 to $2,000.00 $5.00 per $1,000.00 or fraction thereof.
$2,001.00 to $15,000.00 $10.00 for the first $2,000.00; plus $3.00 for each additional $1,000.00
or fraction thereof, to and including $15,000.00.
$15,001.00 to $50,000.00 $49.00 for the first $15,000.00; plus $2.50 for each additional $1,000.00
or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00.
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $136.50 for the first $50,000.00; plus $2.00 for each additional
$1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00.
$100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $236.50 for the first $100,000.00; plus $1.25 for each additional
$1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $500,000.00.
$500,001.00 and up $736.50 for the first $500,000.00; plus $0.75 for each additional
$1,000.00 or fraction thereof.
(b) Moving of building or structures. For the moving of any building or structure, the fee shall be $50.00.
(c) Demolition of building or structures. For the demolition of any building or structure, the fee shall be
$25.00.
(d) Permit fees doubled for work prior to permit. Where work for which a permit is required by this Code is
started or proceeded with prior to obtaining said permit, the fees herein specified shall be doubled, but the
payment of such double fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this Code
in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed herein.
(e) Plan-checking fees. When the valuation of the proposed construction exceeds $1,000.00 and a plan is
required to be submitted by section 105.3 of city building code, as amended, a plan-checking fee shall be paid
to the building official at the time of submitting plans and specifications for checking. Said plan-checking fee
shall be equal to one-half of the building permit fee as set forth in section 107.4 of city building code, as
amended.
(1969 Code, sec. 6-43; Ordinance 1087, sec. 2(G), adopted 3/28/95)
Sec. 10-63. Electrical permit fees.
The electrical permit fees are as follows:
(1) Minimum permit: $10.00 for the first 20 openings and $0.05 thereafter.
(2) Commercial: $25.00 for the first 20 openings and $0.05 thereafter.
(1969 Code, sec. 6-44; Ordinance 1087, sec. 2(H), adopted 3/28/95)
Sec. 10-64. Plumbing inspection fees.
The plumbing inspection fees are as follows:
(1) Residential: $10.00.
(2) Commercial: $25.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/283
(3) Sewer tap: $5.00.
(4) Gas inspection: $5.00.
(1969 Code, sec. 6-45; Ordinance 1087, sec. 2(I), adopted 3/28/95)
Secs. 10-65—10-86. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. MECHANICAL
Sec. 10-87. Mechanical code adopted; penalty.
(a) There is hereby adopted a mechanical code known as the International Mechanical Code, with the most
current published edition. Such code is published in book form and is to be maintained in the community
development director's office and is referred to, incorporated herein, and made a part hereof for all purposes.
Provided, however, that in the event any conflict may arise between the provisions of the code adopted by the
provisions of this article and any other applicable provisions of this Code, state law, or city ordinance, rule or
regulation, the provisions of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation shall prevail and be
controlling.
(b) Any person violating the provisions of said mechanical code shall be punished as provided in section 1-6.
(1969 Code, sec. 6-60; Ordinance 1364, sec. 2, adopted 3/6/01)
Secs. 10-88—10-117. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. ENERGY CONSERVATION
Sec. 10-118. Energy conservation code adopted; penalty.
(a) There is hereby adopted an energy conservation code known as the International Energy Conservation
Code, with the most current published edition. Such code is published in book form and is to be maintained in
the community development director's office and is referred to, incorporated herein, and made a part hereof for
all purposes. Provided, however, that in the event any conflict may arise between the provisions of the code
adopted by the provisions of this article and any other applicable provisions of this Code, state law, or city
ordinance, rule or regulation, the provisions of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation shall
prevail and be controlling.
(b) Any person violating the provisions of said energy conservation code shall be punished as provided in
section 1-6.
(1969 Code, sec. 6-70; Ordinance 1393, sec. 1, adopted 7/23/02)
CHAPTER 12
CEMETERIES*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 12-1. Newly created grave spaces; previous dedication.
The previous dedication of blocks, lots and grave spaces in East View Cemetery is amended by closing certain
alleys and dedicating grave spaces therein. The alleys closed and grave spaces designated are listed as a part
of Ordinance No. 663 and is filed and recorded in the office of the city secretary. (1969 Code, sec. 7-1;
Ordinance 663, secs. 1, 4, adopted 10/11/60)
Sec. 12-2. Conveyances, space included.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/283
Any previous conveyance of any lot in East View Cemetery shall be construed to convey only such grave
spaces as were included in the lot at the time of the conveyance, and, thereafter, grave spaces created are
subject only to conveyances made or to be made by the city. (1969 Code, sec. 7-2; Ordinance 663, sec. 2,
adopted 10/11/60)
Sec. 12-3. Prices for all grave spaces.
All grave spaces shall be sold in accordance with this chapter. (1969 Code, sec. 7-3; Ordinance 663, sec. 3,
adopted 10/11/60; Ordinance 1391, sec. 1, adopted 6/25/02)
Secs. 12-4—12-24. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. PERPETUAL CARE*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 12-25. City authorized as trustee.
The city, owning and operating a cemetery known as East View Cemetery, is authorized to act as a permanent
trustee for the perpetual care and upkeep of lots and graves in such burial grounds and is authorized to accept
such trust as herein provided and the same shall become perpetual. (1969 Code, sec. 7-15; Ordinance 653,
sec. 1, adopted 5/10/60)
State Law reference- Municipal cemetery authorized, Health and Safety Code sec. 713.001.
Sec. 12-26. Successor to trustee.
In any event should the city, after having entered into and accepted such trust herein provided for, renounce
said trust or fail or refuse to act further as such trustee, as herein provided for, then the district judge or highest
trial judge of the county shall appoint a suitable successor to such trustee who shall faithfully execute the trust
as herein provided for. (1969 Code, sec. 7-16; Ordinance 653, sec. 7, adopted 5/10/60)
Sec. 12-27. Accepting gifts, donations, or sales proceeds.
The city is authorized to accept by gift, donation, or sales proceeds for general improvements to East View
Cemetery. A $1.75 per square foot on the size of the grave space sold or 15 percent of the proceeds from the
sale price of any grave space, whichever is greater, shall be allocated to the perpetual care fund. All monies
received as designated in this section, shall be so deposited in said perpetual care fund. (1969 Code, sec. 7-17;
Ordinance 653, sec. 2, adopted 5/10/60; Ordinance 1391, sec. 2, adopted 6/25/02; Ordinance 1416, sec. 1,
adopted 9/9/03)
Sec. 12-28. Use of money advanced.
The city is invested with the power and authority and it shall be its duty to invest and reinvest all funds
advanced to it for the purposes herein set forth in interest bearing bonds or securities of a municipality, state, or
federal government or its agencies. Any normal operating maintenance expense of the cemetery shall be
eligible for use by these funds. However, only the use of the accrued interest shall be utilized and not any
principal of the said trust fund. (1969 Code, sec. 7-19; Ordinance 653, sec. 4, adopted 5/10/60; Ordinance
1391, sec. 4, adopted 6/25/02)
Sec. 12-29. Private beautification and care permitted; donations for existing graves.
None of the rights, powers, and duties herein provided for shall deprive any person having any interest in a
grave or burial lot, or kinship within the third degree by affinity or consanguinity to those therein interred, from
beautifying or caring for the same individually or at his own expense under the reasonable rules and regulations
the city may provide; however, watering of any grave space shall not be allowed in any area that has not been
deemed as a special care area; and all persons who now have kinship with or are otherwise interested in
persons interred therein may make donations to the city for the perpetual care fund. (1969 Code, sec. 7-21;
Ordinance 653, sec. 6, adopted 5/10/60; Ordinance 1391, sec. 6, adopted 6/25/02)
Secs. 12-30-12-46. Reserved.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/283
DIVISION 2. RULES AND REGULATIONS
Sec. 12-47. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Deed or certificate of ownership refers to any instrument conveying right of interment in East View Cemetery.
Superintendent includes any employee of the city who may, in the absence of the superintendent, be acting for
him.
(1969 Code, sec. 7-31; Ordinance 1105, secs. 1, 2, adopted 9/23/85)
Sec. 12-48. Applicability.
All interments, disinterments and removals in East View Cemetery shall be subject to these rules and
regulations and all other orders and laws of the properly constituted authorities of the city, county, state, or
federal government. (1969 Code, sec. 7-32; Ordinance 1105, sec. 3, adopted 9/23/85)
Sec. 12-49. Prior notice required; permitted interment.
(a) At least six working hours' notice shall be given to the superintendent prior to any interment and at least
one week's notice prior to any disinterment or removal.
(b) No interment of any body other than that of a human being shall be permitted in the cemetery.
(1969 Code, sec. 7-33; Ordinance 1105, secs. 4, 5, adopted 9/23/85)
Sec. 12-50. Time of payment for cemetery services.
All fees or proceeds from sale of grave spaces shall be paid in advance before any services or interments are
allowed. The only exceptions are for cemetery services rendered to any funeral home that is located in the city
or to the county for indigents. (1969 Code, sec. 7-34; Ordinance 1105, sec. 6, adopted 9/23/85; Ordinance
1391, sec. 7, adopted 6/25/02)
Sec. 12-51. Validity of grave space transfers, assignments.
No transfer or assignment of any grave space or interest therein shall be valid until recorded in the cemetery
records in the office of the city secretary. (1969 Code, sec. 7-35; Ordinance 1105, sec. 7, adopted 9/23/85)
Sec. 12-52. Setting of memorials and markers.
Memorials or markers must be set on suitable foundations and the setting thereof supervised by the
superintendent. (1969 Code, sec. 7-36; Ordinance 1105, sec. 8, adopted 9/23/85)
Sec. 12-53. Hours of operation.
East View Cemetery shall be open to visitors during the hours between sunrise and sunset during the entire
year. (1969 Code, sec. 7-37; Ordinance 1105, sec. 9, adopted 9/23/85)
Sec. 12-54. Removal of flowers, etc., and debris.
(a) After a period of deterioration municipal employees shall remove all flowers, ornaments and decorations.
(b) Grave space owners or their agents or employees when caring for cemetery property, must not leave any
weeds, refuse, or debris of any kind on their property, streets, or alleyways. All debris must be disposed of in a
proper container at the cemetery or removed from the cemetery grounds.
(1969 Code, sec. 7-38; Ordinance 1105, secs. 10, 11, adopted 9/23/85; Ordinance 1391, sec. 8, adopted
6/25/02)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/283
Sec. 12-55. Special and nonspecial care areas designation.
(a) Property in East View Cemetery that is designated as special care areas shall be maintained with a
certain level of maintenance that includes routine irrigation watering, as local law may allow; routine mowing of
grasses; and other routine maintenance items that are determined prudent and necessary by city
administration. The following property shall be developed exclusively as special care areas: the entire blocks of
21, 22 and 23.
(b) All other property in East View Cemetery shall be designated as nonspecial care areas. The nonspecial
care areas shall be maintained with a lesser level of care that does not include in the providing of water for
landscape irrigation purposes, except for burial lots that have been converted to perpetual care as prescribed
by previous policies and as local law may allow. A burial lot owner or family member shall make the request for
landscape irrigation water and when the superintendent receives such a request he shall respond in a timely
fashion to provide such water service. All irrigation water shall be used in a conservative-like fashion; and if
abuses occur, then the superintendent may terminate the usage of irrigation water to the burial lot where the
abuse is occurring. Other maintenance items include routine mowing of grasses and various maintenance items
that are deemed prudent and necessary by city administration shall be performed.
(c) The regulations listed in subsections (a) and (b) of this section supersedes all other rules or regulations
that have been adopted by previous city commissions in defining the level of care to be provided at East View
Cemetery.
(1969 Code, sec. 7-39; Ordinance 1105, sec. 12, adopted 9/23/85; Ordinance 1391, sec. 9, adopted 6/25/02;
Ordinance 1401, sec. 1, adopted 10/22/02)
Sec. 12-56. Construction of memorials and head markers.
All family memorials and head markers in blocks 21 and 22 shall be constructed only of bronze, granite, or
marble; and no more than one family memorial shall be permitted on any lot. Each and every memorial or
marker shall be set on a foundation installed at the owner's expense and under the supervision of the
superintendent and shall be set flush with the lawn and follow the contour of the particular section in which the
same is located. Families buying six spaces or more, in a row, that have by prior pattern been established with
laydown markers, may erect one family upright memorial not to exceed 24 inches in height above ground level.
The family memorial shall be set in a straight line with the rest of the markers. Upright memorials are permitted
in blocks 21, 22 and 23 only on designated rows which have by prior history had upright memorials. (1969
Code, sec. 7-40; Ordinance 1105, sec. 13, adopted 9/23/85; Ordinance 1131 adopted 10/14/86)
Sec. 12-57. Grave space prices; fees.
(a) The prices for lot or grave spaces sold in a special care area are as follows:
(1) Upright monument grave space: $700.00.
(2) Flat monument grave space: $650.00.
(b) The price for lot or grave spaces sold in a nonspecial care area is $450.00. Grave space in a nonspecial
care area for persons classified by the county as an indigent is $50.00.
(c) All interments shall utilize municipal services for opening and closing graves. The following fees shall be
collected for the opening and closing of graves:
(1) Normal workday with closing before 5:00 p.m.: $500.00.
(2) Normal workday with closing after 5:00 p.m.: $600.00.
(3) Saturday or holiday: $700.00.
(4) Persons classified by the county as indigent: $50.00.
(d) All funerals shall utilize municipal services for awning, setup and lowering of the casket. The following
fees shall be collected for this service:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/283
(1) Normal workday with closing before 5:00 p.m.: $200.00.
(2) Normal workday with closing after 5:00 p.m.: $240.00.
(3) Saturday or holiday: $240.00.
(4) Persons classified by the county as indigent: No charge.
(e) Any person requesting a disinterment shall be charged a fee based on actual cost that includes labor and
equipment charges.
(1969 Code, sec. 7-41; Ordinance 1105, sec. 14, adopted 9/23/85; Ordinance 1277 adopted 9/20/95;
Ordinance 1391, sec. 10, adopted 6/25/02; Ordinance 1416, sec. 2, adopted 4/26/03)
Sec. 12 -58. Prohibited construction of curbing and planting of items.
Construction or placement of curbing, planting of trees or shrubbery is hereby prohibited except for landscaping
of common areas that are designed and constructed by municipal employees. (1969 Code, sec. 7-42;
Ordinance 1105, sec. 15, adopted 9/23/85; Ordinance 1391, sec. 11, adopted 6/25/02)
Sec. 12-59. Recording fee.
If a buyer of a grave space or lot desires to have the deed recorded in the deed records of the county, the fee
shall be paid by the buyer at the time of recording. (1969 Code, sec. 7-43; Ordinance 1105, sec. 16, adopted
9/23/85; Ordinance 1391, sec. 12, adopted 6/25/02)
Sec. 12-60. Removal of curbing or other items.
The city is hereby authorized to remove items such as trees, shrubbery, curbing or coping if the owner or
relatives of the decedents request such removal. The expense of removal for such items shall be borne entirely
by the requestor. The cost for such service shall be based on current rates for labor and equipment charged by
the city. (1969 Code, sec. 7-44; Ordinance 1105, sec. 17, adopted 9/23/85; Ordinance 1391, sec. 13, adopted
6/25/02)
Sec. 12-61. Construction materials for interment receptacles.
All interment receptacles shall be constructed out of metal materials, except wooden materials may be
substituted when the superintendent grants authorization. (1969 Code, sec. 7-45; Ordinance 1105, sec. 18,
adopted 9/23/85; Ordinance 1391, sec. 14, adopted 6/25/02)
CHAPTER 14
ELECTIONS*
Sec. 14-1. Proclaiming general election.
A general election shall be held, as required by the Charter, for such officers as are named by the mayor in
proclamation ordering the election. (1969 Code, sec. 9-1)
CHAPTER 16
ELECTRICAL CODE*
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/283
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 16-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
Accessible in an attic means a distance of not less than 30 inches shall exist from the top of the ceiling joists to
the bottom of the roof joists or rafters at the highest point.
Apprentice electrician means one who assists a master or a journeyman electrician in installations and who
works under the constant supervision of a master or a journeyman electrician.
Board means a quorum of the board of electrical examiners.
Building means any building or structure, including a residence.
Commercial means anything other than residential.
Commission means the city commission of the City of Vernon, Texas.
Fixture means a unit which supports a means of illumination.
Holiday means a holiday which is established by the personnel rules of the city.
Homeowner means a person owning and living in (or who will live in, if the building is under construction) a
single-unit dwelling.
Installation means all electrical work of any nature performed on, or in, a consumer's premises.
Journeyman electrician means one skilled and experienced in the physical labor involved in electrical
installations, and who does, or holds himself out as intending to do, electrical installations under the
employment and supervision of a master electrician.
Maintenance electrician means one who is employed by one employer to maintain and to repair existing
electrical installations in a designated building under one ownership and who does not otherwise engage
himself as either a master, journeyman, or apprentice electrician.
Master electrician means a person who, himself being highly skilled in methods and practices of electrical
installations, proposes to do installations and to enter into agreements or contracts for such installations.
National Electrical Code means the current edition of the National Electrical Code, adopted by the city.
Opening means the location where a ceiling light is to be mounted; also a convenience outlet or a switch.
Person means a master electrician, a journeyman electrician, an apprentice electrician, a maintenance
electrician, a firm, a partnership, a corporation, any other type of organization, any individual and the plural of
any or all of these as well as the singular.
Secretary means the secretary of the board of electrical examiners, of the duly appointed electrical inspector, or
of a duly appointed assistant electrical inspector who has been specifically appointed by the electrical inspector
to serve in his absence.
(1969 Code, sec. 10-1; Ordinance 1248 adopted 11/17/93)
Sec. 16-2. Exemptions-City and state departments and electric utility companies.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to installations maintained by the electrical department of the city,
by the state highway department or by an electric public utility company. (1969 Code, sec. 10-2; Ordinance
1248 adopted 11/17/93)
Sec. 16-3. Same-Other utility companies as to own property.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/283
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to electric light, heat, and power companies, or telephone and
telegraph companies operating under the franchise of state or federal laws in the installation, maintenance,
removal, or repair of wires or other equipment used in connection with the business or plants. (1969 Code, sec.
10-3; Ordinance 1248 adopted 11/17/93)
Sec. 16-4. Manufacturer's research; limitation.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit manufacturers of electrical apparatus or equipment from
carrying on reasonable electrical experiments with materials and products within the confines of their own
premises and all installations therein; provided, further, that the electrical inspector may require the
manufacture to make whatever changes he believes necessary for the protection of public life, welfare, and
property. (1969 Code, sec. 10-4; Ordinance 1248 adopted 11/17/93)
Sec. 16-5. Penalties; license revocation for two or more violations.
(a) Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in
section 1-6. Each day a violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) In addition to any penalty authorized, two or more violations of this chapter by any person holding a
license hereunder shall be grounds for revocation of such license. Upon complaint being made to the city
commission of two or more violations by a license holder, the commission shall set the matter of revocation of
the license down for a hearing and shall give the licensee at least ten days' notice by registered mail of such
hearing. Said hearing will be public and the licensee shall be entitled to be heard in person or by his attorney.
After full hearing the commission shall determine whether such license should be revoked.
(1969 Code, sec. 10-6; Ordinance 1248 adopted 11/17/93)
Sec. 16-6. Work in progress.
Installations contracted for before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be
governed by the electrical ordinance effective at that time or by the ordinance herein enacted, at the option of
the electrical contractor; provided the electrical contractor advises the electrical inspector in writing within 30
days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived of such contract and the
manner in which it conflicts with this chapter but is applicable to prior electrical ordinances and secures written
acknowledgement of the electrical inspector. (1969 Code, sec. 10-7; Ordinance 1248 adopted 11/17/93)
Secs. 16-7—16-34. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATIVE
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 16-35. Electrical inspector's office-Created; appointment of personnel.
There is created the office of electrical inspector of the city. The city manager shall appoint the electrical
inspector and such other assistants as he shall deem proper. (1969 Code, sec. 10-17; Ordinance 1248 adopted
11/17/93)
Sec. 16-36. Same-Personnel qualifications; additional duties as prescribed.
The electrical inspector and his assistants shall be persons having adequate knowledge of current and
approved methods and practices relating to the electrical installations. In addition to the duties set forth, the
electrical inspector and his assistants shall perform such other functions and duties as the city manager may,
from time to time, direct. (1969 Code, sec. 10-18; Ordinance 1248 adopted 11/17/93)
Sec. 16-37. Same-Duties and powers.
The electrical inspector shall have the following duties:
(1) Inspect all installations, alterations and repairs of electrical work in consumer installations as
set out in this chapter. He shall make such inspection within 24 hours after application therefor
(Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, recognized by the city, excluded). For an approved installation,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/283
he shall attach a green tag or card; for a disapproved installation, he shall attach a red tag or card.
To remove, deface, damage or mutilate a tag or card which the electrical inspector has attached to
an installation shall constitute an offense against the city.
(2) Upon determining that unsafe, improper or unlawful consumer installations exist, immediately
notify the owner of said premises, or his agent and the electrician performing the work on said
premises, in writing, specifying the exact deficiency existing, and shall allow said parties a
reasonable time, as determined by the electrical inspector, to correct said deficiency. If corrective
action is not begun immediately or the deficiency is not corrected within a prescribed time, and if he
believes public welfare endangered, the electrical inspector shall order the electrical supply to the
premises discontinued. A written record of such orders shall be kept in the office of the electrical
inspector.
(3) As far as may be necessary for the performance of his duties, have the right to enter any
consumer's premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose of making any test or inspections of the
electrical wiring, appliances, or equipment contained therein. When on duty the electrical inspector
shall wear a badge clearly identifying his official capacity.
(4) Keep, or cause to be kept, a written record of all permits, licenses and inspections which are
required under this chapter. He shall also keep a written record of all condemnations and
disconnects of electrical installations resulting from condemnations.
(5) The electrical inspector shall stop the installation, alteration, operation or repair of any
electrical work on or in any consumer's premises when, in the inspector's opinion, the work is being
done in a reckless, careless or unsafe manner or in a manner which violates the provisions of this
chapter.
(6) Upon determining that particular work should stop, post notices to that effect on the
consumer's premises and thereafter no person shall proceed with the installation until the electrical
inspector has canceled the stop work notice. The posting of a red tag or card on the premises shall
constitute a stop work notice. It shall be a violation of this chapter to remove, deface or damage or
mutilate the stop work notice.
(1969 Code, sec. 10-19; Ordinance 1248 adopted 11/17/93)
Sec. 16-38. Same-Not eligible for examination during term.
No person serving as electrical inspector shall be permitted to take the examination for a master electrician's
license during his term of office. (1969 Code, sec. 10-20; Ordinance 1248 adopted 11/17/93)
Sec. 16-39. Same-Conflict of interest.
No electrical inspector may have any interest in any electrical company nor shall he do any electrical work for
any private party or any company while he is in the employment of the city. (1969 Code, sec. 10-21; Ordinance
1248 adopted 11/17/93)
Secs. 16-40—16-66. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. RESERVED*
Secs. 16-67-16-100. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. LICENSES AND RESTRICTIONS†
Sec. 16-101. Licensing requirements.
Every person desiring to engage in the electrical business in a capacity for which a license is required by this
Code shall be the holder of a valid electrician's license issued by the state. (1969 Code, sec. 10-36; Ordinance
1248 adopted 11/17/93; Ordinance 1615, sec. 2, adopted 7/23/13)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/283
Sec. 16-102. Neon work.
At no time may a neon man do work in the city on any signs, buildings, etc., without holding a master or
journeyman electrical license with bond made to the city. (1969 Code, sec. 10-58; Ordinance 1248 adopted
11/17/93)
Secs. 16-103—16-132. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS
Sec. 16-133. Permit required; exceptions; fees.
(a) Before commencing work on any electrical installation, the fees hereinafter provided shall be paid to and
a permit therefor must be secured from the office of the electrical inspector; provided, however, no permit shall
be required for minor work, such as repairing flush switches, replacing fuses, and changing lamp sockets and
receptacles. Permits shall be issued only to master electricians and to homeowners who qualify as hereinafter
set forth.
(b) Failure to obtain a permit shall constitute a violation of this chapter and each day work is done without a
permit shall constitute a separate offense.
(c) Where work for which a permit is required by this Code is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining said
permit, the fees herein specified shall be doubled. However, the payment of such double fee shall not relieve
any person from fully complying with the requirements of this Code in the execution of the work, nor from any
other penalties prescribed herein.
(1969 Code, sec. 10-65; Ordinance 1248 adopted 11/17/93)
Sec. 16-134. Contractor's responsibility to obtain permit.
All electrical contractors shall take out all permits and make payments for same at the office of the city
secretary in the city hall. (1969 Code, sec. 10-66; Ordinance 1248 adopted 11/17/93)
Sec. 16-135. Expiration of permit.
All permits shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced
within 90 days from the date of issue, or if after commencement of work, the work is suspended for a period of
60 days. (1969 Code, sec. 10-67; Ordinance 1248 adopted 11/17/93)
Sec. 16-136. Homeowner's affidavit; scope of permit.
A homeowner shall be entitled to secure a permit for electrical installation only upon executing an affidavit
attesting to the following:
(1) Ownership of the property upon which the electrical installation is to be installed.
(2) Applicants bona fide intention to live therein.
(3) That applicant has not secured a homeowner's permit for other property within the last two
years.
(4) That applicant will perform all of the electrical installation without any physical assistance from
anyone other than members of his immediate family living in the household.
Nothing herein contained shall entitle anyone not a master electrician to secure a permit to install wiring in any
structure other than a single unit residence.
(1969 Code, sec. 10-68; Ordinance 1248 adopted 11/17/93)
Sec. 16-137. Permit fees.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/283
(a) Electrical permit fees are set out in section 10-63. On new construction, ranges and dryers are included
as a regular opening. All dryers, ranges and refrigerated coolers and hot water heaters wired in as separate
units will have a minimum fee of $1.50 for each permit.
(b) Signs with:
(1) Lights:
(A) Less than five, $0.25;
(B) Five to ten, $0.50;
(C) Ten to 20, $0.75;
(D) 20 to 50, $1.00;
(E) All signs containing more than 50 lights, $2.00.
(2) Motors:
(A) Less than one horsepower, $0.25;
(B) Over one and less than three horsepower, $0.50;
(C) Three to five horsepower, inclusive, $1.00;
(D) All motors above five horsepower, $1.50.
When an extension is made to old work or when new work is finished complete with fixtures or droplights or
switches, necessitating but one inspection, charge for outlet only.
(c) The state and federal governments and all instrumentalities thereof shall be exempt from the payment of
any fee for any electrical permit.
(1969 Code, sec. 10-69; Ordinance 1248 adopted 11/17/93)
Sec. 16-138. Inspections-Notice; making.
The holder of a permit shall notify the electrical inspector's office in writing as to when the installation is ready
for the rough-in inspection and shall also notify the electrical inspector's office as to when the electrical
installation is ready for the final inspection; and the electrical inspector shall cause such inspection to be made
within 24 hours of the time of receipt of such notice, exclusive of Saturdays and Sundays, and holidays
recognized by the city. (1969 Code, sec. 10-70; Ordinance 1248 adopted 11/17/93)
Sec. 16-139. Same-Reinspection fees.
If the installation shall fail to pass the rough-in or final inspection and a reinspection is therefore required, a fee
of $5.00 for the second reinspection, and $10.00 for each subsequent reinspection, shall be required. (1969
Code, sec. 10-71; Ordinance 1248 adopted 11/17/93)
Secs. 16-140—16-161. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. CONSTRUCTION
Sec. 16-162. National Electrical Code-Adoption.
All electrical installations hereafter installed within the corporate limits of the city shall be done in a first class,
workmanlike manner, and in accordance with the National Electric Code, most current edition adopted after two
years from publication to allow for proper local review, at least one copy of which is on file in the office of the
building inspector; and the same is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter, as fully as if set out at
length herein, subject to all amendments and deletions hereinafter contained. (1969 Code, sec. 10-78;
Ordinance 1248 adopted 11/17/93; Ordinance 1615, sec. 3, adopted 7/23/13)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/283
Sec. 16-163. Same-Amendments.
The National Electrical Code shall be amended as follows:
(1) All Romex installed shall be of the ground type, such as, 12-2WG, 12-3WG, etc.
(2) All receptacles shall be of the grounding type.
(3) The use of flexible conduit (except MC cable) will not be permitted for use as general wiring
system, but may be used for special types of connections, such as connecting motors, appliances,
recessed fixtures or where space limits the use of larger raceway for short runs or extensions, with
the approval of the electrical inspector.
(4) All lights in bathrooms, kitchens, or laundry rooms shall be controlled by wall switches, located
where lights cannot be readily reached from bathtub, sink, lavatory, or shower. In bathrooms and
kitchens all metal fixtures, receptacles and switches shall be grounded. Lights shall not be grounded
to their neutral wires.
(5) When additions or expansions are made that enclose the meter installations which exist on the
outside of buildings prior to the expansion, then it shall be the responsibility of the owner to have the
meter installation removed to a point that will be outside the expanded buildings and readily
accessible to public utility personnel for purposes of reading or repair.
(6) All newly installed panels and load centers must be large enough to accommodate the present
load requirements and have at least two spare circuits for future use. A one-inch empty conduit shall
be installed from the panel to the attic and from the panel to below the first floor of every new or
completely remodeled installation.
(7) Not more than four current-consuming outlets shall be connected to a 20-ampere appliance
circuit. Not more than eight current-consuming outlets shall be connected to a 15-ampere general
use branch circuit. Not more than ten current-consuming outlets shall be connected to a 20-ampere
general use branch circuit.
(8) Should any residence or building be moved from one location to another and should the wiring
be nonconforming to the new use, the residence or building shall be rewired.
(9) Should the occupancy of a residence be changed to a public building, such as, but not limited
to, a child-care facility caring for more than six children, a private school with more than six students
in attendance at one time or a nursing home facility caring for more than three patients, the wiring of
the entire building shall be made to comply with the requirements of the public building standards of
this chapter. When less than 25 percent of a residence is converted to public building use, such as,
but not limited to, a beauty shop, ceramic shop, service or retail shop, medical office, dental office or
clinic, then, and in that event only, the portion of the building in which the occupancy has changed
shall be rewired to comply with the public building standards. Where there has been a partial and
minor change of occupancy in a residence which displays no sign visible from the street such as, but
not limited to, an office not generally open to the public or a music studio at which not more than six
students congregate at one and the same time, then, and in that event only, residence-type wiring
will comply with this chapter.
(10) An all metal service entrance or service entrance cable complete with raintight entrance
equipment, shall be used from the point of contact with the power company to the distribution panel
and to all subpanels.
(11) Where service entrance equipment is installed outside a building, a minimum clearance of
41/2 feet must be maintained from the ground or any floor or platform to the bottom of such
equipment.
(12) Service entrance conductors shall not be run more than 20 feet within the hollow spaces of
combustible frame buildings, unless provided with automatic overcurrent protection at the outer
ends. On buildings where the electricity supply agency sets a transformer and extends from their
transformer, a number of connection boxes for customer convenience or where the electricity supply
agency designates a location for the meters, from these locations, the service conductors to each
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/283
individual occupancy shall be run either: under the slab; outside of building; on the roof, and when
conductors emerge into occupancy shall extend no more than 20 feet to service equipment, unless
they have overcurrent protection at the outer end, but in no case can unfused service conductors
feed through one single occupancy to another.
(13) Grounding electrode conductors shall be copper. The following will be acceptable as
grounding electrodes:
a. Rigid metal or copper water lines when there are 20 or more feet of them buried in the
earth.
b. Eight-foot driven ground rod of either one-half-inch copper, or five-eighths-inch copper
weld.
c. 20 feet of No. 4 solid copper buried in the bottom of the footing.
(14) Electrical metallic tubing shall not be installed in the ground or in concrete slabs poured on
the ground.
(15) All buildings open to the public and/or buildings in the fire zone shall be considered as places
of assembly and the fixed wiring methods shall be metal raceways or MC cable.
(16) Fire damage. Where, in the opinion of the electrical inspector, a fire originated due to faulty
electrical wiring, overloading of wiring or equipment or any unauthorized electrical installation, it shall
be the duty of the electrical inspector to inspect the premises involved, and where said lines or
electrical services have been cut in the firefighting process, no electrical service shall be reinstated
or reconnected until the said premises conform to the provisions of this chapter. Any where the lines
have not been cut in the firefighting process, and the electrical inspector deems such premises to be
dangerous or hazardous to life and property, he shall order the electrical service to be disconnected
immediately and remain disconnected until such defects have been corrected.
(17) Concealed wiring. Installations, where there is wiring to be concealed, shall be inspected
before concealment. The person installing such wiring shall notify the electrical inspector thereof and
the work shall not be covered until the inspector has approved same. Any person covering or
concealing wires before having same inspected shall be deemed guilty of violation of this chapter
and subject to the penalties provided for in section 16-5.
(18) Service connection. No person engaged in the business of transmission and sale of electric
current to users thereof shall make any connections of any kind to their transmission lines with the
electric wiring or apparatus in any building or place without first having received the electrical
inspector's certificate of compliance for said building or place.
(1969 Code, sec. 10-79; Ordinance 1248 adopted 11/17/93; Ordinance 1265 adopted 12/14/94)
CHAPTER 18
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 18-1. Organization established and named.
There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in
accordance with state law.
(1) An emergency management coordinator shall be appointed by the city manager and serve at
his pleasure.
(2) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management
within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter. The
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/283
director may delegate authority for execution but the responsibility shall remain with the director.
(3) The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers
and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well
as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed
among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management
plan.
(1969 Code, sec. 8-1; Ordinance 1418, sec. 1, adopted 9/23/03)
Sec. 18-2. Director-Powers and duties.
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) Surveying actual or potential hazards that threaten life and property within the city and
identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures that would tend to
prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city,
and shall recommend for adoption by the city commission all mutual aid arrangements deemed
necessary for the implementation of such plan.
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed
for a period in excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the city commission. Any order
or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt
and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary.
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations, or directives, which are necessary for
carrying out the purposes of this chapter. Such proclamations, regulations or directives shall be
disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general
public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with
the city secretary.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency management organization as well
as the training of emergency management personnel.
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the
emergency management organization of the city.
(7) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional, or federal
emergency management organizations.
(8) Marshalling of all necessary personnel, equipment, or supplies from any department of the city
to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the
representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and
execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located and
with other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency
management efforts.
(10) Supervision of, and final authorization for, the procurement of all necessary supplies and
equipment, including acceptance of private contributions that may be offered for improving
emergency management within the city.
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for the use of private property
for public shelter and other purposes.
(12) Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies, and services that could
be used during a disaster, as provided for herein.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/283
(13) Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch.
418.
(1969 Code, sec. 8-2; Ordinance 1418, sec. 2, adopted 9/23/03)
Sec. 18-3. Emergency management plan, regional mitigation action plan, and National Incident
Management System (NIMS).
(a) A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state.
The plan shall set forth the form of the organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties and powers; and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of
this section. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state
division of emergency management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles, and terminology shall
conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be
the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their
portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be
considered supplementary to this section and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster.
(b) A regional mitigation action plan shall be developed for the Nortex Region and maintained in a current
state. The objective of the Nortex Regional Mitigation Action Plan is to fulfill the requirements of the Hazard
Mitigation Grant, Pre-Disaster Mitigation Program (DMA 2000 Plan Criteria) and Flood Mitigation Assistance
Program.
(c) The National Incident Management System (NIMS) is hereby established as the standard command and
control system in the management of all incidents occurring within the city and incidents involving any public
safety division organized through the city.
(1969 Code, sec. 8-3; Ordinance 1418, sec. 3, adopted 9/23/03; Ordinance 1462, sec. 1, adopted 5/23/06)
Sec. 18-4. Interjurisdictional program.
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge in the formation of an interjurisdictional emergency
management program for the county, and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of an
interjurisdictional emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management
coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a countywide program of emergency management
insofar as said program may affect the city. (1969 Code, sec. 8-4; Ordinance 1418, sec. 4, adopted 9/23/03)
Sec. 18-5. Override conflicting orders, rules and regulations.
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in
effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the
latter may be inconsistent therewith. (1969 Code, sec. 8-5; Ordinance 1418, sec. 5, adopted 9/23/03)
Sec. 18-6. Liability.
This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace,
health, and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of said city, nor any individual, receiver,
firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out,
complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any
person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to
the city a license or privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate, and use the whole or any part
of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice
enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly
liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license,
privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. (1969 Code, sec. 8-6;
Ordinance 1418, sec. 6, adopted 9/23/03)
Sec. 18-7. Commitment of funds.
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency
management activity authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the city commission, nor shall any
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/283
person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of
the city commission unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend
and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or
property. (1969 Code, sec. 8-7; Ordinance 1418, sec. 7, adopted 9/23/03)
Sec. 18-8. Offenses and penalties.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter. It shall
likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry, or display any emblem, insignia, or any other means of
identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless the proper officials so
have granted such authority.
(b) Convictions for violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by fine as provided in
section 1-6.
(1969 Code, sec. 8-8; Ordinance 1418, sec. 8, adopted 9/23/03)
CHAPTER 20
FEES
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 20-1. Fee to defray costs of collection.
In accordance with Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 103.0031, there shall be imposed an additional fee of 30 percent
on all debts and accounts receivable (i.e., fines, fees, restitution, other debts, and costs) that are more than 60
days past due and have been referred to an attorney for collection. (1969 Code, sec. 10 ½-1; Ordinance 1483,
sec. 1, adopted 7/26/07)
Secs. 20-2—20-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. COURT FUNDS
Sec. 20-21. Municipal court technology fund.
(a) Established.
(1) There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, here-in-now
known as the fund, pursuant to Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 1102.0172.
(2) The fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and may be maintained in the
general revenue account.
(b) Establishment of amount of the fee and assessment and collection.
(1) The fee shall be in the amount of $4.00.
(2) The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant, upon conviction for a
misdemeanor offense in the municipal court, as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted
if:
a. Judgment, sentence, or both are imposed on the person;
b. The person is placed on deferred disposition; or
c. The court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgment and sentence.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/283
(3) The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after February 26,
2008.
(4) The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the finance director, who shall
deposit the fee into the municipal court technology fund.
(c) Designated use of the fund and administration.
(1) The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of or to maintain
technology enhancements for the municipal court. The term “technology enhancements” shall
include any and all items described in Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.0172.
(2) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city commission.
(1969 Code, sec. 10 ½-11; Ordinance 1495, secs. 1—3, adopted 2/26/08)
Sec. 20-22. Municipal court building security fund.
(a) There is hereby created and established a municipal court building security fund (the fund) pursuant to
Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.017.
(b) The municipal court is hereby authorized and required to assess a municipal court building security fee
(the fee) in the amount of $3.00 against all defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense by the municipal
court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee.
(c) A person is considered to have been convicted in a case, if:
(1) Judgment, sentence, or both are imposed on the person;
(2) The person receives deferred disposition; or
(3) The court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgment and sentence.
(d) The municipal court clerk is hereby authorized and required to collect the fee and to pay same to the city
treasury. All fees so collected and paid over to the city treasury shall be segregated in the fund.
(e) The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of security devices and/or services
for the building housing the municipal court. Security devices and/or services shall include any and all items
described in Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.017(d).
(f) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city commission.
(1969 Code, sec. 10 ½-12; Ordinance 1496, sec. 1, adopted 2/26/08)
CHAPTER 22
FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 22-1. Arson reward.
The city hereby offers a reward of $250.00 for the arrest and conviction of any person found guilty of committing
the crime of arson within the city. This reward is a standing offer, and shall be paid out of the general fund of the
city. (1969 Code, sec. 11-1; Ordinance 677 adopted 10/23/62)
Sec. 22-2. Fire site to remain clear of unauthorized persons.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/283
On a fire alarm being sounded for fire purposes, it shall be unlawful for any person, other than those owning an
interest in the property involved in the fire and (except the members of the fire department) persons authorized
by the fire chief and peace officers to go within 500 feet of the site of the fire while the fire department is in
action fighting the fire; provided, the fire chief may prescribe the limits of the field of operation of the fire
department in fighting a fire and designate same by ropes or stationing men along its lines, and when so
designated it shall be unlawful for any person, other than those mentioned in this section, to enter said limits.
(1969 Code, sec. 11-2; Ordinance 394, sec. 2, adopted 9/15/22)
Sec. 22-3. Spark and dust arresters for gin plants.
Before any gin plant shall be run or operated by any person in the city, it shall be equipped with and have within
and upon its smokestack a spark arrester sufficient to arrest and prevent the escape of fire sparks. The gin
plant shall also be equipped with and have a dust room sufficient to take care of and prevent the escape of dust
and fine lint cotton from the exhaust fans of said gin. (1969 Code, sec. 11-3; Ordinance 350, sec. 2, adopted
8/29/1916)
Sec. 22-4. Dumping ashes, etc.; fires in streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to empty, dump, pour or place any ashes, live coals, trash or refuse in, or
burn any paper, trash or other matter or create any bonfire upon or in any street, alley or other public place in
the city. (1969 Code, sec. 11-4; Ordinance 310, sec. 1, adopted 1/14/1914)
Sec. 22-5. Pyrotechnics regulated.
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Pyrotechnics means and includes any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination
of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion,
explosion, deflagration or detonation, and includes Roman candles; sky rockets; helicopter type rockets;
cylindrical fountains; cone fountains; wheels; illuminating torches and colored fire in any form; sparklers and dip
sticks; mines; shells; firecrackers; salutes; whistles without report; squibs; a fire balloon; a hydrogen filled
balloon; signal lights; blank cartridges; toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or toy guns in which explosive or
flammable compound, or any tablets or other devices containing any explosive substance. The term
“pyrotechnics” shall not include auto flares, paper caps containing not in excess of an average of 0.25 of a grain
of explosive content per paper cap, manufactured in accordance with the interstate commerce commission
regulations for packing and shipping as provided therein and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices
for use of such caps the sale and use of which shall be permitted.
(b) No person shall hereafter fire or explode or keep, store, manufacture, or sell any pyrotechnics in the
corporate limits of the city to be used, fired or exploded in said city.
(c) No person shall hereafter have in his possession in the corporate limits of the city any pyrotechnics for the
purpose of using, firing, or exploding same in the corporate limits of said city; any pyrotechnics so found in the
possession of any person shall be condemned, seized, and confiscated by the police department except all
persons transporting any pyrotechnics within the city limits and extending for a distance outside of the city limits
for a total of 5,000 feet must secure a permit from the fire marshal's office of the department of public safety.
Any person transporting pyrotechnics under the provisions of this section shall at their own expense and at all
times during the term of the permit must obtain and secure for its and the city's protection public bodily injury
liability insurance in the amount of $100,000.00/$300,000.00 and property damage insurance in the amount of
$50,000.00. A certificate of the required insurance evidencing the carrying out of such insurance issued by an
insurance carrier authorized to transact business in the state for the benefit of the person named therein as
insured, as evidence of ability to respond in damages in at least such amount must be filed with and approved
by the city fire marshal. Any notice of cancellation of such insurance shall be immediately furnished to the city
fire marshal.
(d) This section shall not apply to the possession or use of signaling devices for current daily consumption by
railroads, police department, and fire department and other required to use them by law; to the possession, sale
or use of normal stock of flashlight compositions by photographers or dealers in photographic supplies; for
signal or ceremonial purposes; athletic or sports events; nor for the use by military organizations.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/283
(e) The state fire marshal may issue a written permit to a properly qualified person for giving a pyrotechnic
display in accordance with state law. It shall be the duty of the city fire marshal to make an investigation as to
whether such a display as proposed shall be of such a character and so located that it may be hazardous to
property or dangerous to any person, and he shall so advise the state fire marshal of his findings. All
pyrotechnic displays must be supervised by the city fire marshal or one of his fire prevention assistants. A copy
of all permits received from the state fire marshal must be filed with the city fire marshal within 24 hours before
such display is held.
(f) No person shall have, keep, store, manufacture or sell any pyrotechnics within the area immediately
adjacent and contiguous to the city limits, and extending for a distance outside of the city limits for a total of 50
feet, and it shall be unlawful to do or perform any act in violation of this section within such area of 50 feet
outside the city limits; provided this section shall not apply within any portion of such 50-foot area which is
contained within the territory of any other municipal corporation.
(g) No person shall use, fire or explode, or cause to be used, fired or exploded, any pyrotechnics within the
area immediately adjacent and contiguous to the city limits and extending for a distance outside of the city limits
for a total of 50 feet. It shall be unlawful to do or perform any act in violation of this section within such area of
50 feet outside the city limits; provided that this section shall not apply within any portion of such 50-foot area
which is contained within the territory of any other municipal corporation.
(h) No person shall have, keep, store, manufacture or sell any pyrotechnics within an area extending for a
distance outside of the city limits from a distance of 50 feet to a distance of 5,000 feet from the city limits;
unless such person shall have obtained a permit from the city fire marshal's office of the department of public
safety. The application for such permit shall contain the specific location of the building used to keep, store,
manufacture or sell the pyrotechnics and must also contain a blueprint or diagram showing the construction of
said building. The construction of the building must comply with the rules and regulations of the city fire
marshal's office.
(i) All persons manufacturing or selling pyrotechnics within an area extending for a distance outside of the
city limits from a distance of 50 feet to a distance of 5,000 feet from the city limits shall close their doors and
places of business each night from 11:55 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. the following morning and shall not sell or
manufacture any pyrotechnics during this time period.
(j) Should any section, paragraph, clause or phrase hereof be declared to be void or unconstitutional, such
holdings shall not affect the other valid provisions of this section, and same shall remain in full force and effect.
(k) Any person violating any provisions of this section shall upon conviction be punished as provided in
section 1-6.
(1969 Code, sec. 11-5; Ordinance 878 adopted 10/9/73)
Sec. 22-6. Fire prevention code adopted; penalty.
(a) There is hereby adopted a fire prevention code known as the International Fire Code, with the most
current published edition. Such code is published in book form and is to be maintained in the fire chief's office
and is referred to, incorporated herein, and made a part hereof for all purposes. Provided, however, that in the
event any conflict may arise between the provisions of the code adopted by the provisions of this article and
any other applicable provisions of this Code, state law, or city ordinance, rule or regulation, the provisions of
this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation shall prevail and be controlling.
(b) Any person violating the provisions of said fire prevention code shall be punished as provided in section
1-6.
(1969 Code, sec. 11-6; Ordinance 1145, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/87; Ordinance 1231, sec. 1, adopted 4/8/92;
Ordinance 1255, sec. 1, adopted 7/13/94; Ordinance 1364, sec. 3, adopted 3/6/01)
Sec. 22-7. Outdoor burning-Permit required.
The fire chief or his designated representatives is hereby authorized to issue permits for outdoor burning within
the city limit in compliance with the Texas Clean Air Act, located in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code sec.
382.001 et seq., and the rules and regulations of the state commission on environmental quality regulating
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/283
outdoor burning, located in 30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 111. (1969 Code, sec. 11-7; Ordinance 1411, sec. 1,
adopted 6/24/03)
Sec. 22-8. Same-Guidelines adopted.
The Texas Clean Air Act relating to outdoor burning and 30 Tex. Admin. Code ch. 111 that contains the rules
and regulations of the state commission on environmental quality for outdoor burning is hereby adopted as
guidelines for the regulation of outdoor burning. (1969 Code, sec. 11-8; Ordinance 1411, sec. 2, adopted
6/24/03)
Sec. 22-9. Same-Permit application.
The fire chief is hereby authorized to promulgate an application for a permit for outdoor burning within the city
limits, which said application will contain the name of the applicant, the time of the scheduled outdoor burn, the
amount and description of the items to be burned, the location of said outdoor burn, safety precautions to be
taken, and any other information relating to the decision of whether the outdoor burn should take place. The
application shall also state the times such burning is allowed, the minimum safety precautions, which applicants
must take, and any limitation regarding weather conditions. The fire chief or his designated representatives may
stop any burn which does not comply with all these requirements set out herein, or if it becomes necessary to
prevent a dangerous situation, or if it is a nuisance to any person or property. (1969 Code, sec. 11-9; Ordinance
1411, sec. 3, adopted 6/24/03)
Sec. 22-10. Penalty for failure to obtain an outdoor burning permit.
Any person failing to obtain an outdoor burning permit and performs an act in outdoor burning shall be punished
as provided in section 1-6. (1969 Code, sec. 11-10; Ordinance 1411, sec. 4, adopted 6/24/03)
Sec. 22-11. Fire limits construction.
Any construction within the fire limits must comply with chapter 10, pertaining to buildings.
Sec. 22-12. Combustible storage permit required.
In order to store combustible material according to Section 315 of the International Fire Code in a building
located in the fire limits as set out in section 10-1 of this Code, a permit must be acquired from the office of the
fire marshal. The fee for said permit shall be $100.00 per calendar year and must be renewed by January 31st
of any year. Application shall be made on a form developed by the fire marshal, a copy of which shall be kept
on file in the office of the city secretary. Periodical inspections, financial assurance, and signage will be required
as well as other requirements according to the fire marshal. (Ordinance 1575, sec. 1, adopted 12/20/11)
Sec. 22-13. Penalty for failure to obtain a combustible storage permit.
Failure to obtain a combustible storage permit and/or storage of combustible materials in a building located in
the fire limits without a permit shall be punished as provided in section 1-6. (Ordinance 1575, sec. 1, adopted
12/20/11)
Secs. 22-14—22-38. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. FIRE MARSHAL
Sec. 22-39. Appointment and qualifications.
The fire marshal shall be appointed by and report directly to the fire chief. (1969 Code, sec. 11-16; Ordinance
296, sec. 1, adopted 4/8/1913; Ordinance 1664, sec. 1, adopted 5/26/15)
Sec. 22-40. Investigation of fires-Required; records.
The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within the city, by
which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire
was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be begun within 24 hours, not including
Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires occurring
within the city, together with all facts, statistics, and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/283
amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this section. Such record shall at
all times be open to public inspection. (1969 Code, sec. 11-17; Ordinance 296, sec. 2, adopted 4/8/1913)
Sec. 22-41. Same-Gathering evidence; charging crimes.
The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the
testimony on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in
relation to the matter to which an examination as herein required is being made, and shall cause the same to
be reduced to writing; and if he shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person
with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal
conduct in connection with such fire, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such
offense, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the name of
witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony
taken in the case. (1969 Code, sec. 11-18; Ordinance 296, sec. 3, adopted 4/8/1913)
Sec. 22-42. Same-Power to take testimony.
The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which
is, by the provisions of this article, a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any
book, paper, or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire marshal is authorized and empowered to
administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. (1969 Code, sec. 11-19;
Ordinance 296, sec. 4, adopted 4/8/1913)
Sec. 22-43. Same-Contemptuous conduct of witnesses.
Any witness who:
(1) Refuses to be sworn;
(2) Refuses to appear or testify;
(3) Disobeys any lawful order of the fire marshal;
(4) Fails or refuses to produce any book, paper, or document touching any matter under
examination; or
(5) Is guilty of any contemptuous conduct;
during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in the matter of said investigation or inquiry, after being
summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor. It shall be the duty of the fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted.
(1969 Code, sec. 11-20; Ordinance 296, sec. 5, adopted 4/8/1913)
Sec. 22-44. Private hearings; invoking the rule as to witnesses.
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private. Persons
other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held.
Witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other
until they have been examined. (1969 Code, sec. 11-21; Ordinance 296, sec. 6, adopted 4/8/1913)
Sec. 22-45. Right-of-entry-Investigation of fires.
The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary in the performance of the
duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article, to enter on and examine any building or premises
where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall
be exercised only with reason and good discretion. (1969 Code, sec. 11-22; Ordinance 296, sec. 7, adopted
4/8/1913)
State Law reference- See V.A.T.S. Insurance Code, art. 543 for similar provisions as to state fire marshal.
Sec. 22-46. Same-Investigation of condition of premises.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/283
The fire marshal, upon complaint of any persons having an interest in any building or property adjacent or
without any complaint, shall have the right at all reasonable hours, for the purposes of examination, to enter into
and upon all buildings and premises within the city. It shall be his duty, annually or more often, to enter upon
and make, or cause to be entered upon and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing,
and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. (1969 Code, sec. 11-23; Ordinance 296,
sec. 8, adopted 4/8/1913)
Sec. 22-47. Maintaining unsafe condition-Dilapidated buildings; faulty appliances, etc.; dangerous
accumulations; order to eliminate.
Whenever the fire marshal shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repair or by reason of age
or dilapidated condition or for any cause, is especially liable to fire; which is so situated as to endanger other
buildings or property, or so occupied that fire would endanger persons or property therein; and shall find an
improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces, or other heating appliances of any kind
whatsoever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected; a dangerous
arrangement of lighting devices or systems; or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds,
petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable
materials, refuse, or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or
create conditions dangerous to the firemen or occupants; he shall order the same to be removed or the
condition to be remedied. Such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owners or occupants of said
buildings or premises; provided, however, if any such owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such
order, he may within five days appeal to the city manager who shall investigate the cause of the complaint; and
unless by his authority the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by
said owner or occupant. (1969 Code, sec. 11-24; Ordinance 296, sec. 8, adopted 4/8/1913)
Sec. 22-48. Same-Dilapidated buildings, etc., constitutes misdemeanor.
Any owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises who shall keep or maintain the same when,
for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause it is especially liable to fire and
which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of others, or it is especially liable to fire and which is
so occupied that fire would endanger other persons or their property therein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and punished as provided in section 1-6. (1969 Code, sec. 11-25; Ordinance 296, sec. 9, adopted 4/8/1913)
Sec. 22-49. Same-Improper appliances, etc., or dangerous accumulations, constitutes misdemeanor.
Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same with
an improper arrangement of any stove, range, furnace, or other heating appliance of any kind whatever,
including chimneys, fines and pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be dangerous in the
matter of fire or health of safety of persons or property of others; or who shall keep or maintain any building, or
other structure or premises with any improper arrangement of any lighting device or system, or with storage of
explosives, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable
materials, refuse or with any other condition which shall be dangerous in character to the persons, health or
property of others; or which shall be dangerous in the matter of promoting, augmenting or causing fires; or
which shall create conditions dangerous to firemen or occupants of such building, structure or premises other
than the maintainer thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in section 1-6. (1969
Code, sec. 11-26; Ordinance 296, sec. 10, adopted 4/8/1913)
Sec. 22-50. Same-Order prerequisite to prosecution.
No prosecution shall be brought under sections 22-48 and 22-49 until the order provided for in section 22-47 is
given, and the party notified shall fail or refuse to comply with the same. (1969 Code, sec. 11-27; Ordinance
296, sec. 11, adopted 4/8/1913)
Secs. 22-51—22-73. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. EMERGENCY RESPONSE AND RESCUE SERVICES*
Sec. 22-74. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the
context of their usage clearly indicates another meaning:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/283
Business entity or person means any corporation, sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, firm or
other similar entity, or any individual person, engaged in any commercial, business or industrial transactions of
any nature.
Hazardous material means any substance defined under section 101(14) of CERCLA; any biological agent or
other disease-causing agent which, after release into the environment and upon exposure, ingestion, inhalation,
or assimilation, by ingestion through food chains, will or may reasonably be anticipated to cause death,
disease, behavioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutation, physiological malfunctions (including malfunctions
in reproduction), or physical deformations in such persons or their offspring; any substance listed by the U.S.
Department of Transportation as hazardous materials under 49 CFR 172.101 and appendices; or any
hazardous waste as defined under 29 CFR 1910.120.
Responsible party means all persons involved in the possession, ownership or transportation of any hazardous
material that is released or abandoned, or who have legal liability for the causation of an incident resulting in
the release or abandonment of any hazardous materials.
Service means a response by one or more fire/EMS department units to an incident involving a leakage, spill
and/or other release and/or abandonment of any hazardous material.
Service call means the period of time from the dispatch of fire/EMS department units at the site where the
service is to be performed, to the return of all department units to an available status.
(1969 Code, sec. 11-76; Ordinance 1451, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/05)
Sec. 22-75. Defraying of costs authorized.
In order to partially defray the costs incurred by the city for providing hazardous materials service by the
fire/EMS department, charges are hereby established and shall be paid and collected from the responsible
party.
(1) For service calls of one hour or less, the responsible party shall pay for expendable supplies,
plus an additional 30 percent of the cost of the expendable supplies.
(2) For service calls of more than one hour, the responsible party shall pay the actual per hour
labor cost and a 50 percent markup for fringe benefits for the firefighters involved in the response
and $185.00 per hour for any vehicle involved in the response except for the fire chief's vehicle. The
charge shall be based on per quarter hour for every quarter hour, or portion thereof, over the first
hour. The responsible party shall also pay for expendable supplies, plus an additional 30 percent of
the cost of the expendable supplies.
(1969 Code, sec. 11-77; Ordinance 1451, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/05)
Sec. 22-76. Identification of responsible party.
If the responsible party cannot be identified or refuses to remedy all hazardous conditions created by leakage,
spill and/or other release and/or abandonment of a hazardous material, the fire/EMS department may contract
with a third party to complete the necessary remedial measures. The responsible party shall pay for all third
party costs, plus an additional 20 percent of third party cost, associated with the hazardous materials
remediation. (1969 Code, sec. 11-78; Ordinance 1451, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/05)
Sec. 22-77. Duty to report incidents.
It shall be the duty of each responsible party to report any incident involving any leakage, release, spill, or
abandonment of any hazardous materials to the fire/EMS department immediately upon the discovery of the
same, or as soon thereafter as possible. (1969 Code, sec. 11-79; Ordinance 1451, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/05)
Sec. 22-78. Exceptions to payment of charges.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any individual who constitutes a responsible party shall not
be required to pay charges authorized under this article if all of the following conditions are met:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/283
(1) The responsible party does not illegally dispose of nor abandon substances deemed as
hazardous materials;
(2) The individual otherwise responsible or liable for the release of a hazardous material is not
involved in the possession, ownership or transportation of the hazardous material as the employee,
agent, or servant of any business entity or person;
(3) The individual involved in the possession, ownership or transportation of the hazardous
material released is so involved solely for private, noncommercial purposes related to the
individual's own residential property, real property or private personal property, and the individual
receives or is to receive no compensation for any services involving the hazardous materials; and
(4) The hazardous material possessed, owned or being transported by the individual are in forms,
quantities and containers ordinarily and lawfully available for sale as consumer products to members
of the general public.
(1969 Code, sec. 11-80; Ordinance 1451, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/05)
Sec. 22-79. Exempt entities.
This article shall not apply to any hazardous materials possessed, owned or transported by the city, the state
(including its political subdivisions) or the federal government. (1969 Code, sec. 11-81; Ordinance 1451, sec. 1,
adopted 9/27/05)
Sec. 22-80. Offenses and penalties.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the fire/EMS
department in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article.
(b) Convictions for violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by fine as provided in section
1-6.
(1969 Code, sec. 11-82; Ordinance 1451, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/05)
Sec. 22-81. Fees.
(a) The city commission authorizes the city manager to authorize collection of fees to be billed against the
insurance coverage or parties involved in motor vehicle accidents, vehicle fires, hazardous waste or chemical
spills, and/or other non-fire suppression activities to which the city responds with fire department equipment
and/or personnel.
(b) Those charges will be assessed as a debt to the party causing the event, the landowner, the party
controlling the premises in the event of a spill or dumping and/or the party transporting said hazardous,
dangerous and/or injurious product.
Fire suppression activities resulting from third party negligence may be billed against that third party. Fire
suppression activities resulting from arson may be billed against the arsonist.
(c) Fees for services assessed and collected in this section shall be as follows:
(1) The response cost shall be $425.00 per hour, for each fire response apparatus.
(2) When an ambulance is used as a safety stand-by vehicle the cost of $300.00 per hour for
each ambulance shall apply.
(3) The cost for a command vehicle or manpower vehicle shall be $200.00 per hour for each
vehicle.
(4) If any protective equipment or firefighting equipment is damaged or contaminated, the current
replacement cost shall be charged.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/283
(5) The current replacement cost shall be charged for the use of consumable haz-mat supplies
and firefighting agents.
(Ordinance 1654, sec. 1, adopted 1/27/15)
CHAPTER 24
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
Sec. 24-1. Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and methods.
(a) Statutory authorization. The state legislature has, in V.T.C.A., Water Code sec. 16.318, delegated the
responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
(b) Findings of fact.
(1) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life
and property, health, and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety, and general welfare.
(2) These flood loses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which
cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazards areas by
uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed, or otherwise protected from flood damage.
(c) Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions
designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditures of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains; electric,
telephone and sewer lines; streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future floodblight areas; and
(7) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(d) Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish its purpose, this chapter uses the following
methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or
cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/283
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters
or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
(1969 Code, sec. 12-1; Ordinance 1240, art. 1, secs. A—D, adopted 4/14/93)
Sec. 24-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application:
Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which
originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows, active processes of erosion, sediment
transport, and deposition, and unpredictable flow paths.
Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that
formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map
(FIRM) with a one percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity
flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or
greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area of special flood hazard may be designated as zone A on
the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for
publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year.
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the
flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development means any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built:
(1) In the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top
of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in zone V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the
lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means
of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water; and adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the
magnitude of the base flood.
(2) In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, the term “elevated building”
also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
(3) In the case of zone V1-30, VE, or V, the term “elevated building” also includes a building
otherwise meeting the definition of “elevated building,” even though the lower area is enclosed by
means of breakaway walls, if the breakaway walls met the standards of section 60.3(e)(5) of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. The term “existing construction” may also be referred to as existing structures.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/283
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by
the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete
pads.
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry
land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood boundaryfloodway
map.
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized,
appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce
the extent of the areas within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of
associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees, or
dikes. These specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering
standards.
Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.
See Flooding.
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for
reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and
floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term “floodplain management regulations” describes
such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood
damage prevention and reduction.
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to
structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water, and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than a designated height.
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or
carried out in close proximity to water. The term “functionally dependent use” includes only docking facilities,
port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and
ship repair facilities, but does not include longterm storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to
the proposed walls of a structure.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/283
Historic structure means any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
(A) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(B) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance
with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee and associated structures, such as,
closure and drainage devices which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or floodresistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to
render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent
chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term “manufactured home” does not include a recreational vehicle.
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance
rate map are referenced.
New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever
is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes,
the term “new construction” means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/283
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Start of construction includes, for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal
Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued; provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The term “actual start” means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as, the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as, garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the
structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before start of
construction of the improvement. The term “substantial improvement” includes structures which have incurred
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term “substantial improvement” does
not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a historic structure; provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this chapter when specific enforcement
would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner
otherwise prohibited by this chapter. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.)
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's
floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4),
or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as
that documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929
(or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal
or riverine areas.
(1969 Code, sec. 12-2; Ordinance 1240, art. 2, adopted 4/14/93; Ordinance 1399, sec. 1, adopted 9/24/02)
Sec. 24-3. General application of provisions.
(a) Lands to which this chapter applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/283
(b) Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, The Flood
Insurance Study for City of Vernon, Texas, dated September 21, 2001, with accompanying flood insurance rate
maps (FIRM) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
chapter.
(c) Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance
with the provisions of this chapter.
(d) Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
(e) Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance,
easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
(f) Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the city commission; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(g) Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare
occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part
of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(1969 Code, sec. 12-3; Ordinance 1240, art. 3, secs. A—G, adopted 4/14/93; Ordinance 1370, sec. 1, adopted
4/24/01; Ordinance 1399, sec. 2, adopted 9/24/02)
Sec. 24-4. Administration.
(a) Designation of the floodplain administrator. The community development director is hereby appointed the
floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate
sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
(b) Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
(1) Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
(A) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of
this chapter.
(B) Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site, including the
placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(C) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption
of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived.
(D) Review permits for proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have
been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404
of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344) from which
prior approval is required.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/283
(E) Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact
location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions).
(F) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency
which is the state water commission, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and
submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(G) Ensure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
(H) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 24-
3(b), obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of section
24-5.
(I) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, must require that no new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted
within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more
than one foot at any point within the community.
(2) Under the provisions of 44 CFR 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a
community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, and AH on the community's
FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot; provided
that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA.
(c) Permit procedures.
(1) Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on
forms furnished by him and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale
showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the
foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is
required:
(A) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
new and substantially improved structures;
(B) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be
floodproofed;
(C) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 24-5(b)(2);
(D) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
(E) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 24-4(b)(1)a.
(2) Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on
all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors:
(A) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(B) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect
of such damage on the individual owner;
(C) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(D) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/283
(E) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency
vehicles;
(F) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems;
(G) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the
floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(H) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(I) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use;
(J) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
(d) Variance procedures.
(1) The appeal board as established by the community shall hear and render judgement on
requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
(2) The appeal board shall hear and render judgement on an appeal only when it is alleged there
is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the
courts of competent jurisdiction.
(4) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall
report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(5) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed
on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard
to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter.
(6) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on
a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection (c)(2) of this
section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(7) Upon consideration of the factors noted in this section and the intent of this chapter, the appeal
board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purpose and objectives of section 24-1(c).
(8) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result.
(9) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
(10) Prerequisites for granting variances. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(A) A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief;
(B) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/283
(C) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to
the applicant; and
(D) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(11) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure
will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that
the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced
lowest floor elevation.
(12) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements
and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use; provided that:
(A) The criteria outlined in subsection (d)(1) through (9) of this section are met; and
(B) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood
damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
(1969 Code, sec. 12-4; Ordinance 1240, art. 4, secs. A—D, adopted 4/14/93; Ordinance 1370, sec. 2, adopted
4/24/01; Ordinance 1399, sec. 3, adopted 9/24/02)
Sec. 24-5. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
(a) General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required for all new
construction and substantial improvements.
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant
to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
(b) Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been
provided as set forth in section 24-3(b)(3), section 24-4(b)(1)h., or subsection (c)(3) of this section, the following
provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood
elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in section 24-4(c)(1)a
is satisfied.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/283
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this section. A record of such
certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer, architect,
meet, or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(A) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices,
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured homes.
(A) All manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM
shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes
of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH,
and AE on the community's FIRM on sites:
(i) Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
(ii) In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
(iii) In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
(iv) In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured
home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood;
shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured
home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(C) Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's
FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of this subsection (b)(4) shall be elevated so that
either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation;
or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/283
height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(5) Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30,
AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either:
(A) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(B) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(C) Meet the permit requirements of section 24-4(c)(1), and the elevation and anchoring
requirements for manufactured homes in subsection (b)(4) of this section.
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached
to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently
attached additions.
(c) Standards for subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 24-1(b) through (d).
(2) All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall meet development permit requirements of sections 24-3(c), 24-
4(c) and the provisions of this section.
(3) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed
development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater
than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 24-3(b)
or 24-4(b)(1)h.
(4) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(5) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(d) Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard
established in section 24-3(b) are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood
hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist
and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flows may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified).
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures:
(A) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at
least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM, at least two feet
if no depth number is specified; or
(B) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base
flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy.
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain
administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 24-4(c)(1)a are satisfied.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/283
(4) Require within zone AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(e) Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 24-3(b) are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters,
which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and
other development within the adopted regulatory floodway, unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that
the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) If subsection (e)(1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section.
(3) Under the provisions of 44 CFR 65.12 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a
community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in
an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM
and floodway revision through FEMA.
(1969 Code, sec. 12-5; Ordinance 1240, art. 5, secs. A—C, adopted 4/14/93; Ordinance 1399, secs. 4—8,
adopted 9/24/02)
Sec. 24-6. Penalties.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this
chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter
or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than set out in
section 1-6 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation. (1969 Code, sec. 12-6; Ordinance 1399, sec. 9, adopted 9/24/02)
CHAPTER 26
GARBAGE AND TRASH*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 26-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
City health officer means the person performing the functions of city health officer or his authorized agent.
Garbage means all wastes that decay, except sewage and body wastes, and including all meat, vegetable and
fruit refuse, and carcasses of small dead animals and fish and dead fowl from any premises within the city.
Premises means business houses, offices, theaters, hotels, restaurants, cafes, eating houses, tourist camps,
apartments, rest homes, sanitariums, roominghouses, schools, churches, private residences, vacant lots and all
other places within the city where refuse, either garbage or rubbish, accumulates.
Refuse means all solid wastes, including garbage and rubbish.
Rubbish means tin cans, bottles, papers, tree limbs (which shall be cut into lengths not to exceed five feet),
grass trimmings, vegetation growth removed from shrubs, etc., from any premises within the city limits.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/283
(1969 Code, sec. 13-1; Ordinance 709, sec. 1, adopted 4/21/65)
Sec. 26-2. Burning waste substances; incinerator required.
Burning of trash, wastes, rubbish, garbage, or any other waste substance included in this chapter is forbidden
at any time, except under conditions where the owner or person in charge can show evidence of construction of
an incinerator acceptable to the standards of the state department of insurance and the state department of
state health services or other relevant state agency or department. (1969 Code, sec. 13-2; Ordinance 709, sec.
9, adopted 4/21/65)
Sec. 26-3. Hauling without cover a nuisance.
The hauling of trash, garbage and refuse for hire, within the city, in vehicles without canvas, wire net or other
coverage sufficient to prevent trash, papers, boxes, garbage, and other refuse from falling off of such vehicles is
declared to be a public nuisance. (1969 Code, sec. 13-3; Ordinance 611, sec. 1, adopted 6/14/55)
Sec. 26-4. Scattering, distributing or posting handbills, etc.
It is declared unlawful for any person to distribute or cause to be distributed by throwing or leaving in the streets
or alleys of the city, or by tacking or fastening to any billboard or other object or within five feet of the street or
alley any printed circulars or advertisements of any character whatsoever. This section shall not prevent the
sale and distribution of newspapers and magazines on the streets and alleys. (1969 Code, sec. 13-4;
Ordinance 435, secs. 1, 2, adopted 12/14/26; Ordinance 1061, sec. 1, adopted 6/12/84)
Secs. 26-5—26-26. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. COLLECTION AND REMOVAL SERVICE
Sec. 26-27. Roll-out containers regulation.
Roll-out containers shall be removed from the city right-of-way before 12:00 noon on the day scheduled for the
city's biweekly collection and shall not be placed on the curb for emptying prior to 9:00 p.m. on the day before
the scheduled biweekly city collection. (1969 Code, sec. 13-16; Ordinance 1183, sec. 1, adopted 7/11/89)
Sec. 26-28. Transfer station and convenience station user fees.
The fees charged for the use of the city transfer station and convenience station shall be computed on rates as
listed in the table of charges at the appropriate unit price for waste with a minimum of $2.13 per load up to 100
pounds. Persons who have loads of transported solid waste entering the transfer station and convenience
station that are not secured either by a rope system or covered by a tarp on in an enclosed vehicle shall be
charged an additional fee of $10.00 as well any of the disposal fees listed in the table of charges.
TABLE OF CHARGES
Customer/Item Price per ton/each Price per pound
Transfer Station Fees
Industrial waste customers over 100 tons
per month
$46.61 $0.02331
Governmental agencies $45.28 $0.02264
All other types of customers $47.94 $0.02397
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/283
Transfer waste by collection service
provider (for waste generated outside the
county)
$1.49 N/A
Convenience Station Fees
Metal materials (white goods) $35.16 $0.01758
Rock and cement $35.16 $0.01758
Brush, pallet, wood and yard waste $35.16 $0.01758
Dead large animals $53.27 each
Dead small animals $5.32 each
Passenger car/light truck tire sizes less than
17.5-inch rim diameter without rim
$2.13 each
Passenger car/light truck tire sizes less than
17.5-inch rim diameter with rim
$4.26 each
Truck tire sizes greater than 17.5-inch rim
diameter
$7.99 each
Truck tire sizes greater than 17.5-inch rim
diameter with rim
$12.78 each
Off road or agricultural tires Cost times $1.25 each
(1969 Code, sec. 13-17; Ordinance 709, sec. 2, adopted 4/21/65; Ordinance 1321, sec. 2, adopted 7/28/98;
Ordinance 1371, sec. 1, adopted 4/24/01; Ordinance 1420, sec. 1, adopted 9/23/03; Ordinance 1327, sec. 1,
adopted 4/26/05; Ordinance 1458, sec. 1, adopted 4/25/06)
Sec. 26-29. Meddling with refuse container; scattering contents.
The meddling with refuse containers or in any way pilfering, scattering contents, or junking in any alley or street
within the city is prohibited. (1969 Code, sec. 13-18; Ordinance 709, sec. 3, adopted 4/21/65)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/283
Sec. 26-30. Collection for residential and commercial service.
(a) Residential and commercial service. Collection schedules and service shall be in accordance to an
agreement between the municipality and the solid waste collection and disposal service provider. It shall be
unlawful of any person in possession or control of any premises to place the roll-out containers in a location
other than as specified by the public works director. The container shall be placed for easy collection by the
municipality's solid waste collection service provider.
(b) Residential bulky items service. Collection schedules and service shall be in accordance to an agreement
between the municipality and the solid waste collection and disposal service provider. It shall be unlawful of any
person in possession or control of any premises to place bulky items curbside other than as defined and
specified in the agreement between the municipality and the solid waste collection and disposal service
provider.
(1969 Code, sec. 13-20; Ordinance 709, sec. 3, adopted 4/21/65; Ordinance 1112, sec. 2, adopted 12/10/85;
Ordinance 1254, sec. II, adopted 6/29/94; Ordinance 1321, sec. 3, adopted 7/28/90; Ordinance 1321, sec. 3,
adopted 7/28/98)
Sec. 26-31. Disposal of white goods at convenience station.
White goods with refrigerate oil shall not be accepted at the municipal convenience station, except when they
are evacuated of the refrigerate oil. (1969 Code, sec. 13-21; Ordinance 709, sec. 3, adopted 4/21/65;
Ordinance 1321, sec. 4, adopted 7/28/98)
Sec. 26-32. Unlawful collection.
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect garbage, trash, or junk within the corporate boundary of the city,
except as provided for in this chapter. (1969 Code, sec. 13-22; Ordinance 709, sec. 3, adopted 4/21/65;
Ordinance 1321, sec. 5, adopted 7/28/98)
Sec. 26-33. Illegal disposal.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or otherwise dispose of any garbage, rubbish or any other
refuse materials within the municipality without first placing same in prescribed containers, or as defined and
specified in the agreement between the city and the solid waste collection and disposal service provider, or as
directed by the public works director.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to bring in any garbage, rubbish, or any other refuse materials into the
corporate limits of the city for the purpose of disposing of the same at any place or in any container. This
subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the transportation of garbage, rubbish, or any other refuse material
through the city to be disposed of at a state approved facility.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or otherwise dispose of any garbage, rubbish or any other
refuse materials in any container that is not specifically designated for that person's use as directed or
authorized by the public works director.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or otherwise dispose of any garbage, rubbish or any other
refuse materials in any city-designated containers or in city parks except by persons using the park for picnics
or recreational purposes.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or otherwise dispose of any regulated waste such as tires,
medical waste, liquid waste, grit waste or hazardous waste as these terms are defined by the state natural
resource conservation commission, except by delivery to an authorized waste disposal facility.
(f) It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or otherwise dispose of hot cinders; construction or
demolition debris; and large quantities of rock, dirt, metal and cement for bulk pickup service or in any
containers designated for commercial or residential solid waste service.
(1969 Code, sec. 13-23; Ordinance 709, sec. 3, adopted 4/21/65; Ordinance 1169, sec. 1, adopted 5/10/88;
Ordinance 1245, secs. I—IV, adopted 9/8/93; Ordinance 1321, sec. 5, adopted 7/28/98)
Sec. 26-34. Authorized charges.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/283
The finance director shall establish charges as provided in this article for the collection of trash and garbage by
the city's provider of solid waste collection and disposal service from any location, and adjust said fees in
accordance with any existing contract. (1969 Code, sec. 13-24; Ordinance 709, sec. 6, adopted 4/21/65;
Ordinance 709-A adopted 9/31/71; Ordinance 709-B adopted 10/9/73; Ordinance 915 adopted 10/12/76;
Ordinance 960 adopted 10/9/79; Ordinance 1031, sec. 1, adopted 9/28/83; Ordinance 1104, sec. 1, adopted
9/23/85; Ordinance 1185, sec. 2, adopted 9/12/89; Ordinance 1217, sec. 2, adopted 9/26/91; Ordinance 1226,
sec. 2, adopted 12/18/91; Ordinance 1243 adopted 8/11/93; Ordinance 1321, sec. 7, adopted 7/28/98;
Ordinance 1633, sec. 1, adopted 4/22/14)
Sec. 26-35. Residential collection and disposal user fees.
Residential collection and disposal charges for 90-gallon roll-out containers shall be set as follows:
TABLE OF CHARGES
Type Description Monthly Charge
(1) One-family residence $15.65
(2) Two-family residence with 1 water meter $31.30
(3) Three-family residence with 1 water meter $46.95
(4) Four-family residence with 1 water meter $62.60
(5) Two-family residence, each unit on separate water meter, each unit $15.65
(6) One-family residence and single apartment on 1 water meter $31.30
(7) One-family residence and single apartment on 1 water meter, each unit $15.65
(8) One-family residence: 90-gallon roll-out container $17.05
Each additional 90-gallon roll-out container $ 7.20
(1969 Code, sec. 13-25; Ordinance 709, sec. 7, adopted 4/21/65; Ordinance 709-B adopted 10/9/73; Ordinance
915 adopted 10/12/76; Ordinance 960 adopted 10/9/79; Ordinance 1031, sec. 2, adopted 9/28/83; Ordinance
1104, sec. 2, adopted 9/23/85; Ordinance 1185, sec. 3, adopted 9/12/89; Ordinance 1226, sec. 3, adopted
12/18/91; Ordinance 1243 adopted 8/11/93; Ordinance 1321, sec. 8, adopted 7/28/98; Ordinance 1437, sec. 2,
adopted 4/26/05; Ordinance 1458, sec. 2, adopted 4/25/06; Ordinance 1477, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/07;
Ordinance 1589, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/12; Ordinance 1633, sec. 2, adopted 4/22/14; Ordinance 1660, sec. 1,
adopted 4/28/15)
Sec. 26-36. Commercial collection and disposal user fees.
(a) Table of charges. Commercial collection and disposal charges shall be based on the size, type, and
number of containers and frequency of service. The monthly charges per container for commercial collection
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/283
shall be set as follows:
Commercial Unit One Time Lift
per Week
Two Times Lift
per Week
Not more than 5
Times Lift per Week
Extra Lifts
90-Gallon roll-out 26.25
4-Yard 100.32 180.57 400.94 25.09
6-Yard 123.47 222.24 601.41 31.38
8-Yard 146.62 263.90 801.90 37.64
(b) Shared containers. If a container is used by more than one business or commercial user, the charge as
established by subsection (a) of this section, less any charges for residential use, shall be prorated to each
business or commercial user for the container in a manner established by the finance director, based upon the
estimate of the relative volumes of garbage and trash generated by each user. However, the charge to a
business or commercial user determined by any such distribution method shall not be less than the total
charges as set out in section (a).
(c) Container revenue maintained. If at any time the use of a container changes so that the revenue from
such container does not equal the charge as established subsection (a) of this section, then the charges to all
current users of such container shall be reestablished so that the total share per container is maintained.
(d) Home occupations. Businesses operated out of a residence shall be considered separate and apart from
the residence and the charges to such business shall be determined as in subsection (b) of this section.
(1969 Code, sec. 13-26; Ordinance 709, sec. 7, adopted 4/21/65; Ordinance 1243 adopted 8/11/93; Ordinance
1321, sec. 9, adopted 7/28/98; Ordinance 1329, sec. 1, adopted 12/24/98; Ordinance 1437, sec. 1, adopted
4/26/05; Ordinance 1458, sec. 3, adopted 4/25/06; Ordinance 1477, sec. 2, adopted 3/27/07; Ordinance 1558,
sec. 1, adopted 5/24/11; Ordinance 1589, secs. 2, 3, adopted 4/17/12; Ordinance 1633, sec. 3, adopted
4/22/14; Ordinance 1660, sec. 2, adopted 4/28/15)
Sec. 26-37. Monthly billing; mandatory service.
(a) All charges or fees for residential collection service, commercial collection service, convenience station
usage or transfer station usage shall be billed accordingly and the bill for such service shall be due within 15
days from the date of billing, at the appropriate collection office. If the bill is not paid within 25 days after the
date of billing, then the city reserves the right to terminate and discontinue waste collection service to the
person or premises without further notice until all past due accounts and charges are paid.
(b) All persons with water meters or sanitary sewer service shall be provided waste collection service and
charged accordingly, unless the service is provided by a city commission approved collection service. The
finance director shall have the authority to waive this mandatory collection service, if in his opinion the service is
unwarranted.
(1969 Code, sec. 13-27; Ordinance 709, sec. 8, adopted 4/21/65; Ordinance 709-A adopted 9/31/71; Ordinance
709-C adopted 9/14/76; Ordinance 1321, sec. 10, adopted 7/28/98; Ordinance 1329, sec. 2, adopted 12/24/98)
Sec. 26-38. Penalty.
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction,
shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-6. The violation thereof shall be deemed a separate
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/283
offense, and upon conviction shall be punished accordingly. Provided, however, compliance may be further
sought through injunctive relief in the district court. (1969 Code, sec. 13-28; Ordinance 709, sec. 5, adopted
4/21/65; Ordinance 1321, sec. 11, adopted 7/28/98)
CHAPTER 28
HEALTH AND SANITATION*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 28-1—28-17. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. NUISANCES
Sec. 28-18. Definitions.
Any and all other objectionable, unsightly, or unsanitary matter of whatever nature means any condition, object,
material or other matter that is dangerous or detrimental to human life or health; that renders the ground, the
water, the air or food a hazard or likely to cause injury to human life or health; that is offensive to the senses; or
that threatens to become detrimental to the public health. The term includes but is not limited to any abandoned
wells, shafts or basements; abandoned refrigerators; stagnant or unwholesome water; sinks; privies; filth;
carrion; rubbish; junk, trash, debris or refuse; impure or unwholesome matter of any kind; and any matter,
condition or object which is objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary to a person of ordinary sensitivities.
Rubbish means all refuse, tin cans, old vessels of all sorts, useless articles, discarded clothing and bottles of all
sorts, and other non-decayable wastes.
Trash and debris mean all manner of refuse, including but not limited to mounds of dirt, compost, piles of
leaves, grass and weed clippings, paper trash, useless fragments of building material, rubble, household items
and appliances, items of salvage such as scrap metal and wood, barrels, tires, objects that hold water for an
extended time, tree and brush trimmings, and other miscellaneous wastes or rejected matter.
Weeds includes all rank or uncultivated vegetable growth or matter which has grown to more than 12 inches in
height; creates an unsanitary condition or becomes a breeding place for mosquitoes, rodents, vermin or other
disease-carrying pests regardless of the height of the growth; or endangers property or is liable to catch on fire.
(Ordinance 1573, sec. 1, adopted 10/25/11)
Sec. 28-19. Declaration.
Whatever is dangerous to human life or health; or whatever renders the ground, the water, the air, or any food
or drink unwholesome and a hazard to human life and health is declared to be a nuisance. (1969 Code, sec.
14-26; Ordinance 666, sec. 1, adopted 3/14/61)
Sec. 28-20. Specific conditions or acts deemed impermissible.
The following are declared to be nuisances, and as such are liable to be abated, and the person guilty of
causing, permitting, or suffering any of them upon his premises or in any building occupied or controlled by him
or in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or gutter immediately adjacent to such premises within the city limits or
within 5,000 feet thereof shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-6; the imposition of which
penalty shall in no event prevent or relieve the offender of the payment of the abatement costs and expenses
as herein provided:
(1) Any building, erection, or cellar or any part of such building, erection or cellar which is
overcrowded, or not provided with adequate means of ingress or egress or is not sufficiently
supported, ventilated, sewered, drained, cleaned, or lighted.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/283
(2) All cellars, vaults, drains, pools, privies, sewers, yards, grounds, or premises which have for
any cause become foul, nauseous, or offensive or injurious to the health, or unpleasant to the
occupants of adjacent residences or to persons passing such premises. See also section 54-60.
(3) All carcasses, all decaying flesh, fish, fowl, fruit, or vegetables, all deposits of manure, all flesh
of any kind or description whatsoever, all filthy or offensive water or slops in any private yard or
premises, and all other unwholesome substances when thrown upon or conducted into or upon any
street, alley, public ground, or enclosure in such manner as to render such substances
unwholesome and offensive or liable to become unwholesome or offensive.
(4) All privies that are offensive from use; all markets, cellars, laundries, stores, or other buildings
or places which are not kept clean and free from filthy and unwholesome substances and odors; all
deposits or substances that are offensive or liable to engender disease.
(5) Every trade, business or occupation injurious to the health or comfort of persons who reside in
the vicinity, and any can or receptacle containing water or slops suffered to become stagnant or
offensive or unwholesome from any cause.
(6) The act of depositing filth or any foul, offensive, nauseous or injurious substance upon any
sidewalk, street, alley, public thoroughfare, or other public place.
(7) The act of sweeping or depositing any trash, paper, or rubbish into any street, alley, public
thoroughfare or other public place and allowing the same to remain in such place longer than six
hours.
(8) The act of burning any hair, leather, rags, or any other substance of any kind which may cause
or produce an offensive smell, smoke or odor capable of annoying persons living in the vicinity or
persons passing along the streets, alleys or public thoroughfares.
(9) The act of defecating or urinating upon the streets, alleys or public grounds, or in any place
that may be seen from a private residence, or by persons passing along the streets, alleys or public
thoroughfares.
(10) The act of keeping, raising, possessing, or having in or about the premises, except within
enclosures, any pigeons with intent to keep, raise or breed same.
(11) The act of any person of permitting or allowing any weeds, filth, or rubbish of any kind to
remain on any sidewalk in front of or at the side of any premises owned by such persons, or in the
street, to the middle thereof, in front or at the side of any premises owned or controlled by such
person, or upon any alley, that may be at the rear or side of any lots owned or controlled by such
person.
(12) The act of expectorating or spitting of:
(A) Mucous or saliva;
(B) Saliva mixed with tobacco;
(C) Secretions from the nose or air passages;
(D) The remains of any chewed or partly chewed tobacco or snuff; or
(E) The remnant of any partially chewed or smoked cigar or cigarette;
upon any sidewalk, public building, or public vehicle, place or building or public resort within the
corporate limits of the city.
(13) The act of hauling, carrying or transporting any meat or slaughtered or dead animals or fish
through the streets of the city without having the same entirely covered, screened, and protected
from dust and public view.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/283
(14) The act of scattering any advertisements, circulars, handbills, printed or written
announcements, or paper of like character, or any medicines, upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys or
within the public buildings or grounds within the limits of the city.
(15) The act of the owner or possessor of any animal which may die within the corporate limits of
the city failing to have the carcass of same removed to the dump ground or a rendering plant within
18 hours after death of said animal.
(16) The act of throwing from any opening in, or carrying from, any dwelling or place of abode any
night soil, feces, urine, or filthy or unclean water into or upon any alley, street, or sidewalk or into or
upon any adjacent property not owned by the principal.
(17) The act of conducting or causing to be conducted into any alley or gutter of waste water from
any sink or tank or any source of water supply which may produce any pools of stagnant water in
said alley or gutter.
(18) The act of dumping upon and removing from any sidewalk, street or alley any coal or like
material in a dry state, in such manner that annoying or offensive dust is generated from such
material, or the act of leaving any coal dust or like material upon any sidewalk, street, or alley at or
near the place where such coal or material was deposited or from which it was removed.
(19) Any article or substance placed upon any street, sidewalk, alley, gutter, drain or public ground
except such articles as are permitted by ordinance of this city, in such manner as to obstruct such
passageway.
(20) The act of throwing any glass, tin, queen's ware, crockery, or other rubbish into or upon the
sidewalks, streets, alleys, public thoroughfares, commons, drains, or butters.
(21) Any unwholesome food, liquor or adulterated medicine, and all cattle, horse or hog pens,
stables or enclosed areas in which any cattle, horses or hogs may be kept or confined, which may
from use have become offensive.
(22) The granaries, barns, elevators, or other premises where rats breed or are harbored.
(23) The act of allowing any privy to become dilapidated or out of repair so that any person within
or the contents thereof may be exposed to view; the act of constructing or keeping on the premises
any privy, the contents whereof are exposed to view, or can be seen from any street or public place;
the act of discharging or causing to be discharged into any street, alley, public thoroughfare, or other
public place or upon premises belonging to any other person the contents of such privy.
(24) Any nauseous, foul, or putrid liquids or substances likely to be nauseous, foul, offensive or
putrid, discharged, placed, thrown or conducted into or upon any street, alley, public ground or
common.
(25) The act of wrongfully casting, throwing, or depositing any filth, substance, or thing into any
private well or cistern.
(26) The act of erecting or maintaining buildings or structures with roofs or eaves projecting
beyond the property line or shedding water upon any property other than that belonging to the owner
of such erection or building.
(27) Weeds or tall grass growing in excess of 12 inches upon premises located within the city.
Vegetation on undeveloped property shall be kept at a height of 12 inches or less within 50 feet of
the city right-of-way or public way. The remainder of the property should be kept free from vegetation
growing in excess of 18 inches unless approved by the director of community development (ex.,
native grass approved by the federal crop rotation program).
(28) Any other act or thing done or suffered within the city limits or within 5,000 feet of said city
limits which may interfere with the exercise and enjoyment of any member of the community of his
right to be free from foul, noxious, offensive, or unpleasant odors or vapors or loud or offensive
sounds or noises, and to breathe fresh air and to be free from the sight of foul or offensive objects
and substances and the sound of loud or offensive sounds or noises.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/283
(29) Accumulations. Whenever and wherever weeds, rubbish or any other objectionable, unsightly
and unsanitary matter of whatever nature shall exist, covering or partly covering the surface of any
lot or parcel of real estate within the city so as to produce an unsightly appearance of which may
harbor reptiles or rodents, create a fire hazard or result in unsanitary conditions, such a condition is
declared to be unlawful, the abatement of which shall be a public necessity.
(30) Allowing trees, shrubbery and vines to obstruct any vehicle traveling through an alley, or
which may obstruct a sidewalk or street or other public grounds. Sidewalks must have a height
clearance of eight feet; streets and alleys must have 15 feet of overhead clearance.
(1969 Code, sec. 14-27; Ordinance 314 adopted 6/9/1914; Ordinance 666, sec. 3, adopted 3/14/61; Ordinance
838 adopted 5/11/71; Ordinance 1573, sec. 2, adopted 10/25/11; Ordinance 1674, sec. II, adopted 11/24/15)
Sec. 28-21. Abatement by city-Failure of owner of property to remove; noncompliance subject to lien.
Except as otherwise provided herein, in the event the owner or occupant shall fail or refuse to comply with any
of the provisions of this article within ten days after notice to do so, the city may do such work or cause the
same to be done, and pay therefor, and charge the expenses in doing or having such work done, or
improvements made, to the owners of the property, whereupon such charge shall be a personal liability of such
owner to the city, and shall be a lien on the property as authorized by law. Said notice may be in writing served
upon such owner in person by an officer or employee of the city, or may be by letter addressed to such owner at
his post office address, or if personal service may not be had as aforesaid, or the owner's address be not
known, then notice may be given by publishing a brief summary of said order as many as two times within ten
consecutive days in some newspaper of general circulation in the city addressed “Sanitary Improvements,” “To
Whom It May Concern,” and such publication shall be deemed sufficient notice. (1969 Code, sec. 14-28;
Ordinance 666, sec. 4, adopted 3/14/61)
Sec. 28-22. Same-Charges, expenses after elimination.
Any residential property as defined by the city zoning ordinance set forth in appendix A to this Code, the owner,
agent or occupant of such premises at the minimum, at the discretion of the community development director,
shall be invoiced for the solid waste charges incurred by the city in abating the said nuisance. Any commercial
property as defined by the city zoning appendix A, the owner, agent or occupant of such premises at the
minimum, at the discretion of the community development director, shall be invoiced for the solid waste
charges, equipment usage and manpower incurred by the city in abating the said nuisance. (1969 Code, sec.
14-28.1; Ordinance 1475, sec. 2, adopted 3/27/07)
Sec. 28-23. Same-Administrative charges.
A $50.00 administrative fee shall be invoiced to any residential or commercial property owner, tenant, and/or
responsible party for any citation issued for noncompliance to a nuisance regulation as herein expressed. A
$100.00 administrative fee shall be invoiced to any residential or commercial property owner after the city
abates the said nuisance. (1969 Code, sec. 14-28.2; Ordinance 1479, sec. 3, adopted 5/22/07; Ordinance
1573, sec. 3, adopted 10/25/11)
Sec. 28-24. Loud noises-Conditions constituting nuisances.
(a) The following acts, among others, are declared to be nuisances in violation of this section, but said
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(1) The playing of any radio, phonograph, tape player or other electronic device of a similar
nature, or any musical instrument in such manner or with such volume, during the hours between
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons of ordinary
sensibilities in any dwelling or other type of residence, such persons being indoors or outdoors at
any such location.
(2) The use of any loudspeaker or amplifier of such intensity that disturbs persons of ordinary
sensibilities in the immediate vicinity of the equipment.
(3) The running of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or operating
a vehicle in any such manner through a muffler or other device that will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises there from.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/283
(4) The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air, unless the noise to be created
is effectively muffled and reduced to prevent loud or explosive noises there from.
(5) The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair work on any building, other
than between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., as to create loud grating, grinding, jarring, or
rattling noise or vibrations.
(6) The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal
combustion engine, motor vehicle engine or boat engine, except in case of an urgent necessity in
the interest of public safety and convenience.
(7) The operation, as a part of any commercial business or institutional facility located in a RS-1,
RS-2, RG, C-C, C-A/R, C-G, or C-F zoning district as defined by the city zoning appendix A,
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., within 500 lineal feet of any occupied residential
dwelling, of any heavy equipment, truck or machinery which emits noises of such intensity or
loudness that annoys or disturbs persons of ordinary sensibilities within such distance, except in
case of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety and convenience.
(b) This section is not intended to prohibit and shall not prohibit in any way the following activities:
(1) Operation of power lawnmowers or other lawn equipment or any equipment used for
agricultural purposes, golf course or lawn maintenance;
(2) The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to an emergency;
(3) Sound produced by emergency vehicles;
(4) Amplifiers used on vehicles to attract patrons that are operated by ice cream and snow cone
vendors that produce jingles or music from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.;
(5) The use and operation of an amplified, mechanical bell system in connection with the use and
occupancy of a church structure. However, such systems shall not be used or operated in a manner
so as to be offensive to the ordinary sensibilities of a reasonable and prudent person; and
(6) The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to any athletic event, cultural event or concert
authorized by the police chief.
(c) In addition to the fines and penalties set forth in this section for the enforcement of the provisions of this
section, the city may enforce the provisions hereof by injunctive relief through an appropriate court of
competent jurisdiction.
(1969 Code, sec. 14-29; Ordinance 1471, sec. 1, adopted 10/14/06; Ordinance 1471, sec. 1, adopted 11/28/06)
Sec. 28-25. Same-Declared misdemeanor to cause or aid and abet in causing.
Any person who shall create, operate or maintain or aid and abet any person in creating, operating or
maintaining a nuisance as defined in section 28-24 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day on
which such nuisance shall be operated or maintained shall constitute a separate offense. (1969 Code, sec. 14-
30; Ordinance 599, sec. II, adopted 9/8/53)
Sec. 28-26. Same-Permits.
The chief of police is authorized to grant permits to such persons who shall make application to him for the
operation of loudspeaking equipment within the city on a temporary basis, but no such permit shall be granted
for a period of more than three consecutive days at any one time. Any such person holding a permit granted
under this section shall use such equipment only in such manner as shall be authorized by such permit and a
violation of the terms of such permit shall be considered a violation of this Code. (1969 Code, sec. 14-31;
Ordinance 599, sec. III, adopted 9/8/53)
Secs. 28-27—28-55. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. ABANDONED AND JUNKED VEHICLES*
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/283
Sec. 28-56. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Antique auto means a passenger car or truck that was manufactured in 1925 or before, or which is at least 25
years old.
Collector means the owner of one or more antique or special interest vehicles who collects, purchases,
acquires, trades or disposes of special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for his own use in order to
restore, preserve, and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest.
Junked vehicle means any motor vehicle as defined in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code sec. 683.071, as
amended, which is:
(1) Self-propelled and does not have lawfully attached to it:
(A) An unexpired license plate; and
(B) A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; and
(2) Wrecked, dismantled, or partially dismantled or discarded; or
(3) Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
(A) 72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
(B) 30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age, which has not been altered or modified from original
manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists.
(1969 Code, sec. 14-61; Ordinance 1323, sec. I, adopted 6/23/98)
Sec. 28-57. Exemptions.
This article shall not apply to:
(1) A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner
where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property;
(2) A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in
connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard; or
(3) Unlicensed, operable, or inoperable antique or special interest vehicles stored by a collector
on his property, provided that the vehicles in the outdoor storage areas are maintained in such a
manner that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by
means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery or other appropriate means.
(1969 Code, sec. 14-62)
Sec. 28-58. Abatement, removal.
The procedure for abatement and removal of abandoned and junked vehicles or parts thereof, as public
nuisances, as defined in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code sec. 683.001 et seq., from private property, public
property, or public rights-of-way shall be as follows:
(1) For a junked vehicle on private property, written notice of not less than ten days must be given
stating the nature of the public nuisance on private property and that it must be removed and abated
within the ten days and further that a request for a hearing must be made before the expiration of the
ten-day period. Such written notice shall be mailed, by certified or registered mail with a five-day
return requested, to the last registered owner of the junked motor vehicle and any lienholder of
record and to the owner or occupant of the private premises whereupon such public nuisance exists.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/283
If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States post office, official action to abate the
nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten days from the date of such return.
(2) For a junked vehicle on public property, written notice of not less than ten days must be given
stating the nature of the public nuisance on public property or on a public right-of-way and that it
must be removed and abated within ten days and further that a request for a hearing must be made
before expiration of the ten-day period. Such notice shall be mailed, by certified or registered mail
with a five-day return requested, to the last registered owner of the junked motor vehicle and any
lienholder of record and to the owner or the occupant of the public premises or to the owner or the
occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way whereupon such public nuisance exists.
If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States post office, official action to abate the
nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten days from the date of such return.
(3) A request for a hearing in either subsection (1) or (2) of this section shall be made in writing
and delivered to the clerk of the municipal court.
(4) A public hearing must be held prior to the removal of the vehicle or part thereof as a public
nuisance, to be held before the judge of the municipal court, when such a hearing is requested by
the owner or occupant of the public or private premises or by the owner or occupant of the premises
adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the vehicle is located, within ten days after service of
notice to abate the nuisance. Any order requiring the removal of a vehicle or part thereof shall
include a description of the vehicle, and the correct identification number and license number of the
vehicle, if available at the site.
(5) Written notice must be given to the state department of transportation within five days after the
date of removal identifying the vehicle or part thereof.
(6) After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable.
(7) The procedure for abatement and removal of a public nuisance shall be accomplished by the
regularly salaried, fulltime employees of the city, except that the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof
from private property, public property or public rights-of-way may be by any other duly authorized
person under direction of the city.
(1969 Code, sec. 14-63; Ordinance 1323, sec. II, adopted 6/23/98)
Secs. 28-59—28-89. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES
Sec. 28-90. Definitions.
As used in this article the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Employee means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary
wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his services for a nonprofit entity.
Employer means a person who employs the services of one or more individuals.
Enclosed area means a space that is enclosed on all sides by solid walls that extend from the floor to the
ceiling, exclusive of windows and doors.
Fraternal organization means a nonprofit organization that:
(1) Is chartered by or affiliated with a national organization in existence since 1953;
(2) Is tax exempt under section 501(c)(8), (10), or (19) of the Internal Revenue Code;
(3) Operates under a lodge system with a representative form of government; and
(4) Is organized for the exclusive benefit of the members of the organization and their
dependents.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/283
Operator means the owner or person in charge of a public place or workplace, including an employer.
Public place means an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including
but not limited to, banks, bars, educational facilities, health care facilities, laundromats, reception areas,
restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores,
shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a public place, unless it
is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility.
Retail tobacco store means a retail store used primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in
which the sale of other nontobacco products is incidental.
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant, or other
combustible substance in any manner or in any form.
Workplace means an enclosed area in which employees work or have access during the course of their
employment.
(1969 Code, sec. 14-81; Resolution 812, sec. 1, adopted 2/28/06)
Sec. 28-91. Smoking prohibited.
(a) A person commits an offense if the person smokes in a public place.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person smokes in an enclosed area in a building or facility owned,
leased, or operated by the city.
(c) A person commits an offense if the person smokes in an enclosed area of a workplace.
(d) A person commits an offense if the person smokes within 15 feet from an entrance or openable window of
an enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited.
(e) The owner or operator of a public place commits an offense if the person fails to take necessary steps to
prevent or stop another person from smoking in an enclosed area in a public place.
(1969 Code, sec. 14-82; Resolution 812, sec. 2, adopted 2/28/06)
Sec. 28-92. Exceptions.
This article does not apply to:
(1) A dwelling unit that is used exclusively for a residential use as described in zoning appendix A;
(2) A hotel or motel room designated as a smoking room and rented to a person;
(3) A retail tobacco store;
(4) A private or semiprivate room in a nursing home or longterm care facility that is occupied by
individuals who smoke and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is
permitted;
(5) An outdoor area of a workplace that is not in the area described by subsection 28-91(d);
(6) A facility operated by a fraternal organization for a charitable, benevolent, or educational
function if the premises are controlled by the organization.
(1969 Code, sec. 14-83; Resolution 812, sec. 3, adopted 2/28/06)
Sec. 28-93. Designation of smoking rooms by hotel and motel restricted.
A hotel and motel may not designate more than 50 percent of its rooms that are rented for temporary overnight
occupation by the public as smoking rooms. (1969 Code, sec. 14-84; Resolution 812, sec. 4, adopted 2/28/06)
Sec. 28-94. Employer responsibilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/283
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, an employer shall provide a smoke-free workplace
for employees.
(b) An employer shall notify each employee and applicant for employment that smoking in the workplace is
prohibited.
(1969 Code, sec. 14-85; Resolution 812, sec. 5, adopted 2/28/06)
Sec. 28-95. Voluntary designation of a nonsmoking facility.
Nothing in this article implies that the operator of an enclosed or outdoor public place is prohibited from
designating the entire facility as nonsmoking. (1969 Code, sec. 14-86; Resolution 812, sec. 6, adopted 2/28/06)
Sec. 28-96. Retaliation prohibited.
A person commits an offense if the person discharges, refuses to hire, or retaliates against a customer,
employee, or applicant for employment because the customer, employee, or applicant for employment reports a
violation of this article. (1969 Code, sec. 14-87; Resolution 812, sec. 7, adopted 2/28/06)
Sec. 28-97. Enforcement.
(a) This section is cumulative of other laws providing enforcement authority.
(b) A person may report a violation of this article to the director of the community development division.
(c) The city manager may authorize a city employee conducting an inspection under any provision of this
Code to also inspect for compliance with this article and issue a citation for a violation of this article.
(d) The director of the community development division may enforce this article and may seek injunctive
relief.
(1969 Code, sec. 14-88; Resolution 812, sec. 8, adopted 2/28/06)
Sec. 28-98. Violation and penalty.
(a) A person who violates the provisions of this article commits a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine
as provided in section 1-6. A culpable mental state is not required for a violation of this article, and need not be
proved.
(b) The city manager may suspend or revoke a permit or license issued to the operator of a public place or
workplace where a violation of this article occurs.
(c) Each day an offense occurs is a separate violation.
(1969 Code, sec. 14-89; Resolution 812, sec. 9, adopted 2/28/06)
CHAPTER 30
HOUSING
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 30-1. Residential code adopted; penalty.
(a) There is hereby adopted a residential code known as the International Residential Code, with the most
current published edition. The effective date of said technical code shall be one year after publication. Such
code is published in book form and is to be maintained in the community development director's office and is
referred to, incorporated herein, and made a part hereof for all purposes. Provided, however, that in the event
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/283
any conflict may arise between the provisions of the code adopted by the provisions of this article and any other
applicable provisions of this Code, state law, or city ordinance, rule or regulation, the provisions of this Code,
state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation shall prevail and be controlling.
(b) Any person violating the provisions of said building code shall be punished as provided in section 1-6.
(1969 Code, sec. 15-1; Ordinance 1146, sec. 1, adopted 3/10/87; Ordinance 1231, sec. 1, adopted 4/8/92;
Ordinance 1255, sec. 1, adopted 7/13/94; Ordinance 1375, sec. 1, adopted 8/28/02)
State Law reference- International Residential Code applicable statewide, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code
sec. 214.212.
Secs. 30-2—30-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. FAIR HOUSING POLICY*
Sec. 30-21. Declaration of policy.
(a) It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to bring about through fair, orderly, and lawful procedures,
the opportunity of each person to obtain housing without regard to race, color, creed, religion, sex, national
origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age.
(b) It is further declared that such policy is established upon a recognition of the inalienable rights of each
individual to obtain housing without regard to race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental
handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age; and further that the denial of such rights through considerations
based on race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status,
parenthood, or age is detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes
and unjust denial or deprivation of such inalienable rights which is within the power and the proper responsibility
of government to prevent.
(1969 Code, sec. 15-21; Ordinance 1298, sec. I, adopted 11/19/96)
Sec. 30-22. Definitions.
As used in this article the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this section unless the context requires otherwise.
Age means the calendar age of an individual 18 years of age or over.
City secretary means the city secretary or authorized personnel.
Creed means any set of principles, rules, opinions, and precepts formally expressed and seriously adhered to
or maintained by a person.
Discriminatory housing practice means an act which is unlawful under this article.
Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for
occupancy as, a residence by one or more persons and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for
the construction or location thereof of any such building, structure, or portion thereof.
Family means a single individual or a group of individuals living together under one common roof.
Major life activities means functions such as, but not limited to, caring for one's self, performing manual tasks,
walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, and working.
Marital status means an individual's status as a single, married, divorced, widowed, or separated person.
Parenthood means a person's status as a parent or legal guardian of a child under the age of 18 years.
Person means one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal
representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees,
trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/283
Physical or mental handicap means any physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more
major life activities.
Physical or mental impairment includes:
(1) Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement or anatomical loss affecting
one or more of the following body systems: neurological, musculoskeletal, special sense organs,
respiratory (including speech organs), cardiovascular, reproductive, digestive, genitourinary, hemic
and lymphatic, skin, and endocrine; or
(2) Any mental or psychological disorder, such as, mental retardation, organic brain syndrome,
emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities.
Senior adult means a person 55 years of age or older.
To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy
premises not owned by the occupant.
(1969 Code, sec. 15-22; Ordinance 1298, sec. II, adopted 11/19/96)
Sec. 30-23. Interpretation and effect.
This article shall in no way be interpreted as creating a judicial right or remedy which is the same or
substantially equivalent to the remedies provided under title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, or
the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 USC 1691). All aggrieved parties shall retain the rights granted to
them to title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal Equal Opportunity Act. In
construing this article, it is the intent of the city commission that the courts shall be guided by the federal court
interpretations of title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity
Act, where appropriate. (1969 Code, sec. 15-23; Ordinance 1298, sec. III, adopted 11/19/96)
Sec. 30-24. Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing.
Except as exempted by section 30-28, it shall be unlawful:
(1) To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer or to refuse to negotiate for the
sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race,
color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood or
age.
(2) To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of a sale or rental of a
dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith because of race, color,
creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age.
(3) To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement of
advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation
of or discrimination based on race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental
handicap, marital status, parenthood, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or
discrimination.
(4) To represent to any person because of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical
or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age that any dwelling is not available for
inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available.
(5) To induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations
regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color,
creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age.
(1969 Code, sec. 15-24; Ordinance 1298, sec. IV, adopted 11/19/96)
Sec. 30-25. Discrimination in real estate financing.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/283
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company, or other person whose
business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans to deny a loan or other
financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving,
repairing, or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate,
duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of the race, color,
creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age of such
person or such persons associated therewith or because of the race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin,
physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age of the present or prospective owners, lessees,
tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings for which such loan or other financial assistance is to be
made or given. (1969 Code, sec. 15-25; Ordinance 1298, sec. V, adopted 11/19/96)
Sec. 30-26. Discrimination in providing brokerage service.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deny another person access to membership in, or participation in any
multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling and renting dwellings or to discriminate against another person in the terms or conditions of
such access, membership, or participation, on account of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin,
physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age. (1969 Code, sec. 15-26; Ordinance 1298, sec.
VI, adopted 11/19/96)
Sec. 30-27. Unlawful intimidation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage, or otherwise penalize any individual,
group, or business because such individual, group, or business has complied with the provisions of this article
or has exercised in good faith rights under this article, or has enjoyed the benefits of this article, or because
such individual, group, or business has made a charge in good faith, testified in good faith or assisted in good
faith in any manner in any investigation, or in any proceeding hereunder or has made any report to the city
secretary. (1969 Code, sec. 15-27; Ordinance 1298, sec. VII, adopted 11/19/96)
Sec. 30-28. Exemptions and exclusions.
(a) Nothing in this article shall apply to:
(1) Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that:
(A) Such private individual owner does not own more than three single-family houses at any
one time;
(B) If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of the sale or was not the most
recent resident of such house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall
apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period;
(C) Such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned
or reserved on such person's behalf, under any express voluntary agreement, title to or any
right to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such singlefamily
houses at any one time;
(D) The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities
or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities
or services of any person in the business of selling or renting, dwellings, or of any employee or
agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; and
(E) The sale or rental is made without the publication, posting or mailing of any
advertisement or written notice in violation of this article, but nothing in this provision shall
prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such
professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title.
(2) Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by
no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and
occupies one of such living quarters as his residence.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/283
(b) For the purposes of subsection (a) of this section, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of
selling or renting dwellings if:
(1) He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as a principal in three or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein;
(2) He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as an agent, other than in the sale of his
own personal residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or
more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
(3) He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or
more families.
(c) Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society or a nonprofit institution
or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association, or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for
other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons,
unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin,
physical or mental handicap, marital status, parenthood, or age.
(d) Nothing in this article shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as and incident to its
primary purpose provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting
the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members, or from giving preference to its members.
(e) Nothing in this article shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in which
rooms are leased, subleased, or rented only to persons of the same sex, when such housing accommodation
contains common lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities available for the use of all persons occupying such
housing accommodation.
(f) Nothing in this article shall prohibit the sale, rental, lease or occupancy of any dwelling designed and
operated for senior adults and their spouses, unless the sale, rental, lease, or occupancy is further restricted on
account of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, and marital status.
(g) Nothing in this article shall bar a person who owns, operates or controls rental dwellings whether located
on the same property or on one or more contiguous parcels of property, from reserving any grouping of
dwellings for the rental or lease to tenants with a minor child or children; provided, however, in the event that
said reserved area is completely leased or rented, the person owning, operating or controlling said rental
dwelling may not refuse to rent or lease any other available dwelling to the prospective tenant on the basis of
the tenant's status as parent or any other of the protected classifications set forth in this article.
(1969 Code, sec. 15-28; Ordinance 1298, sec. VIII, adopted 11/19/96)
Sec. 30-29. Violations.
No person shall violate any provision of this article or knowingly obstruct or prevent compliance with this article.
(1969 Code, sec. 15-29; Ordinance 1298, sec. IX, adopted 11/19/96)
Sec. 30-30. Enforcement.
The city secretary shall have the responsibility of administering and implementing this article. The city secretary
may delegate the authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other designated city employees. (1969
Code, sec. 15-30; Ordinance 1298, sec. X, adopted 11/19/96)
Sec. 30-31. Complaints.
(a) Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he
will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereinafter referred to as
the “charging party”) may file a complaint with the city secretary. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall
identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice and
shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. The city
secretary shall prepare complaint forms and furnish them without charge to any person, upon request.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/283
(b) The city secretary shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney
General and the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of title VIII, Fair
Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and shall treat such complaints hereunder in the same manner as
complaints filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section.
(c) All complaints and answers shall be filed within 180 days following the occurrence of an alleged
discriminatory housing practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the city secretary shall provide
notice of the complaint to the person named therein (hereinafter referred to as the “respondent”) who allegedly
committed or were threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory housing practice. The respondent may file
an answer to the complaint within 15 days of receipt of the written complaint.
(d) All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer
oaths.
(e) If at any time the city secretary shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause
to believe that any person has committed a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint has been
filed or is about to be filed, the city secretary may prepare and file a complaint upon his own name and such
complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved.
(1969 Code, sec. 15-31; Ordinance 1298, sec. XI, adopted 11/19/96)
Sec. 30-32. Investigation and conciliation.
(a) Upon the filing of a complaint as herein provided, the city secretary shall cause to be made a prompt and
full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint; provided, however, that before any charge becomes
accepted for investigative purposes, the city secretary or an investigator shall have personally reviewed with the
charging party the allegations contained therein and shall have determined that said charge comes within the
provisions of this article. In the event such review results in the determination that a particular charge does not
come within the provisions of this article, the charging party shall be given a clear and concise explanation of
the reasons why it does not.
(b) If the city secretary determines that there is not probable cause to believe that a particular alleged
discriminatory housing practice has been committed, the city secretary shall take no further action with respect
to that alleged offense.
(c) During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of complaint, the city
secretary shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur,
attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory
housing practice and to obtain adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with provisions of this article.
Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public by the city secretary, the
city commission, the investigator, the conciliator, the charging party, or the respondent, or be used as evidence
in a subsequent proceeding without the written consent of all persons concerned.
(d) Upon completion of an investigation where the city secretary has made a determination that a
discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred, if the city secretary is unable to secure from the
respondent an acceptable conciliation agreement, then the city commission must, upon a majority vote, refer
the case to the city attorney for prosecution in the municipal court or to other agencies as appropriate. With
such recommendation of the city secretary and the referral of the city commission, the city secretary shall refer
his entire file to the city attorney. The city attorney shall, after such referral, make a determination as to whether
to proceed with prosecution of such complaint in municipal court.
(1969 Code, sec. 15-32; Ordinance 1298, sec. XII, adopted 11/19/96)
Sec. 30-33. Penalty.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction shall
be punished as provided in section 1-6. The violation thereof shall be deemed a separate offense, and shall be
punished accordingly. Provided, however, compliance may be further sought through injunctive relief in the
district court. (1969 Code, sec. 15-33; Ordinance 1298, sec. XIII, adopted 11/19/96)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/283
CHAPTER 32
JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
Sec. 32-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Junk means:
(1) Scrap iron, scrap tin, scrap brass, scrap copper, scrap lead, scrap zinc, and all other scrap
metals and their alloys;
(2) Bones, rags, cloth, rubber, rope, tinfoil, used bottles, old cotton; secondhand plumbing fixtures,
appliances, fittings, pipes and supplies;
(3) Used or secondhand electrical fixtures, fittings, appliances and supplies; used or secondhand
gas fixtures, fittings, pipes, appliances and supplies;
(4) Used or secondhand water heaters, fixtures, fittings, appliances and supplies;
(5) Used or secondhand lawn mowers, hose fittings, and supplies and harness;
(6) Used or secondhand automobiles purchased from the general public for the purpose of being
dismantled, and all parts and accessories; and
(7) Used or secondhand automobile tires and tubes.
Junk dealer or dealer in junk, junk shop means any person buying, selling, or receiving for storage or as a
pledge for the payment of monies loaned, or in any way acquiring or dealing in junk, but shall not include
licensed pawnbrokers, and shall not include filling stations, the operators of which may buy, sell, or exchange
casings and inner tubes in the course of business.
(1969 Code, sec. 16-1; Ordinance 508, sec. 2, adopted 6/8/37)
Sec. 32-2. Records and reports-Register required; entries; property holding period.
Each keeper of a junk shop, dealer in junk, and dealer in secondhand goods, as that term is commonly
understood, shall keep at his place of business a register in which he shall enter in writing a minute description
of all property taken, purchased or received by him, together with the time, and name and place of residence,
(giving a street number if within the city) of the person from whom he purchased said property, together with the
signature of the seller, which register shall be kept clean and legible. He shall make such entry within one hour
of the receipt or purchase of such property. Said dealer shall not dispose of goods purchased within 72 hours
after purchase so that such property may be inspected by the police. Every entry shall be made in ink and shall
not in any manner be obliterated or erased. (1969 Code, sec. 16-2; Ordinance 508, sec. 3, adopted 6/8/37)
Sec. 32-3. Same-Reports to police.
Every junk dealer, keeper of a junk shop, and dealer in secondhand goods shall make out and deliver to the
chief of police, every day he is open for business or does any such business before the hour of 12:00 noon, a
legible and correct copy from said register of personal property purchased or otherwise received during the
preceding day, together with the time received or purchased, and a description of the person from whom the
same was purchased; provided no junk dealer, keeper of a junk shop, or dealer in secondhand goods shall be
required to furnish such description of household goods purchased from persons at their residences or of any
property purchased from persons having an established business in the city, or goods sold at public sale, but
such goods must be accompanied by bills of sale or other evidence of open and legitimate purchase and must
be shown to any member of the police department when demanded. (1969 Code, sec. 16-3; Ordinance 508,
sec. 3, adopted 6/8/37)
Sec. 32-4. Same-Exhibiting register; inspection of articles.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/283
The register so kept by junk dealers, keepers of junk shops, and dealers in secondhand goods shall at all times
during business hours be kept open to inspection of the chief of police, and sheriff of this county, or the deputy
of either, or any officer of the police force, the city attorney, the prosecuting attorney of the county, and anyone
authorized in writing for that purpose by the chief of police. The register and any article purchased or received
shall be exhibited by the junk dealer, keeper of a junk shop, or dealer in secondhand goods upon request of
such person, for inspection. (1969 Code, sec. 16-4; Ordinance 508, sec. 4, adopted 6/8/37)
Sec. 32-5. Transactions with minors.
No junk dealer, keeper of a junk shop, or dealer in secondhand goods shall purchase or receive in pledge or on
deposit for any purpose any article from any minor or which may be owned or claimed by or in possession or
control of any minor, unless the parent or guardian of such minor shall state in writing that such transaction took
place with the parent's or guardian's full knowledge and consent, which written statement shall be signed by
such parent or guardian shall have thereon the address and telephone number, if any, of such parent or
guardian, and be delivered to the chief of police with the report of such purchase or deposit. (1969 Code, sec.
16-5; Ordinance 508, sec. 5, adopted 6/8/37)
Sec. 32-6. Prohibited hours of purchase.
No junk dealer, keeper of a junk shop, or dealer in secondhand goods shall purchase, take, or receive from any
person any article of property between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. (1969 Code, sec. 16-6; Ordinance
508, sec. 6, adopted 6/8/37)
CHAPTER 34
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 34-1—34-18. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR MOBILE HOME PARKS
Sec. 34-19. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, certain terms, words and phrases shall have the meaning hereinafter ascribed
thereto:
Agent means any person authorized by the licensee of a mobile home park to operate or maintain such park
under the provisions of this article.
Building official means the legally designated inspection authority of the city, or his authorized representative.
Certificate of occupancy means a certificate issued by the building official for the use of a building, structure,
and/or land, when it is determined by him that the building, structure, and/or land complies with the provisions
of all applicable city codes, ordinances, and regulations.
City health officer means the legally designated head of the city health department, or his authorized
representative
City official means the legally designated head of a city department, or his authorized representative when
acting in an official capacity.
Common access route (same as internal street) means a private way which affords the principal means of
access to individual mobile home lots or auxiliary buildings.
Driveway means a minor entranceway off the common access route within the park into an off-street parking
area serving one or more mobile homes.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/283
Fence. A fence is to be of such materials that it is aesthetic to the adjacent property.
Fire chief means the legally designated chief of the city fire department, or his authorized representative.
License means a written license issued by the city permitting a person to operate and maintain a mobile home
park under the provisions of this article and regulations issued hereunder.
Licensee means any person licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home park under the provisions of this
article.
Mobile home means a movable or portable dwelling constructed to be towed by a motor vehicle on its own
chassis over state roads and highways under special permit, connected to utilities, and designed without a
permanent foundation, for year round living. It may consist of one or more units that can be telescoped when
towed and expanded later for additional capacity, or of two or more units separately towable but designed to be
joined into one integral unit.
Mobile home park means a unified development of mobile home spaces arranged on a tract of land under a
single person's ownership and meeting all requirements of this article.
Parking space, off-street, means a minimum space nine feet in width by 18 feet in length located within the
boundary of a mobile home space, or in a common parking and storage area having unobstructed access to an
internal street.
Permit means a written permit or certification issued by the building official permitting the construction,
alteration, or extension of a mobile home park under the provisions of this article and regulations issued
hereunder.
Plot plan (same as site plan) means a graphic representation, drawn to scale, in a horizontal plane, delineating
the outlines of the land included in the plan and all proposed use locations, accurately dimensioned, the
dimensions also indicating the relation of each use to that adjoining and to the boundary of the property.
Police chief means the legally designated chief of the police department of the city, or his authorized
representative.
Replacement means the act of moving one mobile home from its existing stand and replacing it with another
mobile home.
Service building means a structure housing toilets, lavatories, and such other facilities may be required by this
article.
Sewer connection means the connection consisting of all pipes, fittings, and appurtenances from the drain
outlet of a mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding sewer service riser pipe of the sewage system serving
the mobile home park.
Sewer service riser pipe means that portion of a sewer service which extends vertically to the ground elevation
and terminates at a mobile home space.
Space means a plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home,
together with such open space as required by this article. The term “space” also includes the terms “lot,”
“stand,” and “site.”
Tax assessor-collector means the legally designated tax assessor-collector of the city, or his authorized
representative.
Water connection means the connection consisting of all pipes, fittings, and appurtenances from the water riser
pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within a mobile home.
Water riser pipe means that portion of the private water service system serving a mobile home park which
extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at a mobile home space.
Zoning ordinance means the zoning ordinance of the city, as set forth in appendix A to this Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/283
(1969 Code, sec. 17 ½ -11; Ordinance 1001, sec. 1, adopted 6/10/82)
Sec. 34-20. Penal provisions.
Any person violating any provision of this article within the corporate limits of the city shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in section 1-6. Each day that such violation
continues shall be a separate offense. Prosecution or conviction under this provision shall never be a bar to any
other remedy or relief for violations of this article. (1969 Code, sec. 17 ½ -17; Ordinance 1001, sec. 9, adopted
6/10/82)
Sec. 34-21. Permits.
(a) For construction or occupancy of permanent residential structure. No permit shall be issued for the
construction or occupancy of a permanent residential structure in any mobile home park, with the following
exceptions:
(1) One existing residential structure may be retained or one new residential structure may be
constructed for the occupancy of the owner or operator of the park.
(2) An existing residence may be converted to a clubhouse, community center or service building
for use by the residents of the mobile home park.
(b) Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any mobile home park
within the limits of the city, unless he holds a valid permit issued by the building official in the name of such
person for the specific construction, alteration or extension proposed.
(c) Application requirements.
(1) All applications for permits shall be made upon standard forms provided by the building official
and shall contain the following:
(A) Name and address of the applicant.
(B) Location and legal description of the mobile home park.
To this application shall be attached two copies of a site plan, at a minimum scale of one inch
equals 200 feet for sites of 30 acres or more, and at a minimum scale of one inch equals 100 feet for
sites under 30 acres. The site plan shall include all data required under this article.
(2) One print of the plot plan is to be circulated by the building official to each of the city
departments designated in this article for approval prior to issuing the permit. This plot plan does not
replace or supersede the subdivision plat of the property required by state law to be recorded in the
county records of the county in which the property is located after review and approval of the city
planning commission.
(d) Fee. All applications to the building official shall be accompanied by a fee of $1.00.
(e) Issuance. When upon review of the application, the building official is satisfied that the proposed plan
meets the requirements of this article, a permit shall be issued.
(f) Denial; hearing. Any person whose application for a permit under this article has been denied may request
a hearing on the matter under the procedure provided by this article.
(1969 Code, sec. 17 ½ -12; Ordinance 1001, sec. 2, adopted 6/10/82)
Sec. 34-22. Licenses.
(a) Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any mobile home park within the limits of the city
unless he holds a valid license issued annually by the city in the name of such person for the specific park. All
applications for licenses shall be made in writing on forms furnished by him, to the city, who shall issue a
license upon compliance by the applicant with provisions of this article. The city shall not issue a license unless
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/283
the applicant is a valid holder of a certificate of occupancy. At any time a certificate of occupancy is revoked,
the license is automatically void.
(b) Application.
(1) Application for the original license shall be in writing signed by the applicant, accompanied by
an affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the application and by the deposit of the license fee
hereinafter provided, and shall contain:
(A) The name and address of the applicant.
(B) The location and legal description of the park.
(C) A site plan of the park showing all mobile home spaces, structures, roads, walkways,
and other service facilities.
(2) Before the original license is issued, the city shall obtain the approval of the fire chief on the
firefighting appliances, water supply, accessways, or other applicable conditions as meeting fire
safety requirements.
(c) Hearing granted applicants. Any person whose application for a license under this article has been denied
may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the health authority under the procedure
provided by this article.
(d) Application for license renewal. Application for renewal of a license shall be made in writing by the
licensee on forms furnished by the city on or before January 1 of each year. Such application shall contain any
change in the information occurring after the original license was issued or the latest renewal granted. Before
the renewal license is issued, the city shall obtain the approval of the fire chief on the firefighting appliances,
water supply, accessways, or other applicable conditions as meeting fire safety requirements.
(e) Fee. All license applications shall be accompanied by a fee of $25.00, to be renewed annually.
(f) Transfer of license. Every person holding a license shall give notice in writing to the city within ten days
after having sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of interest in or control of any mobile home
park. Application for transfer of license shall be made within ten calendar days after notification of change
covered in this subsection. Within 15 calendar days thereafter, the city shall act on the application for license
transfer and it shall be approved if the park is in compliance with the provisions of this article.
(g) Transfer of license fee. All applications for license transfer shall be accompanied by a fee of $10.00.
(h) Violations; notice; suspension. Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, a city official, after
consultation with the city official he deems competent to judge, finds that conditions or practices exist which are
in violation of any provision of this article applicable to such park, he shall give notice in writing in accordance
with this article to the licensee or his agent that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a
reasonable period of time specified in such notice, the license shall be suspended. At the end of such period of
time, the city official shall reinspect such park, requesting assistance from other city departments as may be
required, and if such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he shall suspend the license and give
notice in writing of such suspension to the licensee or his agent. Upon receipt of notice of such suspension,
licensee shall cease operation of such park, except as provided in this article.
(i) Existing mobile home parks:
(1) After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, a temporary license,
upon written request therefor, shall be issued by the inspecting officer for every mobile home park in
existence upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived without being
subject to the provisions of this article, except such of the provisions as are made expressly
applicable to the permittee.
(2) The term of the temporary license shall be for 90 days and shall be extended, upon written
request, for an additional 90 days, if:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/283
(A) The licensee shall have filed application for a license in conformity with subsection (b) of
this section within 90 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is
derived;
(B) The licensee shall have diligently endeavored to make the existing mobile home park
conform fully to the plans and specifications submitted with application; and
(C) Failure to make the existing mobile home park conform fully to such plans and
specifications shall have been due to causes beyond the control of the licensee.
(3) All expansion of existing mobile home parks shall conform to this article.
(4) Existing mobile home parks shall conform to all of sections 34-23 and 34-25.
(5) After complying with the above, a license will be issued for the fee of $25.00, to be renewed
annually.
(1969 Code, sec. 17 ½ -13; Ordinance 1001, sec. 3, adopted 6/10/82)
Sec. 34-23. Inspections.
(a) Required. The building official, the city health officer, the fire chief, the police chief, and the tax assessorcollector
are hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to determine
compliance with this article.
(b) Entry on premises. The building official, the city health officer, the fire chief, the police chief, and the tax
assessor-collector shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for the
purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this article.
(c) Inspection of register. The building official, the city health officer, the fire chief, the police chief, and the tax
assessor-collector shall have the power and authority in discharging their official duties to inspect the register
containing a record of all residents of the mobile home park.
(d) Duty of occupants. It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile home park to give the licensee, his
agent, or authorized employee, access to any part of such park at reasonable times for the purpose of making
such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with this article.
(1969 Code, sec. 17 ½ -14; Ordinance 1001, sec. 4, adopted 6/10/82)
Sec. 34-24. Notices, hearings and orders.
(a) Notice of violations; requirements of notice. Whenever it is determined that there are grounds to believe
that there has been a violation of any provision of this article, the city shall give notice of such alleged violation
to the licensee or agent, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of the act is requires;
(4) Be served upon the licensee or his agent; provided that such notice or order shall be deemed
to have been properly served upon such licensee or agent when a copy thereof has been sent by
mail to his last-known address, or when he has been served with such notice by any method
authorized or required by the laws of this state; and
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken will effect compliance with the provisions
of this article.
(b) Appeal from denial of permit by the building official. Any person affected by the refusal of the building
official to issue a permit under the provisions of this article as set out in this article, may request and shall be
granted a hearing on the matter before the city commission; provided that such person shall file within 15 days
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/283
after the day the permit was refused, in the office of the building official, a written petition requesting such
hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor. Upon receipt of such petition, the building
official shall forward it to the city secretary who shall request the city commission to set a time and place for
such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and to show why such refusal should be modified or withdrawn.
(c) Appeal from notice issued by the city. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of any provision of this article applicable to such park by the city, may request
and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the city commission; provided that such person shall file
within 15 days after the day the notice was served, in the office of the city secretary, a written petition
requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor. The filing of the request for
a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and of the suspension, except in the case of an order issued
under subsection (e) of this section. Upon receipt of such petition, the city shall forward such petition to the city
secretary who shall request the city commission to set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the
petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to
show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn.
(d) Hearing; order. After such hearing, the city shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying or
withdrawing the refusal, which order shall be served as provided in subsection (a)(4) of this section. Upon
failure to comply with an order by the city sustaining or modifying a decision thereof, the occupancy permit and
the license of the park affected by the order shall be revoked.
(e) Order without notice. Whenever a city official finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate
action to protect the public health or safety, he may without notice or hearing issue an order reciting the
existence of such an emergency and requiring that action be taken as he may deem necessary to meet the
emergency. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, such order shall be effective immediately. Any
person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon written petition to the
city shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. The provisions of subsection (d) of this section shall be
applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter.
(1969 Code, sec. 17 ½ -15; Ordinance 1001, sec. 5, adopted 6/10/82)
Sec. 34-25. General regulations for mobile home parks.
(a) Site plan. The site plan shall be filed as required by this article and shall show the following:
(1) The area and dimensions of the tract of land, with identification of location and boundaries;
(2) The number, location and size of all mobile home spaces;
(3) The location, width, and specifications of driveways, roadways, and walkways;
(4) The location and specifications of water and sewer lines and riser pipes;
(5) The location and details of lighting, electrical and gas systems;
(6) The location and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be constructed within the park;
(7) Existing and proposed topography of the mobile home park;
(8) The location of fire mains, including the size, the hydrants, and any other equipment which
may be provided; and
(9) Such other information as municipal reviewing officials may reasonably require.
A print of the site or plot plan shall be circulated to the following city departments by the building
official, and approval obtained from them prior to the issuance of a permit: the city secretary and city
manager.
(b) Site requirements. Any mobile home park constructed after the adoption of the ordinance from which this
article is derived, and for any extension or addition to an existing mobile home park in the city, shall be done in
compliance with the following site requirements:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/283
(1) Location. A mobile home park shall be located only on sites having a zoning classification as
defined in the zoning ordinance of the city.
(2) Basic mobile home minimum site requirements.
(A) Space requirements. Each mobile home space shall provide a minimum area of 4,000
square feet; however, no mobile home space shall have dimensions less than 40 feet on the
narrow dimension nor 100 feet on the long dimension, for a single home unit.
(B) Open space requirement.
(i) The minimum front yard setback shall be ten feet from the nearest corner of the
mobile home to the front line of the mobile home space.
(ii) No mobile home shall be closer than ten feet to any property line nor closer than 25
feet to the front property line adjoining a public street.
(iii) For other structures on each space, the minimum front yard setback shall be at
least ten feet.
(iv) The minimum distance between mobile homes as any point shall be 20 feet.
(C) Height regulations.
(i) The height limit for any structure intended for occupancy in the mobile home park
shall be 35 feet.
(ii) The average height of the mobile home frame above the ground elevation,
measured at 90 degrees to the frame, shall not exceed three feet.
(D) Streets, driveways and parking areas. Streets, driveways, and parking areas in all parts
of every mobile home park shall be paved or covered with an all-weather surface. Other
ground surfaces shall be protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil
erosion and of eliminating dust. All internal streets shall be constructed to specifications and
shall be maintained by the owner or agent free of cracks, holes, and other hazards.
(E) Drainage. The ground surface in all parts of a park shall be graded and equipped to
drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner.
(F) Design and location of storage facilities. Unless provided in current mobile home models,
storage facilities with a minimum capacity of 200 cubic feet per mobile home space may be
provided on the space, or in compounds located within 100 feet of each space. Where
provided, storage facilities shall be designed in a manner that will enhance the appearance of
the park and shall be faced with masonry, porcelainized steel, baked enamel steel or other
material equal in fire resistance, durability and appearance.
(G) Mobile home stands. The area of the mobile home stand or space shall provide
adequate support and drainage for placement of the mobile home.
(c) Access and traffic circulation and parking.
(1) No-parking area signs shall be privately owned, built, and maintained. Streets shall be
designed for safe and convenient access to all spaces and to facilities for common use of park
residents. Internal streets shall be kept open and free of obstruction in order that police and fire
vehicles may have access to any area of the mobile home park. The police department shall be
authorized to issue citations for the violation of the provisions hereof and to remove and impound
offending vehicles.
(2) On all sections of internal streets on which parking is prohibited under this article, the owner or
agent shall erect metal signs prohibiting parking. The sign type, size, height and location shall be
approved by the city manager prior to installation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/283
(3) Internal streets shall permit unobstructed access to within at least 200 feet of any portion of
each mobile home.
(4) Within each mobile home park, all streets shall be named and mobile homes numbered to
conform with block numbers on adjacent public streets. These signs and numbers shall be of
standard size and placement to facilitate location by emergency vehicles. The city shall provide all
street signs.
(5) Interior streets shall intersect adjoining public streets at approximately 90 degrees and at
locations which will eliminate or minimize interference with traffic on those public streets.
(d) Street lighting.
(1) Street lighting within the mobile home park shall be provided along all internal streets.
(2) Light standards shall have a height and spacing to ensure an average illumination level of not
less than 0.2 footcandles shall be maintained.
(e) Fire safety standards.
(1) Storage and handling of liquefied petroleum gases. In parks in which liquefied petroleum
gases are stored and dispensed, the handling and storage shall comply with requirements of the city
plumbing code.
(2) Storage and handling of flammable liquids. In parks in which gasoline, fuel oil, or other
flammable liquids are stored and/or dispensed, their handling and storage shall comply with the city
fire code.
(3) Access to mobile homes for firefighting. Approaches to all mobile homes shall be kept clear for
firefighting.
(4) Firefighting instruction. The mobile home park owner or agent shall be responsible for the
instruction of his staff in the use of the park fire protection equipment and in their specific duties in
the event of fire.
(5) Water supply facilities for fire department operations.
(A) Water supply facilities for fire department operations shall be connected to the city public
water supply system unless a special exception is granted by the city commission to use a
private water supply system. If a private supply is utilized for service to the park, the private
supply must be adequate both for domestic requirements and for firefighting requirements
established by the city. The adequacy of the water supply for firefighting requirements shall be
determined by the fire chief. If the mobile home park owner and agent utilize a private water
supply, it shall have sufficient volume and pressure that the city water supply will not be
required for firefighting.
(B) The park owner shall provide standard city fire hydrants located within 500 feet of all
mobile home spaces, measured along the driveways or streets. Fire hydrants will be subject to
periodic inspection by the city fire department. It shall be the responsibility of the park licensee
to ensure that the fire hydrants in need of immediate repair shall be repaired in a satisfactory
manner within eight hours. Nonemergency repairs shall be made within two days.
(6) Rubbish collection. The mobile home park licenses or agent shall provide an adequate system
of collection and safe disposal or rubbish, approved by the fire chief and the city health officer.
(7) Dry brush, leaves and weeds. The mobile home park licensee or agent shall be responsible for
maintaining the entire area of the park free of dry brush, leaves and weeds.
(f) Recreation area. All mobile home parks may have at least one recreation area.
(1) Extent. Recreation areas and facilities, such as playgrounds, swimming pools, and community
buildings, shall be provided which in the judgment of the park licensee or agent will meet the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/283
anticipated needs of the clientele which the park is designed to serve. Provision of separate adult
and tot-lot recreation areas is encouraged.
(2) Size of recreation area. Not less than five percent of the gross site area of the mobile home
park shall be devoted to recreational facilities, generally provided in a central location. In large parks,
this may be decentralized. Recreation areas include space for community buildings and community
use facilities such as adult recreation and child play areas, swimming pools, and drying yards, but
not including vehicle parking areas.
(3) Playground location. When playground space is provided, it shall be so designated and shall
be protected from traffic, thoroughfares, and parking areas. Such space shall be maintained in a
sanitary condition and free of safety hazards.
(g) Water supply.
(1) An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided in each mobile
home park. The connection shall be made to the public supply of water, unless a special exception is
granted by the city commission to use a private water supply system. If a private supply is utilized for
service to the park, the private supply shall be adequate both for domestic requirements and for
firefighting requirements established by the city.
(2) Water distribution system.
(A) The water supply system of the mobile home park shall be connected by pipes to all
mobile homes, buildings, and other facilities requiring water.
(B) All water piping, fixtures, and other equipment shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with state and city regulations and requirements.
(3) Individual water riser pipes and connections shall be in accordance with requirements of the
city plumbing code.
(h) Sewage disposal. From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the
following shall apply:
(1) General requirements. An adequate and safe sewer system shall be provided in all mobile
home parks for conveying and disposing of all sewage. The sewer system for a mobile home park
shall be constructed in accordance with the city plumbing code. All proposed sewage disposal
facilities shall be approved by the city health officer prior to construction. Effluents from sewage
treatment facilities shall not be discharged into any waters of the state except with prior approval of
the city health officer and the appropriate regulatory agency of the state.
(2) Sewer lines. All sewer lines shall be constructed and of materials in accordance with the city
plumbing code.
(3) Individual sewer connections.
(A) Each mobile home stand shall be provided with at least a four-inch diameter sewer riser
pipe. The sewer riser pipe shall be so located on each stand that the sewer connection to the
mobile home drain outlet will approximate a vertical position.
(B) The sewer connection to the mobile home from the sewer riser pipe and any other sewer
connections shall be in accordance with the requirements of the city plumbing code.
(C) All materials used for sewer connections shall be in accordance with the city plumbing
code.
(D) Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when no mobile home
occupies the space. Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the riser.
(i) Electrical and telephone distribution systems. From and after the effective date of the ordinance from
which this article is derived, the following shall apply:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/283
(1) Installation of electric lines. All electrical wiring in the mobile home park shall be installed in
accordance with the city electrical code.
(2) General requirements. Every park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of wiring,
fixtures, equipment and appurtenances which shall be installed and maintained in accordance with
applicable codes and regulations for such systems.
(3) Power distribution lines, individual electrical connections, and grounding. Power distribution
lines shall be located underground. Otherwise all power distribution lines, individual electrical
connections and grounding of the mobile homes and equipment shall comply with the city electrical
code.
(j) Service building and other community service facilities.
(1) Generally. The requirements of this section shall apply to service buildings, recreation
buildings, and other community service facilities, such as:
(A) Management offices, repair shops and storage areas;
(B) Sanitary facilities; and
(C) Indoor recreation areas.
(2) Structural requirements for buildings.
(A) All portions of the structure shall be properly protected from damage by ordinary uses
and by decay, corrosion, termites, and other destructive elements. Exterior portions shall be of
such materials and be so constructed and protected as to prevent entrance or penetration of
moisture and weather, and to comply with all applicable codes of the city.
(B) All rooms containing sanitary or laundry facilities shall:
(i) Have sound-resistant walls extending to the ceiling between male and female
sanitary facilities. Walls and partitions around showers, bathtubs, lavatories, and other
plumbing fixtures shall be constructed of dense, nonabsorbent, waterproof materials or
covered with moisture-resistant materials;
(ii) Have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum
aggregate gross area of windows for each required room shall be not less than ten
percent of the floor area served by them; and
(iii) Have at least one window which can be opened easily, or mechanical device which
will adequately ventilate the room.
(C) Toilets shall be located in separate compartments equipped with self-closing doors.
Shower stalls shall be of the individual type. The rooms shall be screened to prevent direct
view of the interior when the exterior doors are open.
(D) Illumination levels shall be maintained as follows:
(i) General seeing tasks: five footcandles;
(ii) Laundry room work area: 40 footcandles; and
(iii) Toilet room, in front of mirrors: 40 footcandles.
(E) Hot and cold water shall be furnished in every lavatory, sink, bathtub, shower and
laundry fixture; and cold water shall be furnished to every water closet and urinal.
(F) Service buildings shall be maintained at a comfortable temperature by heating
equipment permitted by city regulations, between October 1 and May 1.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/283
(3) Barbecue pits, fireplaces, stoves and incinerators. Cooking shelters, barbecue pits, fireplaces,
wood-burning stoves and incinerators shall be so located, constructed, maintained and used as to
minimize fire hazards and smoke nuisance both on the property on which used and on neighboring
property. No open fire shall be permitted except in facilities provided. No open fire shall be left
unattended. No fuel shall be used and no material burned which emits dense smoke or
objectionable odors.
(k) Refuse and garbage handling. The city shall ensure that containers at mobile home spaces are emptied
regularly and maintained in a usable, sanitary condition. The city will provide the containers.
(l) Insect and rodent control. Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect and rodent
harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control insects and rodents shall
conform with the requirements of the city health director.
(1) Parks shall be maintained free of accumulation of debris which may provide rodent harborage
or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other pests.
(2) The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent harborage of noxious
insects or other pests. Parks shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of noxious weeds
detrimental to health. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description.
(m) Fuel supply and storage. From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is
derived, the following shall apply:
(1) Natural gas system.
(A) Natural gas piping systems shall be installed underground and maintained in accordance
with applicable codes and regulations governing such systems.
(B) Each mobile home space provided with piped gas shall have a cap on the outlet when
not in use to prevent accidental discharge of gas, and shall be in accordance with the city
plumbing code.
(2) Liquefied petroleum gas system. Liquefied petroleum gas systems shall be installed only if an
available natural gas system is more than 1,000 feet from the mobile home park. The liquefied
petroleum gas systems shall be maintained in accordance with applicable codes of the city
governing such systems and regulations of the state railroad commission pertaining thereto.
(n) Miscellaneous requirements.
(1) Responsibilities of the park management.
(A) All responsibilities set out elsewhere in this article.
(B) The licensee or his agent shall operate the park in compliance with this article and other
applicable ordinances and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities
and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
(C) The licensee or agent shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this
article and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this article.
(D) The licensee or agent shall maintain a register of park occupancy which shall contain the
following information:
(i) Name and address of park residents.
(ii) Mobile home registration data, including make, length, width, year of manufacture,
and identification number.
(iii) Location of each mobile home within the park by space or lot number and street
address.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/283
(iv) Dates of arrival and departure.
(E) A new register shall be initiated on January 1 of each year, and the old register be retired
but shall be retained on the premises for at least three years following the retirement.
Registers shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times by an official of the city
whose duties may necessitate access to the information contained therein.
(F) The licensee or agent shall furnish to the tax assessor-collector for the city within ten
days after January 1 of each year, a list of all mobile home residents in the park on January 1.
The list shall contain the owner's name and address, the make, length, width, year of
manufacture and identification number of the mobile home; and the address or location
description of said mobile home within the park. Said lists shall be prepared using forms
provided by the assessor-collector for the city. Within ten days after July 1 of each year, the
licensee or agent shall furnish to the city tax assessor-collector the same data required in the
preceding subsection on all residents who have moved into the park after January 1; and
information on mobile homes which have moved out of the park after January 1, including the
foregoing data plus the date on which each mobile home left the park, and the destination of
the mobile home if this destination can be obtained.
(G) Wrecked, damaged, or dilapidated mobile homes shall not be kept or stored in a mobile
home park or a travel trailer park. The health officer shall determine if a mobile home is
damaged or dilapidated to a point which makes said mobile home unfit for human occupancy
on either a temporary or permanent basis. Whenever such a determination is made, the mobile
home or travel trailer shall be vacated and removed from the premises.
(2) Responsibilities of park occupants.
(A) All responsibilities are set out elsewhere in this article.
(B) The park occupant shall comply with all requirements of this article and shall maintain his
mobile home space, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary
condition.
(C) The park occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of his mobile home in its
mobile home stand and proper installation of all utility connections in accordance with the
instructions of the park management.
(D) Fire-resistant skirting with the necessary vents, screens and/or openings shall be
required on all mobile homes in mobile home parks and shall be installed within 30 days after
emplacement of the mobile homes.
(E) Skirting, porches, awnings, and other additions, when installed shall be maintained in
good repair. The use of space immediately underneath a mobile home for storage shall be
permitted only under the following conditions:
(i) The storage area shall have a base of impervious material.
(ii) Stored items shall not interfere with the underneath inspection of the mobile home.
(1969 Code, sec. 17 ½ -16; Ordinance 1001, sec. 6, adopted 6/10/82; Ordinance 1026, secs. 1—3, adopted
8/17/83)
CHAPTER 36
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS LAW ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/283
Sec. 36-1. Adoption of state penal laws.
Any act the commission of which constitutes a misdemeanor under the laws of the state is prohibited within the
city and, if committed within the city, is hereby declared to be an offense; provided, however, that the penalty
therefor shall not exceed the penalty prescribed in section 1-6 or the penalty prescribed by state law, whichever
is less. (1969 Code, sec. 18-1)
Sec. 36-2. Dangerous articles-Throwing.
Whoever shall throw any:
(1) Heavy or dangerous article;
(2) Water or slop; or
(3) Any other article or thing;
from any vehicle, or from the windows or doors of upper stories of houses, upon any street, alley, pavement, or
other public place or into or against any vehicle in this city where people pass shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(1969 Code, sec. 18-11)
Sec. 36-3. Same-Placing in windows.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place in any window above the first floor within the fire limits in the city any
object capable of inflicting an injury upon a passerby should such object fall from such window. (1969 Code,
sec. 18-12)
Sec. 36-4. Dangerous weapons-Discharge.
Any person who discharges any gun, pistol or firearm of any kind, or who discharges an air rifle or air pistol of
any description, by whatever name known, that by means of compressed air, compressed gas, springs, or any
other means is capable of discharging shots, pellets, or any solid object on or across any public square, street,
or alley of the city or within 100 yards of any business house within the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Any person who discharges any firearm of any kind, with an extreme range of over one mile, within the
boundaries of the portion of the Pease River that is within 5,000 feet of the city limits shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1969 Code, sec. 18-13; Ordinance 1602, sec. 1, adopted 10/31/12)
State Law reference- Similar state law, V.T.C.A., Penal Code sec. 42.01.
Sec. 36-5. Same-Exceptions.
The provisions of section 36-4 shall not apply when such firing is done in the necessary and lawful protection of
one's person, premises or property, unless such firing is recklessly or negligently done; nor shall such section
apply to discharging firearms in a shooting gallery or gunsmith's establishment when such shooting gallery or
gunsmith's establishment is properly fitted and arranged for the purpose so that no danger shall arise
therefrom; provided that no shotgun of any character nor pistol nor rifle of larger than .22 caliber shall be used
in a shooting gallery, nor shall the exception in the gunsmith's establishment apply, except when done in the
necessary repair of same. (1969 Code, sec. 18-14)
Sec. 36-6. Giving false information to hospital officials.
It shall be unlawful for any person when receiving inpatient or outpatient aid or services at the hospital, or
whenever otherwise being treated or being under the care or custody of any person while in the hospital, to give
an assumed or fictitious name or a false place of residence or address, or any other than his true name and the
true place of his residence or address to anyone requesting such information. (1969 Code, sec. 18-17)
Sec. 36-7. Possession, sale of prohibited fireworks; exceptions.
No person shall exhibit or have in his possession, with intent to give away or sell, or offer for sale or sell, any
squib, rocket, cracker, torpedo, grenade, or other combustible fireworks of any kind; provided this section shall
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/283
not apply to the sale of any such articles by wholesalers to each other or to the sale of any such articles at
wholesale to merchants conducting business entirely without the city, or to the sale by wholesalers for private or
public demonstration as hereinafter provided. (1969 Code, sec. 18-19; Ordinance 565, sec. 2, adopted
10/12/48)
Sec. 36-8. Authorized firings; display permit.
Nothing in section 36-7 shall be construed to apply to the sale, storage, or use of railroad track torpedoes or
other signaling devices used by railroads, nor to the sale, storage or use of flashlight composition by
photographers or dealers in photographic supplies; or prevent any public or private demonstration or display of
fireworks of any kind if conducted under proper police supervision after application is made and a permit issued
by the chief of the fire department for such demonstration. Said permit shall not be granted unless such
demonstration or display shall be of such a character and so located, discharged, or fired, as in the opinion of
the chief of the fire department after proper inspection, shall not be hazardous to property or endanger any
person. (1969 Code, sec. 18-20; Ordinance 565, sec. 3, adopted 10/12/48)
Sec. 36-9. Water towers, poles, and similar structures; climbing.
It shall be unlawful for any person, not employed to do so, to climb or ascend any water tower, telephone,
telegraph, electric light, or any other publicly or privately owned pole in the city. (1969 Code, sec. 18-32)
Sec. 36-10. Dial alarm devices using telephone line for prerecorded voice messages prohibited.
No person shall use, or cause to permit to be used, any alarm device which automatically selects a telephone
line of the police department, fire department or 9-1-1 system of the city, and then reproduces any prerecorded
voice messages to report any robbery, burglary, fire, and other emergency unless specifically authorized. (1969
Code, sec. 18-34; Ordinance 1184, sec. 1, adopted 9/12/89)
Sec. 36-11. Curfew hours for minors.
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Curfew hours means:
(1) 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. on the
following day; and
(2) 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Friday or Saturday.
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate
action. The term “emergency” includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or
any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious injury or loss of life.
Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited,
including but not limited to any place of entertainment.
Guardian means:
(1) A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
(2) A public or private agency with whom a minor had been placed by a court.
Minor means any person under 17 years of age.
Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or
conducting any establishment. The term “operator” includes the members or partners of an association or
partnership and the officers of a corporation.
Parent means a person who is:
(1) A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/283
(2) At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody
of a minor.
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes,
but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office
buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
Remain means to:
(1) Linger or stay; or
(2) Fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator,
or other person in control of the premises.
Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious
permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
(b) Offenses.
(1) A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any
establishment within the city during curfew hours.
(2) A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits or by insufficient
control allows the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within
the city during curfew hours.
(3) The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly
allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
(c) Defenses.
(1) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (B) of this section that the minor was:
(A) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
(B) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or
stop;
(C) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(D) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment
activity, without any detour or stop;
(E) Involved in an emergency;
(F) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door
neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence;
(G) Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults
and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility
for the minor; or going to or returning home from, without any detour of stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
(H) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as
the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or
(I) Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with
V.T.C.A. Family Code, Chapter 31.
(2) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b)(3) of this section that the owner, operator,
or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present
on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/283
(d) Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the
apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make
an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based
on any response and other circumstances, no defense in subsection (c) of this section is present.
(e) Expiration. This section expires on May 1, 2017, unless sooner terminated or extended by the city
commission by ordinance.
(1969 Code, sec. 18-35; Ordinance 1228, sec. 1, adopted 3/11/92; Ordinance 1368, sec. 1, adopted 4/24/01;
Ordinance 1423, sec. 1, adopted 3/23/04; Ordinance 1476, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/07; Ordinance 1499, sec. 1,
adopted 4/15/08; Ordinance 1559, sec. 1, adopted 5/24/11; Ordinance 1637, sec. 1, adopted 6/24/14)
Sec. 36-12. Graffiti crimes.
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Aerosol paint means any aerosolized paint products, including a clear or pigmented lacquer or finish.
Aerosol paint container means any aerosol container that is adapted or made for the purpose of applying
aerosol paint, spray paint or another substance capable of defacing property.
Graffiti means any marking, including inscriptions, slogans, drawings, or paintings, made with a graffiti
implement on tangible property without the effective consent of the owner of the property.
Graffiti implement means any aerosol paint, aerosol paint container, broad tip marker, gum label, paint stick or
graffiti stick, etching or engraving device, brush or any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark
on any natural or manmade surface.
Guardian means:
(1) A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor, or
(2) A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
Insufficient control means the negligent failure of a parent to exercise the duty to control his or her minor child.
Minor means an individual younger than 17 years of age.
Owner means any person with legal rights of possession to tangible property.
Parent means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person.
Person means any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal
representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity.
(b) Graffiti as nuisance.
(1) Graffiti as defined by subsection (a) is hereby declared a nuisance and is prohibited.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any natural or manmade surface of any
city-owned or non-city-owned property.
(c) Penalties. Any person who violates any part of section 36-12 of this article shall be guilty of a violation
punishable per section 1-6, General penalty; continuing violations as published in this Code.
(d) Sale of aerosol paint to minors.
(1) Violation. A person commits an offense if, with criminal negligence, he sells aerosol paint to a
minor.
(2) Exception. It is a defense to prosecution that the minor falsely represented himself to be 17
years old or older by displaying an apparently valid state driver's license or identification card issued
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/283
by the state department of public safety containing a physical description consistent with his
appearance for the purpose of inducing the person to sell him aerosol paint.
(e) Furnishing aerosol paint to minor.
(1) Violation. A person commits an offense if, with criminal negligence, he purchases aerosol paint
for or gives or makes available aerosol paint to a minor.
(2) Exception. It is a defense to prosecution that the person was the minor's adult parent,
guardian, or spouse, or an adult in whose custody the minor was committed by a court, and the
person was visibly present when the minor possessed or used the aerosol paint product.
(f) Possession of aerosol paint and graffiti implements by minors.
(1) Violations.
(A) It shall be unlawful for a minor to possess aerosol paint of any sort or character.
(B) It shall be unlawful for a minor to possess any graffiti implement while on any school
property or in areas immediately adjacent to school property upon public property or upon
private property without prior written consent of the owner or occupant of such private property.
(2) Exceptions.
(A) It is a defense to prosecution that at the time of possession the minor was accompanied
or supervised by a parent or guardian, a teacher in connection with a bona fide school project,
or a supervisor during the minor's regular employment.
(B) It is a defense to prosecution that the minor possessed the graffiti implement on the
property at which he or she lives.
(C) It is a defense to prosecution that the possession occurred as part of an organized event
sponsored or supervised by the city, a school, a church, or some other officially recognized
entity.
(g) Possession of graffiti implement on city property. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti
implement while in or upon any public facility, transportation vehicle, park, playground, swimming pool,
recreation facility, or other public building or structure owned or operated by the city or while in or within 50 feet
from an underpass bridge abutment, storm drain, or similar type of infrastructure, unless authorized by the city.
(h) Responsibility of a parent or guardian. A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly
permits or by insufficient control allows the minor to create graffiti.
(Ordinance 1584, sec. 1, adopted 1/24/12)
Secs. 36-13—36-49. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. PUBLIC SAFETY ZONE*
Sec. 36-50. Certain persons prohibited from residing near schools.
(a) This section applies only to a person who is:
(1) Required to register as a sex offender under V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure ch. 62,
because of a reportable conviction or adjudication involving a victim younger than 17 years of age;
or
(2) Civilly committed as a sexually violent predator under V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch.
841, and subject to outpatient treatment and supervision under that chapter.
(b) A person to whom this section applies may not negligently reside within 1,000 feet of a school, childcare
facility, public or private youth center, or city park, as measured in a straight line from the nearest property line
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/283
of the residence to the nearest property line of the school, childcare facility, youth center or city park.
(c) A person residing within 1,000 feet of a school, childcare facility, youth center, or city park, does not
commit a violation of this section if any of the following apply:
(1) The person established the residence prior to April 1, 2010.
(2) The person is under the age of 18 years.
(3) The person is residing at the residence at the time the school, childcare facility, youth center,
or city park is established or extended to within 1,000 feet of the residence.
(d) A person to whom this section applies commits a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine as set out in
section 1-6 of the Code of Ordinances, if a person violates this section. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 1539, sec. 2, adopted 2/25/10)
Sec. 36-51. Definitions.
Childcare facility means a facility which provides care, training, education, custody or supervision for at least
seven children who are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for
part of the 24-hour day, at least three days per week, whether or not the facility is operated for profit or charges
for the services it offers.
City park means any outdoor facility located on public property that is intended for recreation and is open to the
public.
Public or private youth center means any recreational facility or gymnasium that:
(1) Is intended primarily for use by persons who are 17 years of age or younger; and,
(2) Regularly provides athletic, civic, or cultural activities.
Reside means to live, dwell, abide, stay, or lodge for a period of more than one day.
School means a private, public, or charter elementary or secondary school.
(Ordinance 1539, sec. 2, adopted 2/25/10)
Secs. 36-52—36-99. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. ILLEGAL SMOKING MATERIAL
Sec. 36-100. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the use, possession, sale, ingestion or smoking of illegal smoking
products and ingestion devices hereinafter defined within the city limits of the City of Vernon. (Ordinance 1554,
sec. 1, adopted 10/26/10)
Sec. 36-101. Definitions.
Person shall mean individual, corporation, partnership, wholesaler, retailer or any licensed or unlicensed
business.
Illegal smoking product shall mean any substance, whether described as tobacco, herbs, incense, spice or any
blend thereof, regardless of whether the substances is marketed for the purpose of being smoked, which
includes any one or more of the following chemicals or a comparable chemical:
(1) Salviadivinorum or salvinorum A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia
divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and
every compound, manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or
extracts;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/283
(2) 2-[(1R, 3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexy]-5-(2-methylocatan-2-yl) phenol (also known as CP47, 497)
and homologues;
(3) (6aS, 10aS)-9-(hydroxmethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10,
10atetrahydrobenzo [c] chormen-1-ol) (also known as HE-211 or Dexanabinol);
(4) 1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-018);
(5) Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-073); or
(6) 1-pentyl-3(4-methoxynaphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-081).
Ingestion device shall mean equipment, a product or material that is used or intended for use in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing an illegal smoking product into the human body, including:
(1) A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen,
permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl;
(2) A water pipe;
(3) A carburetion tube or device;
(4) A smoking or carburetion mask;
(5) A chamber pipe;
(6) A carburetor pipe;
(7) An electric pipe;
(8) An air-driven pipe;
(9) A chillum;
(10) A bong; or
(11) An ice pipe or chiller.
(Ordinance 1554, sec. 1, adopted 10/26/10)
Sec. 36-102. Sale, purchase, delivery, offer, or gift.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, purchase, offer to sell, barter, give, deliver to, publicly display, deliver
to any illegal smoking product to any person. (Ordinance 1554, sec. 1, adopted 10/26/10)
Sec. 36-103. Use or possession of illegal smoking product.
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession or to use illegal smoking products within the
corporate limits of Vernon. (Ordinance 1554, sec. 1, adopted 10/26/10)
Sec. 36-104. Use or possession of ingestion device.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess with intent to use an ingestion device to inject, ingest,
inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body an illegal smoking product. (Ordinance 1554, sec. 1, adopted
10/26/10)
Sec. 36-105. Defenses to prosecution.
It shall be a defense to a violation of this section that any act described in this article is under and pursuant to
the direction or prescription of a licensed physician or dentist authorized to direct or prescribe such act.
(Ordinance 1554, sec. 1, adopted 10/26/10)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/283
CHAPTER 38
OIL AND GAS WELLS*
Sec. 38-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed
to them by this section:
City means City of Vernon, Texas.
Council means the City Council of the City of Vernon, Texas.
Director means the city manager or his assistant.
Well means any gas, oil, or injection well and includes not only new wells, but deepening of any presently
existing well to another zone, and/or the reopening of any well previously plugged in accordance with railroad
commission regulations.
(1969 Code, sec. 18 ½ -1; Ordinance 1021, sec. 3, adopted 2/8/83)
Sec. 38-2. Violation, penalty and enforcement.
(a) Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense, and upon
conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-6. The violation thereof shall be deemed a separate
offense, and shall be punished accordingly.
(b) The city manager may enforce this section and may seek injunctive relief.
(1969 Code, sec. 18 ½ -17; Ordinance 1021, sec. 20, adopted 2/8/83; Ordinance 1489, sec. 2, adopted
11/27/07)
Sec. 38-3. Area of compliances.
All wells existing within the corporate limits of the city, as of the day of adoption of the ordinance from which this
chapter is derived, are covered immediately by this chapter. All wells brought within the corporate limits of the
city by future annexation of territory to the city shall be covered by this chapter immediately upon said
annexation. (1969 Code, sec. 18 ½ -2; Ordinance 1021, sec. 3, adopted 2/8/83)
Sec. 38-4. Permit to drill required.
Before any well may be drilled within the corporate limits of the city, an application for a permit must be filed
with the director. A permit must be obtained from the council before drilling operations begin, and said permit is
nontransferable. (1969 Code, sec. 18 ½ -3; Ordinance 1021, sec. 2, adopted 2/8/83)
Sec. 38-5. Application contents.
The application for the permit required by this chapter shall set forth the following information:
(1) A copy of the drilling application and a copy of the permit which has been issued by the
railroad commission.
(2) The name and address of the operator of the lease.
(3) A description of the lease or lands involved in the drilling unit.
(4) A plat showing the location of the well, the ownership of the land, and offset operators.
(5) Satisfactory evidence of liability and property damage insurance as required by this chapter.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/283
(6) Maximum drilling depth proposed.
(7) Method of operation of the proposed well, injection or production.
(8) A plat indicating all the surface rights property owners adjacent to the proposed well.
(9) Exact drilling point shall be staked by applicant prior to inspection by the director.
(1969 Code, sec. 18 ½ -4; Ordinance 1021, sec. 4, adopted 2/8/83)
Sec. 38-6. Fee.
The fee for a permit required by this chapter shall be in the sum of $250.00 to be submitted with the application.
If drilling has not commenced within one year from the date of permit, another permit will be required under the
terms of this section. (1969 Code, sec. 18 ½ -5; Ordinance 1021, sec. 5, adopted 2/8/83)
Sec. 38-7. Refusal of permit.
No permit shall be issued by the city commission to drill any well when:
(1) The location for same shall be within the dedicated rights-of-way of any streets or alleys of the
city.
(2) The location for same shall be within any designated city park as outlined in the city master
parks plan.
(3) The location for same shall be within a 100-foot radius of any residence, commercial or public
structure, unless the application contains a signed and notarized release from the property owners
within such one hundred-foot radius.
(1969 Code, sec. 18 ½ -6; Ordinance 1021, sec. 8, adopted 2/8/83; Ordinance 1489, sec. 1, adopted 11/27/07;
Ordinance 1518, sec. 1, adopted 7/28/09)
Sec. 38-8. Permit hearing.
The director shall notify in writing the surface rights property owners adjacent to the proposed drilling site and
location of said well not less than five or more than 15 days prior to a hearing on the permit application. The
hearing will be held before the director. At the conclusion of said hearing and after making such investigation as
he may deem proper or necessary under the circumstances, the director shall make his recommendation to the
council not more than five days after said hearing has been completed, either recommending the issuance of
such permit or recommending the denial thereof. Such recommendations shall be in writing and attached
thereto the reasons for the same including any instruments or documents submitted to him at such hearing.
(1969 Code, sec. 18 ½ -7; Ordinance 1021, sec. 9, adopted 2/8/83)
Sec. 38-9. Hearing before council.
(a) After receipt of the recommendation made by the director, the council shall then schedule a hearing
thereon at the next regular meeting of the council at which time either party may be heard by the council prior to
their final decision.
(b) The decision of the council shall be final and in making its decision it shall, in addition to other
considerations, have the power and authority to refuse any permit to drill any well at any particular location
within the city where, by reason of such particular location and the character and value of the permanent
improvements already erected on or adjacent to the particular location in question, for school, hospital, park or
civic purposes, health reasons, safety reasons, or any of them the drilling of such wells on such particular
location might be injurious or be a disadvantage to the city or its inhabitants as a whole or to a substantial
number of its inhabitants or would not promote orderly growth and development of the city.
(1969 Code, sec. 18 ½ -8; Ordinance 1021, sec. 10, adopted 2/8/83)
Sec. 38-10. Issuance of permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/283
Any permit granted by the council shall be issued by directive of the council and signed by the director on a
form provided by the city. (1969 Code, sec. 18 ½ -9; Ordinance 1021, sec. 11, adopted 2/8/83)
Sec. 38-11. Bond.
A surety bond shall be filed with the city in the amount of $25,000.00 along with the permit application for the
initial well applied for by an operator after publication of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. If an
operator has a $25,000.00 bond on file, an additional bond is not needed for subsequent wells. This bond will
be in effect as long as this operator operates wells inside the city. This bond shall be in favor of the city and all
persons concerned, conditioned that the permittee will comply with the terms, conditions and requirements of
this chapter. (1969 Code, sec. 18 ½ -10; Ordinance 1021, sec. 6, adopted 2/8/83)
Sec. 38-12. Insurance.
In addition to the bond required in section 38-11, the permittee shall carry a policy of standard comprehensive
public liability insurance, including contractual liability covering bodily injuries and property damage, naming the
permittee and the city, with an insurance company authorized to do business within the state. Such policy in the
aggregate shall provide for the following minimum coverages:
(1) For bodily injuries, $100,000.00 for one person; $300,000.00 for one accident.
(2) For property damage, $100,000.00. The permittee shall file with the director along with the
application a certificate of insurance as stated herein. The insurance policy shall not be canceled
without written notice to the director at least ten days prior to the effective date of such cancellation.
In the event such insurance policy is canceled, the permit granted under such policy shall cease until
the permittee files additional insurance as provided herein.
(1969 Code, sec. 18 ½ -11; Ordinance 1021, sec. 7, adopted 2/8/83)
Sec. 38-13. Drilling operations.
In the event that any permit is granted to drill or explore for oil or gas within such corporate limits, the drilling
contractor shall proceed with the drilling operations with the highest degree of care so as not to injure adjoining
property or persons in any manner and shall keep the premises suitably fenced or guarded 24 hours a day in
such manner as to avoid trespassing on the part of anyone during the drilling and exploratory operations,
particularly children, and upon the completion of such drilling operations, all drilling mud shall be removed
outside the corporate limits of the city and the grounds around the well and the slush pits shall be immediately
cleared of all drilling mud and/or all oil, salt water or water, and shall be made to conform in appearance to the
lands in the neighborhood wherein such drilling operations are so conducted. If a slush pit is located not nearer
than a 1,000-foot radius from any residence, commercial structure, or public building, fencing requirements may
be waived by request to and approval of the council. (1969 Code, sec. 18 ½ -12; Ordinance 1021, sec. 16,
adopted 2/8/83)
Sec. 38-14. Location and fencing of tank batteries.
(a) In the event production is obtained, and the oil storage tank battery is located within the city limits, the
same shall be erected within the confines of an earthen or concrete wall designed in such a manner that the
area inside the retention wall would retain the total volume of the tanks located therein and the same shall be
completely enclosed by a suitable all metal fence of a sufficiently strong and close mesh construction it will not
be penetrable by domestic animals and/or small children.
(b) Any gate installed for the use of ingress or egress shall be kept locked when not in use. In no event shall
such battery be located nearer than a 150-foot radius from any residence, commercial structure or public
building, unless the application contains a signed, notarized release from the property owners within such 100-
foot radius. All lines on lease shall be buried a minimum of one foot. If a tank battery is located not nearer than
a 1,000-foot radius from any residence, commercial structure or public building, fencing requirements may be
waived by request to and approval of the council.
(1969 Code, sec. 18 ½ -13; Ordinance 1021, sec. 12, adopted 2/8/83)
Sec. 38-15. Pumps to be electrically powered.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/283
No pumping unit used for the purpose of lifting oil shall be powered with any power other than electricity. (1969
Code, sec. 18 ½ -14; Ordinance 1021, sec. 13, adopted 2/8/83)
Sec. 38-16. Maintenance and fencing of well jacks.
Any well jacks or units operating within the corporate limits of the city shall be kept clean, painted, in good
repair and properly lubricated in order that they will operate quietly and they shall be enclosed by an all-metal
fence for a height of not less than six feet and of a type suitable to prevent trespassing on the part of any
unauthorized person, particularly children and domestic animals. A lock shall be installed on each gate and
shall be locked except during workover. if a well jack is located not nearer than a 1,000-foot radius from any
residence, commercial structure or public building, fencing requirements may be waived. (1969 Code, sec. 18
½ -15; Ordinance 1021, sec. 14, adopted 2/8/83)
Sec. 38-17. Mufflers required.
All internal combustion engines shall be muffled during any operation in the city. (1969 Code, sec. 18 ½ -16;
Ordinance 1021, sec. 15, adopted 2/8/83)
CHAPTER 40
PARKS AND RECREATION*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 40-1. Alcoholic beverages prohibited in municipal parks.
(a) The possession and the consumption of alcoholic beverages in any municipal park in the city and in all
public street rights-of-way abutting any such park are prohibited.
(b) Any person who is convicted of violating this section shall be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-
6.
(1969 Code, sec. 19-1; Ordinance 944, secs. 1, 2, adopted 10/14/78)
Sec. 40-2. Camping in general prohibited; exceptions.
Overnight camping is prohibited in all municipal parks. The only exceptions are officially designated functions or
events sponsored by the Chamber of Commerce or at an event sanctioned by the police chief. Overnight
camping is defined as staying in the park after 11:00 p.m. for the purpose of sleeping and spending the night.
This includes sleeping inside an automobile or recreational vehicle. (1969 Code, sec. 19-2; Ordinance 1431,
sec. 1, adopted 10/19/04)
Secs. 40-3—40-22. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ROY ORBISON PARK AND PAVILION
Sec. 40-23. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Aquatics center means the Orbison Aquatics Center and the entire premises hereof, including the concession
stand/bathhouse and all other parts thereof.
Pavilion means the Roy Orbison Park and Pavilion and the entire premises hereof, including the building and all
other parts thereof.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/283
(1969 Code, sec. 19-21; Ordinance 1293, sec. V, adopted 11/19/96; Mo. adopted 7/27/99; Ordinance 1587,
sec. 1, adopted 3/27/12)
Sec. 40-24. Park pavilion scheduling.
The city secretary shall review all tourism and promotional requests for scheduling, and allow this type of event
to be proprietary for scheduling purposes for rental of the Roy Orbison Park and Pavilion. (1969 Code, sec. 19-
22; Ordinance 1293, secs. I—III, adopted 11/19/96; Mo. adopted 7/27/99; Ordinance 1515, sec. 1, adopted
11/24/09)
Sec. 40-25. Use of Roy Orbison Park and Pavilion.
(a) Reservations. Tourism and promotional reservation requests shall be submitted in writing to the city
secretary by October 1 of each year, with review and scheduling being determined by the city secretary on or
before November 1 of each year. All other reservations shall be on a first come, first served basis beginning on
January 2 of each year. Reservations may be made by telephone or in person.
(b) Contract. A written rental agreement contract will be required.
(c) Prohibited uses. The following uses will be prohibited:
(1) Conducting of private school, including but not limited to dance classes, aerobics, exercise
classes, union activities, and cosmetic training sessions.
(2) Use of the pavilion for religious functions is limited to special services only.
(3) The use on any portion of the pavilion by any individual, firm, or corporation for the purpose of
selling merchandise, except the selling of merchandise by display, exhibit or present of the
merchandise under the sponsorship of a civic organization, antique club, arts club or other charitable
organization.
(4) Recreational vehicle hookups will be prohibited.
(5) Amplified music will be prohibited.
(6) No decorations shall be attached to walls, ceilings, or cabinets.
(7) Alcoholic beverages will be prohibited.
(d) Deposit. A deposit fee of $100.00 is required for the reservation. Any reservation not confirmed by the
$100.00 deposit fee will be canceled. The deposit and rental fee for the reservation must be made two weeks
prior to the reservation. Forfeiture of the deposit fee shall occur:
(1) When cancellation of the reservation is not made prior to 72 hours to the reservation.
(2) If the keys to the facilities are not returned to city hall within the allotted time.
(3) When the facilities are not left in as good a condition as upon arrival. Each tenant using the
pavilion shall be responsible for setting up and taking down all tables and chairs.
(4) All utilities including lights, air conditioner, etc., must be turned off before leaving the pavilion.
In determining if the facilities are left in an unacceptable condition shall be at the sole discretion of
the city staff.
(e) Rental fees. Rental of the facilities includes the entire premises. Outside patrons may not use covered
pavilion when rented. If there are no renters, covered pavilion may be used by the general public. No free use
of the pavilion shall be permitted, extended or granted to any individual, organization, or group except
governmental functions. Rental fees shall be as follows:
(1) Two hours or less: $50.00.
(2) Two to four hours: $100.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/283
(3) Four hours or more per day: $150.00.
(f) Hours of use. The hours in which the pavilion can be used are from 6:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight every
calendar day of the year. All activities must end at 12:00 midnight.
(g) Tenants to indemnify city. All tenants of the pavilion shall hold the city harmless from any and all liabilities
for any claim resulting from their rental or use of the premises and shall indemnify the city in case of any claims
resulting from their operations or occurring during their occupation of the premises and all rental contracts shall
specifically include such provisions.
(h) Sanction. Any person or organization that has been found to be habitually or flagrantly in violation of this
article shall be prohibited from the use of the facility for a period of time as determined by the city commission.
(1969 Code, sec. 19-23; Ordinance 1293, sec. IV, VI—XII, adopted 11/19/96; Mo. adopted 7/27/99; Ordinance
1454, sec. 1, adopted 11/22/05; Ordinance 1515, sec. 2, adopted 11/24/09)
Sec. 40-26. Use of Orbison Aquatics Center.
(a) Aquatics center rental reservations. Aquatics center rental reservations, in conjunction with renting of the
Orbison Park Clubhouse, will on a first-come, first-serve basis.
(1) Individuals renting the Orbison Park Clubhouse up to April 1 will have the option to also rent
the aquatics center during the same evening 7:00 p.m.-9:00 p.m.
(2) Individuals wishing to rent both the clubhouse and the aquatics center must provide nonrefundable
down payment for the aquatics center rental at the time clubhouse is reserved.
(3) The aquatic center is available for rentals during as well as after normal business hours.
(4) Advance reservations of the aquatic center and/or pavilion cannot be made by the same group
or person for consecutive weekends or days until after April 15.
(5) The city prohibits rental agreements to minors. All rental agreements must be made with a
legal adult.
(6) No oral agreements for use of city facilities will be considered. All reservations must be
confirmed with written contract signed and approved by center staff and the user with down payment
fees paid in full.
(b) Admission/rental/down payment rates.
(1) General admission fees, passbook fees, party rental fees, party table fees and rules shall be
determined prior to January 1 of each year by the city manager, finance director and public works
director. Said fees shall be determined based upon the cost of operation of the aquatic center. The
city commission shall be informed of any and all rate changes.
(2) Party rental fees may be refunded if aquatics center is closed due to bad weather.
(c) Rules for use.
(1) User agrees to assume all responsibility for any damages to premises, even above the rental
fee amount.
(2) User shall comply with all federal, state, and local laws.
(3) User may not physically attach materials in the facility. This includes using tape or tacks on a
painted surface.
(4) User may not collect fees on the premises without previous approval by director of recreation
and community services.
(5) User agrees to leave premises in the same or better condition than which existed prior to
usage. This includes putting away all equipment, removing decorations, sweeping, wiping off tables
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/283
and chairs, returning tables and chairs to appropriate location, picking up trash, and taking trash out
to the dumpster, not in trash receptacle cans.
(6) The user is responsible for set-up and clean-up of facility and this time is included in the
overall reservation time reserved on the written contract. Additional services and equipment are the
responsibility of the user. If the aquatic center is not vacated at the specified time on the contract,
additional time will be charged. City staff is not responsible for setting up or putting away tables,
chairs, or any other equipment used during your reservation.
(7) Center staff reserves the right to determine whether a specified number of adult chaperones
are required for an activity.
(d) Hours of use. Hours of use shall be determined prior to January 1 of each year by the city manager,
finance director and public works director.
(Ordinance 1587, sec. 2, adopted 3/27/12; Ordinance 1608, sec. 1, adopted 2/26/13; Ordinance 1625, sec. 1,
adopted 2/25/14; Ordinance 1663, sec. 1, adopted 5/11/15)
CHAPTER 42
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS*
Sec. 42-1. Definitions.
(a) The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in
this section:
Charitable purposes shall mean philanthropic, religious or other non profit objectives, including the benefit of
poor, needy, sick, refugee or handicapped persons; the benefit of any church or religious society, sect, group or
order; the benefit of a patriotic or veterans' association or organization; the benefit of a fraternal, social or civic
organization, or the benefit of any educational institution. “Charitable purpose” shall not be construed to include
any direct benefit to the individual making the commercial home solicitation, or to include the benefit of any
political group or political organization which is subject to financial disclosure under state or federal law.
Dusk means 30 minutes after sunset.
Itinerant operations shall mean and refer to the conduct of business operations at one or more locations or
properties throughout the day, provided that the mobile food vendor does not remain or linger at any particular
property or location for longer than 30 minutes.
Itinerant vendor or Itinerant merchant shall mean any person who sets up and operates a temporary business
on privately owned property, whether improved or unimproved, in the city, soliciting, selling, or taking orders for,
or offering to sell or take orders for any goods or services.
Mobile frozen dairy food vendor shall mean any person who operates a vehicle on the streets of the city for the
purposes of soliciting sales of frozen dairy food, either made or produced at the time of sale, or prepackaged
and wrapped in a covering.
Mobile ice cream truck shall mean a mobile food unit that operates from a motor vehicle and sells only
prepackaged, single-portion, ice cream or frozen confections.
Peddler shall mean any person traveling by foot, wagon, vehicle or any other type of conveyance from street to
street carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, or merchandise and offering or exposing them for sale,
or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers; or who, without traveling from place to place, exhibits,
displays, sells or offers for sale such products from a wagon, handcart, pushcart, motor vehicle, conveyance or
from his person while on the public ways of the City of Vernon. A peddler also includes any street vendor,
itinerant vendor or transient vendor.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/283
Public right-of-way for the purposes of this chapter shall mean a legally established area or strip of land,
whether public or private, on which an irrevocable rite of passage has been recorded, and which is occupied or
intended to be occupied by a street, utility service, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or other similar
use. Right-of-way also includes the travel portion of the roadway and all traffic medians.
Residential street means a thoroughfare, public driveway or alley which has been dedicated or deeded to the
public for general use and affords a principal means of vehicular or other access to property abutting thereon.
Soliciting means the solicitation through the attempt or act of asking, bartering, or communicating in any
manner for the purpose of selling or offering to sell, or buying or offering to buy, goods and/or services, for a forprofit
purpose which includes promoting, advertising, receiving or obtaining money gifts or items of value for
said individual or group of individuals, or a for-profit organization, club, company or corporation.
Transient Vendor or Transient merchant shall mean vendors who sell items for a limited time and have no
permanent place of business at that location. Examples of places where transient vendor sales may take place
are at fairs, bazaars, flea markets, art or craft shows, concerts or farmers markets.
(Ordinance 1562, sec. 2(Exh. A(I)), adopted 6/28/11)
Sec. 42-2. Rules and regulations.
(a) Solicitation.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct home solicitation upon residential property within
the city without obtaining a written permit as prescribed by this ordinance prior to such solicitation. If
a solicitor is found to be soliciting prior to obtaining a permit, permit fees may double the stated
amount.
(2) Every solicitor obtaining a permit under this provision and doing business within the city shall
at all times display said permit on their person in a place easily visible, and have a valid driver's
license or other valid governmental identification that correctly identifies whom the solicitor is and for
whom the solicitor is working.
(3) A permit issued under this chapter shall not be transferable nor give authority to more than one
person to conduct business as a solicitor. Each solicitor must obtain an individual permit.
(4) It shall be unlawful for a solicitor to solicit for a purpose other than that set out in the
application upon which the permit was issued.
(5) Employees of the City of Vernon are hereby exempt from the provisions of subsection (1)
above provided approval is first obtained from the city manager or their designee.
(6) It shall be unlawful to approach any part of a residence other than the front door.
(7) It shall be unlawful to solicit, peddle, or distribute on residential property prior to 9:00 am or
after 7:00 pm of any day Monday through Saturday, or any time on Sunday or any other federally
designated holiday.
(8) It shall be unlawful to solicit, peddle or distribute to/from persons entering or leaving a public
place, on private property, without consent of the owner or manager of such private property. This
shall include charitable or civic peddlers.
(9) It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit, peddle or distribute on any residential property or
to go upon any residential premises for the purpose of soliciting, peddling or distributing and ring the
doorbell, knock upon the door or create any sound for the purpose of attracting the attention of the
occupant of the residence if:
(A) Requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or:
(B) If there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous place upon or near the main
entrance to the residence, a weatherproof sign, not less that three inches by four inches in size
bearing the words “no trespassing,” “no peddlers,” “no advertisements,” “no solicitation,” no
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/283
handbills,” or any similar notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of such premises
do not desire to have any such solicitation upon their premises. The letters on such signs shall
not be less than two-thirds [of] an inch in height.
(b) Itinerant merchants, transient merchants and peddlers.
(1) It shall be unlawful to operate as an itinerant merchant, transient merchant, mobile ice cream
truck, mobile frozen dairy vendor or peddler unless the itinerant merchant, transient merchant,
mobile ice cream truck, mobile frozen dairy vendor or peddler has obtained and shall then have in
force an itinerant street vendor permit issued under the provisions of this ordinance prior to
beginning operations as an itinerant merchant, transient merchant, mobile ice cream truck, mobile
frozen dairy vendor or peddler. If found to be operating prior to obtaining a permit, permit fees may
be double the stated amount.
(2) All permits shall be for specific time periods, dates and locations, and shall be on display by
the itinerant merchant, transient merchant or peddler and visible to the public.
(3) A permit issued under this chapter shall not be transferable nor give authority to more than one
person to conduct business as an itinerant merchant, transient merchant, mobile ice cream truck,
mobile frozen dairy vendor or peddler. Each itinerant merchant, transient merchant, mobile ice
cream truck, mobile frozen dairy vendor or peddler must obtain an individual permit.
(4) All itinerant merchants, transient merchants and peddlers shall be located in commercial
zoning districts only. Location is residential zoning districts is expressly prohibited.
(5) No itinerant merchants, transient merchants or peddlers may conduct business or solicit within
the street right-of -way except as provided by state law as in municipal activities.
(6) Vehicles must be in good condition, comply with all state and federal safety requirements and
follow all traffic laws.
(7) In no event shall the operation of an itinerant merchant, transient merchant or peddler be
allowed for more than three consecutive days or more than four times per calendar year. For the
purposes of this section, an “occurrence” shall be defined as a set-up by an itinerant merchant,
transient merchant or peddler at a location for any period of time.
(8) No itinerant merchants, transient merchants or peddlers shall have exclusive right to any
location in the public streets, nor shall any itinerant merchants, transient merchants or peddlers be
permitted a stationary location alongside, or adjacent to the public streets or alleyways nor shall said
itinerant merchants, transient merchants or peddlers be permitted to operate in any congested area
where said operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purposes of this section,
the judgment of a peace officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether
the area is congested or the public is impeded or inconvenienced.
(9) Posting of signs and/or flyers in public places is prohibited. On site signs may be allowed but
must be at least ten feet from the curb or edge of street and driver vision must not be obstructed.
(10) Mobile food vendors may not sell alcoholic beverages.
(11) Mobile frozen dairy vendors, mobile ice cream trucks, or other itinerant vendor vehicles are
permitted to vend in an area for a short period of time and move to multiple other locations providing
they do not remain at a location for more than 30 minutes without specific approval as contained in
the permit.
(12) Sound equipment must be limited to music or human speech and can only be used between
11:00 am and dusk each day.
(13) Sound may not be broadcast within 100 yards of schools, hospitals, churches, courthouses,
funeral homes, or cemeteries and shall meet all noise nuisance provisions contained in the City of
Vernon Code of Ordinances. Music must be played at a reasonable volume while the unit is stopped
for vending. If the unit is stopped for vending for more than ten minutes, then music shall be turned
off.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/283
(14) Except where specifically included, the provisions of this article shall not apply to:
(A) Any person connected with a religious or civic group who solicits donations or sells
goods for charitable purposes.
(B) Any person who sells goods or services at an event sponsored by a religious or civic
group designed to provide revenue to the religious or civic group; provided, however, that the
event may not occur more than one time per calendar month.
(C) Any person who sells, solicits, or furnishes services to persons on a permanent route on
a daily or weekly basis.
(D) Any person who maintains a regular place of business but makes deliveries within the
city.
(E) Any community wide event or for transient vendors as approved by the City Manager.
(Ordinance 1562, sec. 2(Exh. A(II)), adopted 6/28/11)
Sec. 42-3. Application for permit.
(a) Solicitation.
(1) A person or organization seeking a permit for the purpose of conducting home solicitation shall
file an application with the City of Vernon.
(2) Fee for a solicitation permit shall be $65.00 per person/per calendar year. A non-refundable
deposit of $15.00 will be paid upon application for a permit, with the balance due when permit is
issued.
(3) After review of the permit application and after a minimum of 24 hours of the receipt of the
application, the city secretary or his designee shall either issue a permit, as provided in this
ordinance, or notify the person applying that the application does not comply with the requirements
of this ordinance, specifying why the application is incomplete or otherwise does not comply.
(4) A permit granted under this article will be valid only until the termination of the solicitation
period specified in the permit or for 180 days, whichever is less. Regardless of when issued, all
permits expire December 31 of each calendar year.
(5) Religious of civic group that solicit or sell goods except during a city-wide community event for
charitable purposes shall register their solicitations or sales programs at no cost.
(6) The application for purpose of conducting home solicitation shall contain the following
information:
(A) The full and legally recognized names and any associated aliases, logos, nicknames,
and abbreviated names of the entity or person applying for the permit to solicit.
(B) Whether the person applying is an individual, partnership, corporation or association.
(C) The names, mailing address and telephone number of all individuals who will be in direct
charge or control of the solicitation.
(D) The time period within which the solicitation is to be made, giving the date of the
beginning of solicitation and its projected conclusion and the specific location(s).
(E) A description of the methods and means by which the solicitation is to be accomplished.
(F) The type of merchandise to be sold or offered for sale or the nature of the services to be
furnished.
(G) Whether such applicant, upon any such order so obtained, will demand, accept or
receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/283
(H) The names of the cities where the applicant has worked in the previous 365 days.
(I) A copy of a valid driver's license or other valid governmental identification that correctly
identifies whom the solicitor is and for whom the solicitor is working.
(J) A copy of a valid Texas sales tax permit issued by the State Comptroller, if applicable.
(K) An authorization to conduct a criminal background check on the applicant.
(L) Any other information the city deems necessary for the administration of this chapter.
(M) Any solicitor handling or selling non-prepackaged food must also possess a current
Texas Department of State Health Services (TDSHS) food handling permit.
(7) The application must be signed by the applicant and accompanied by a non-refundable
deposit of $15.00. Such application shall also show satisfactory written proof of the individual's
authority to represent the company.
(8) Information provided by the applicant will be subject to verification by the police department.
(9) A permit will not be issued if there is affirmative statement as to whether the applicant has ever
been:
(A) Convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to a misdemeanor involving fraud, theft,
embezzlement, burglary, fraudulent conversion, or misappropriation of property within the
preceding ten years, or convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to any felony.
(B) Found liable in a civil or administrative action in which the complaint or petition alleged
fraud, theft, embezzlement, fraudulent conversion, misappropriation of property, or the use of
untrue or misleading representations in an attempt to sell or dispose of property or to obtain
money or a thing of value from another.
(C) Found liable under law regarding the use of unfair, unlawful, or deceptive business
practices.
(D) Subject to an injunction or restrictive court order relating to business activity as the result
of an action brought by a federal, state, or local public agency, including action affecting a
vocational license.
(E) Found to be soliciting before a permit is approved.
(10) If a permit is denied, the person whose application was denied cannot go within one city
block of other valid permit holders.
(b) Itinerant merchants, transient merchants and peddlers.
(1) Any driver or person desiring a permit to conduct sales activity in the city as a mobile ice
cream truck, mobile frozen dairy vendor, or other itinerant or transient vendor shall make a written
application to the city.
(2) Fee for an itinerant merchants permit shall be $115.00. A non-refundable deposit of $15.00 will
be paid upon application for a permit, with the balance due when permit is issued.
(3) After review of the permit application and after a minimum of 24 hours of the receipt of the
application, the city secretary or his designee shall either issue a permit, as provided in this
ordinance, or notify the person applying that the application does not comply with the requirements
of this chapter, specifying why the application is incomplete or otherwise does not comply.
(4) A permit granted under this article will be valid only until the termination of the solicitation
period specified in the permit with a maximum of three days. No permit will be issued to the same
applicant more than four times per year. Regardless of when issued, all permits expire December 31
of each calendar year.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/283
(5) Religious of civic group that solicit or sell goods except during a city-wide community event for
charitable purposes shall register their solicitations or sales programs at no cost.
(6) The application for itinerant merchants, transient merchants and peddlers shall contain the
following information.
(A) The applicant's name, address, date of birth, phone number, fax number and email
address.
(B) The legal business name, address and phone number of the business represented by
the applicant.
(C) The name, address, phone number, date of birth and drivers license information of any
additional applicants and/or drivers.
(D) Statement of the kind, type and character of the goods that applicant will offer for sale,
and state whether the purchaser of such wares or goods shall be required to make any deposit
or advance payment of purchase price before delivery and a complete and full statement of the
delivery date.
(E) The period of time the applicant requests to sell or solicit in the city.
(F) Location or area of the city where sales activity will be conducted.
(G) List of all convictions of all felonies and misdemeanors and violations of this article of
applicant and representatives, stating the offense, city and state, the court of conviction and
the punishment imposed.
(H) If sales are to be conducted from a stationary location the applicant shall submit written
consent of the property owner or its authorized agent consenting to applicant's use of such
private property for sales activity indicated in the permit application.
(I) Name of any additional employees, drivers, agents or representatives who will be working
with the applicant.
(J) Names of all cities in which the applicant has conducted sales activity in the last 365
days.
(K) Any itinerant vendor handling or selling non-prepackaged food must also possess a
current Texas Department of State Health Services (TDSHS) food handling permit.
(7) The application must be signed by the applicant and accompanied by a non-refundable
deposit of $15.00. Such application shall also show satisfactory written proof of the individual's
authority to represent the company.
(8) Information provided by the applicant will be subject to verification by the police department.
(9) No itinerant vendor permit of any kind shall be granted unless:
(A) The applicant is at least 18 years of age and has a valid state issued drivers license.
(B) The applicant had no active suspension on his or her driving privileges in any state.
(C) No permit shall be issued if the applicant has been convicted of or pleaded nolo
contendere to any felony.
(D) Permit is obtained prior to beginning of operations.
(Ordinance 1562, sec. 2(Exh. A(III)), adopted 6/28/11)
Sec. 42-4. Investigation, issuance, denial and revocation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/283
(a) It shall be the duty of the city secretary or her designee to investigate each applicant for a permit under
this chapter before issuance of such a permit based on a review of the applicant's background.
(b) The city secretary or her designee shall issue the applicant a home solicitation or itinerant vendor permit if
the city secretary determines that the application has been fully and accurately completed, the permit
application fee has been paid, and that the applicant satisfied each requirement of this ordinance. If not, the city
secretary can deny the permit.
(c) A home solicitation or itinerant vendor permit may be revoked if the chief of police so determines that
reasonable cause exists to believe that:
(1) A statement of fact contained in the application was false or materially misleading.
(2) The permit holder has failed to comply with any of the provisions off this ordinance.
(3) Any of the conditions of this ordinance is, or has become applicable to the permit holder.
(4) The permit holder has engaged in a home solicitation that involves the use of false,
misleading, fraudulent or deceptive acts.
(5) If, at the discretion of the chief of police, the permit is not in the best interest of the citizen's of
Vernon.
(Ordinance 1562, sec. 2(Exh. A(IV)), adopted 6/28/11)
Sec. 42-5. Penalties.
(a) Any person violating any provision of this ordinance or failing to observe any provision of this chapter
shall have their permit revoked immediately and will not be entitled to reapply for a period of one year from the
date of the revocation. In the event of such forfeiture of permit, no part of such permit fee as may have been
paid shall be refunded to such person.
(b) Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
Class C misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be fined in a sum not to exceed the maximum amount allowed
by state law and city charter for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(c) In case of any willful violation of any of the terms and provisions of this chapter, the city, in addition to
imposing the penalties above provided, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in any court having
proper jurisdiction, to restrain, correct or abate such violations; and the definition of any violation of the terms of
this ordinance as a misdemeanor, shall not preclude the city from invoking the civil remedies given it by the
laws of the state, but same shall be cumulative and subject to prosecution as hereinabove prescribed for such
violations.
(Ordinance 1562, sec. 2(Exh. A(V)), adopted 6/28/11)
CHAPTER 44
PERSONNEL
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 44-1—44-18. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. RETIREMENT*
Sec. 44-19. Social Security Act provisions-Responsibility for entering agreements.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/283
The city commission, acting for and on behalf of the city, shall enter into all necessary agreements with the
state department of public welfare for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the Social Security Act and
state law. (1969 Code, sec. 21-31; Ordinance 622, sec. 1, adopted 6/12/56)
Sec. 44-20. Same-Mayor to execute agreements.
The mayor is appointed as agent of the city commission and of the city to execute all necessary agreements
and instruments for and in behalf of the commission and city. (1969 Code, sec. 21-32; Ordinance 622, sec. 2,
adopted 6/12/56)
Sec. 44-21. Same-Responsibility for assessments, collections, payments and reports.
The city finance manager is directed to be responsible for making assessments, collections, payments and
reports as required by the state department of public welfare. (1969 Code, sec. 21-33; Ordinance 622, sec. 3,
adopted 6/12/56; Ordinance 1084 adopted 3/12/85)
Sec. 44-22. Same-Funds allocation.
A sufficient sum of money shall be allocated and set aside from available funds for the purpose of carrying out
the provisions of the Acts mentioned in section 44-19, such money so allocated and set aside to be known as
the city social security fund, which fund shall be set aside and maintained in the regular city depository. (1969
Code, sec. 21-34; Ordinance 622, sec. 4, adopted 6/12/56)
Sec. 44-23. TMRS service credits for probationary period of employment.
(a) Any employee of the city who is a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (TMRS) and who
performed service as a probationary employee for the city prior to September 1, 1989, for which the employee
did not receive credited service in the system because the person, as a probationary employee was not
enrolled as a member of the system during the period of probationary employment, is hereby allowed to obtain
prior service credit for the period of such probationary service (not in excess of six months), pursuant to the
provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code sec. 853.303.
(b) To obtain prior service credit allowable under subsection (a) of this section, any employee entitled thereto
shall file a detailed written statement of the service claimed with the city secretary within one year from the
effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived.
(c) As soon as practicable after the employee has filed a claim for the prior service credit under V.T.C.A.,
Government Code sec. 853.303, the city secretary shall, if said officer determines that such service was
performed as claimed, verify the prior service allowable (not exceeding six months) and the average monthly
compensation paid the member during the period of probationary employment, and shall certify to the board of
trustees of the system the creditable prior service approved, and the average monthly compensation paid to the
person by the city during the period of probationary employment.
(1969 Code, sec. 21-35; Ordinance 1924, secs. I-III, adopted 11/19/96)
Sec. 44-24. Authorization of restricted prior service credit.
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code sec. 853.305, as amended
(hereinafter referred to as the “TMRS Act”), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System
(hereinafter referred to as the “system”) who is now or who hereafter becomes an employee of the city shall
receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed as an employee of any of the entities
described in said V.T.C.A., Government Code sec. 853.305; provided that:
(1) The person does not otherwise have credited service in the system for that service; and
(2) The service meets the requirements of said V.T.C.A., Government Code sec. 853.305.
(b) The service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length-of-service requirements for
retirement eligibility, has no monetary value in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and
may not be used in other computations, including computation of updated service credits.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/283
(c) A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this section must take the action
required under said V.T.C.A., Government Code sec. 853.305 while still an employee of the city.
(1969 Code, sec. 21-36; Ordinance 1295, sec. I, adopted 11/19/96)
Sec. 44-25. Authorization of updated service credits.
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code secs. 853.401-853.404, as amended
(hereinafter referred to as the “TMRS Act”), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System
(hereinafter referred to as the “system”) who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system in
force and effect January 1 of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in the
employment of the city, and on such date had at least 36 months of credited service with the system, shall be
and is hereby allowed updated service credit, as that term is defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code sec.
853.402(d).
(b) On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code sec. 853.601, any member of the
system:
(1) Who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city;
(2) Who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating
municipality by reason of previous service; and
(3) Was a contributing member on January 1 of the calendar year preceding such allowance;
shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to
adjustment as set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code sec. 853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and
all future grants under this section.
(c) The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be 100 percent of the base updated
service credit of the member, calculated as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code sec. 853.402(c).
(d) Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior service
credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same
service.
(e) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of section 853.401 of the TMRS Act (V.T.C.A.,
Government Code sec. 853.303(d)), the deposits required to be made to the system by employees of the
several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the effective
date of this section on the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city.
(1969 Code, sec. 21-37; Ordinance 1311, sec. I, adopted 11/25/97; Ordinance 1381, sec. I, adopted 12/11/01)
Sec. 44-26. Increase in retirement annuities.
(a) On terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code sec. 853.203, the city hereby elects to
allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the system to
retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current service annuities and
prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to the city. An annuity increased under this
section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person.
(b) The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of prior service and
current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are
based, multiplied by 70 percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers,
from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December
that is 13 months before the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived.
(c) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same
proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced.
(d) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the
annuity will not be changed hereunder.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/283
(e) The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an
annuitant is an obligation of the city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the system.
(1969 Code, sec. 21-31; Ordinance 1311, sec. II, adopted 11/25/97; Ordinance 1381, sec. II, adopted 12/11/01)
Sec. 44-27. Dates of allowances and increases.
The initial allowance of updated service credit and increase in retirement annuities hereunder shall be effective
on January 1, 2002, subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system. An allowance of updated
service credits and an increase in retirement annuities shall be made hereunder on January of each
subsequent year until this article ceases to be in effect under V.T.C.A., Government Code sec. 853.404(e),
provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the determination set forth in
V.T.C.A., Government Code sec. 853.404(d) of the TMRS Act. (1969 Code, sec. 21-39; Ordinance 1311, sec.
III, adopted 11/25/97; Ordinance 1381, sec. III, adopted 12/11/01)
Sec. 44-28. Increased deposit rate.
All employees of the city, who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, shall make deposits to
the system at the rate of seven percent of their individual earnings. (1969 Code, sec. 21-40; Ordinance 1311,
sec. IV, adopted 11/25/97; Ordinance 1381, sec. IV, adopted 12/11/01)
Sec. 44-29. Rate of contributions by the city.
Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code sec. 853.407(g) of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to make future
normal and prior service contributions to its account in the municipal accumulation fund of the system at such
combined rate of the total compensation paid by the city to employees who are members of the system, as the
system's actuary shall annually determine as the rate necessary to fund, within the amortization period
determined as applicable to the city under the TMRS Act, the costs of all benefits which are or may become
chargeable to or are to be paid out of the city's account in said accumulation fund, regardless of other
provisions of the TMRS Act limiting the combined rate of city contributions. (1969 Code, sec. 21-41; Ordinance
1402, sec. 1, adopted 12/17/02)
CHAPTER 46
PLUMBING
Sec. 46-1. Plumbing code adopted; penalty.
(a) There is hereby adopted a plumbing code known as the International Plumbing Code, with the most
current published edition. Such code is published in book form and is to be maintained in the community
development division director's office and is referred to, incorporated herein, and made a part hereof for all
purposes. Provided, however, that in the event any conflict may arise between the provisions of the code
adopted by the provisions of this article and any other applicable provisions of this Code, state law, or city
ordinance, rule or regulation, the provisions of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation shall
prevail and be controlling.
(b) Any person violating the provisions of said plumbing code shall be punished, as provided in section 1-6.
(1969 Code, sec. 22-1; Ordinance 1256, sec. 1, adopted 8/10/94; Ordinance 1364, sec. 5, adopted 3/6/01)
Sec. 46-2. Fuel gas code adopted; penalty.
(a) There is hereby adopted a fuel gas code known as the International Fuel Gas Code, with the most current
published edition. Such code is published in book form and is to be maintained in the community development
division director's office and is referred to, incorporated herein, and made a part hereof for all purposes.
Provided, however, that in the event any conflict may arise between the provisions of the code adopted by the
provisions of this article and any other applicable provisions of this Code, state law, or city ordinance, rule or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/283
regulation, the provisions of this Code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation shall prevail and be
controlling.
(b) Any person violating the provisions of said fuel gas code shall be punished, as provided in section 1-6.
(1969 Code, sec. 22-2; Ordinance 1364, sec. 4, adopted 3/6/01)
CHAPTER 48
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 48-1. Damage to pavement-By vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or propel any traction engine or other kind of engine, vehicle,
implement or machinery of any kind, the surface of the wheels of which have cogs or lugs on them or are
otherwise rough or uneven, or which have no wheels on, along or across any paved street within the city. (1969
Code, sec. 23-1; Ordinance 354, sec. 1, adopted 6/12/1917)
Sec. 48-2. Same-Cutting, digging in or breaking pavement; permit and fee required.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person or utility company to enter upon any paved street, alley, or sidewalk
within the city and cut, dig, or break any hole or trench in the pavement without first making application therefor
to the city. Said application shall set forth in designating the street, alley or sidewalk to be thus disturbed, and
the extent of the pavement cut to be made. The city shall issue a permit for such pavement cut. Said permit
shall set forth the regulations to restore the pavement from the cut.
(b) A fee of $250.00 plus $1.58 per square foot shall be charged and collected by the city to repair the
pavement. The measurement for charging the fee is to be determined by the street department's inspector.
(1969 Code, sec. 23-2; Ordinance 468, sec. 1, adopted 7/15/30; Ordinance 1365, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/01;
Ordinance 1611, sec. 1, adopted 3/26/13)
Sec. 48-3. Use for utility purposes; consent required.
It shall be unlawful for any person operating or intending to operate a telegraph, telephone, electric power or
light, street railway, interurban railway, steam railway, sewer or sewage disposal or gas company, or any other
character of public utility, to use for any such purpose any street, alley, highway or grounds of the city without
first obtaining the consent of the city commission expressed by ordinance and upon paying such compensation
as may be prescribed and upon such conditions as may be provided by such ordinance. (1969 Code, sec. 23-3;
Ordinance 449, sec. 1, adopted 10/28/27)
Sec. 48-4. Hanging signs, etc., prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hang or suspend, or permit to remain hanging or suspended, any sign,
board, plank or other thing over, above or across any public sidewalk in this city. (1969 Code, sec. 23-4;
Ordinance 228, sec. 1, adopted 6/9/1908)
Sec. 48-5. Sale of vehicle prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place any vehicle on any public street or alley in the city for the
purpose of exhibiting, advertising, or offering the same for sale. (1969 Code, sec. 23-5; Ordinance 395B, sec. 1,
adopted 4/10/23)
Secs. 48-6—48-28. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. STREET CLOSING PROCEDURE
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/283
Sec. 48-29. Petition-Authorized.
All of the fee owners of real property abutting on any street, alley, or other public thoroughfare in the city may
petition the city commission to vacate and abandon and close any such street, alley, or public thoroughfare, or
any portion thereof. (1969 Code, sec. 23-27; Ordinance 707, sec. 1, adopted 1/12/65)
Sec. 48-30. Same-Execution; acknowledgment.
Such petition shall be duly executed and acknowledged by all of the fee owners of real property abutting on
such street, alley, or thoroughfare, or portion thereof, sought to be closed, in the same manner as required by
the laws of the state for the execution of deeds of conveyances to real property. If such property is a homestead
property, as that term is defined under the laws of this state, such instrument shall be executed and
acknowledged by the husband and wife. (1969 Code, sec. 23-28; Ordinance 707, sec. 2, adopted 1/12/65)
Sec. 48-31. Same-Filing.
Such petition, duly executed, shall be considered filed when it is left with the community development director
at his normal place of conducting business. (1969 Code, sec. 23-29; Ordinance 707, sec. 4, adopted 1/12/65;
Ordinance 1417, sec. 1, adopted 9/23/03)
Sec. 48-32. Proof of ownership.
For the purposes of establishing the identity of the actual fee owners of such abutting property, the community
development director may require the petitioners to submit proof of their title acceptable to the city attorney. All
expenses in connection with such proof of ownership shall be borne by petitioners. (1969 Code, sec. 23-30;
Ordinance 707, sec. 3, adopted 1/12/65; Ordinance 1417, sec. 2, adopted 9/23/03)
Sec. 48-33. Hearing-Setting.
The community development director shall bring such petition to the attention first to the planning and zoning
commission after the notice of public hearing for such street closure has been published. The planning and
zoning commission public hearing shall be at a time of not more than 30 days before the city commission may
consider the petition in a second public hearing. (1969 Code, sec. 23-31; Ordinance 707, sec. 5, adopted
1/12/65; Ordinance 1417, sec. 3, adopted 9/23/03)
Sec. 48-34. Same-Publishing notice.
The community development director shall cause a notice of such hearing to be published one time in a
newspaper published in the city at least seven days before the date of such hearing before the planning and
zoning commission and the date of a possible public hearing before the city commission. Such notice shall
describe the street, alley or public right-of-way, or portion thereof, sought to be closed, as described in the
petition, and shall state the date, hour and place of hearing before the planning and zoning commission and city
commission. The cost of the publication for the public hearing shall be borne by the petitioners. Payment for the
cost of publication shall be paid before the public hearings and certified as being paid by the community
development director to the city manager. (1969 Code, sec. 23-32; Ordinance 707, sec. 6, adopted 1/12/65;
Ordinance 1417, sec. 4, adopted 9/23/03)
Sec. 48-35. Same-Receiving evidence.
At the hearings described in this article, the commissioners of the planning and zoning commission and city
commission may hear evidence as to whether or not it would be for the benefit of the public to close such
street, alley or public right-of-way, or any portion thereof, described in such petition, or any part thereof. At such
hearing any citizen of the city may present evidence for or against such petition. The planning and zoning
commission shall recommend to the city commission for the petition either to be approved or denied. If
recommended for approval the city commission shall hear the petition. If recommended for denial the petitioner
may request a hearing by the city commission. (1969 Code, sec. 23-33; Ordinance 707, sec. 7, adopted
1/12/65; Ordinance 1417, sec. 5, adopted 9/23/03)
Sec. 48-36. Ordinance closing street.
After such hearings described in this article, if the city commission is of the opinion that it would be to the public
benefit to close such street, alley, or public right-of-way, or any portion thereof, described in such petition, or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/283
any part thereof, the city commission, after two readings, pass an ordinance to that effect and take such further
action as might be necessary to effect such closing and abandonment. After passage of the ordinance by the
city commission, the city secretary shall cause the ordinance to be filed for record with the county clerk's office.
(1969 Code, sec. 23-34; Ordinance 707, sec. 8, adopted 1/12/65; Ordinance 1417, sec. 6, adopted 9/23/03)
Sec. 48-37. Procedure not exclusive.
The procedures outlined in this article shall not be exclusive of any other procedures for closing public streets,
alleys or public thoroughfares in the city that are otherwise permitted under the laws of the state. (1969 Code,
sec. 23-35; Ordinance 707, sec. 9, adopted 1/12/65)
Secs. 48-38—48-62. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. OBSTRUCTIONS*
Sec. 48-63. Obstructions; permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or erect any obstruction on any street or sidewalk within the city
without first having obtained a permit therefor from the city commission, except for periodic sidewalk sales in
front of a business. (1969 Code, sec. 23-47; Ordinance 388, sec. 1, adopted 4/13/22)
Sec. 48-64. Fencing or placing articles therein.
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any sidewalk, street, or alley, or any part thereof, in any manner,
either by fencing or by placing or leaving any kind of obstruction thereon or therein; provided that nothing in this
section shall prevent persons from placing packages, articles and goods which they may be receiving or
sending out, on any sidewalk directly in front or in any alley directly to the rear, of the building such person may
then be occupying, provided the same shall not be placed more than four feet from the outer edge of such
sidewalk and provided same shall not remain thereon or therein for more than two hours. (1969 Code, sec. 23-
48; Ordinance 222, adopted 6/13/1905; Ordinance 289, sec. 2, adopted 11/12/1912)
Sec. 48-65. Stands, structures, etc., in streets-Declared a nuisance.
All hamburger stands, popcorn stands, restaurants, fruit stands, and other stands, obstructions, and structures
erected, used, maintained, and located in the streets of the city within the fire limits are declared to be
nuisances. (1969 Code, sec. 23-49; Ordinance 290 adopted 2/4/1913)
Sec. 48-66. Same-Unlawful to permit.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place or allow to remain within any street or any part thereof within
the fire limits any obstruction, stand or structure described in section 48-65. (1969 Code, sec. 23-50; Ordinance
291 adopted 2/4/1913)
Sec. 48-67. Obstructions; streets, sidewalks and alleys.
The occupant or owner of any property is responsible for keeping the street, alley, sidewalk and public grounds
clear of obstructions that are caused by overgrowth of trees, shrubs or vines that originate on the owner's
property. This includes the trimming of trees, shrubbery and vines which may obstruct any vehicle traveling
through an alley, or which may obstruct a sidewalk or street or other public grounds. Additionally, sidewalks
must have a height clearance of eight feet; streets and alleys must have 15 feet of overhead clearance.
(Ordinance 1674, sec. I, adopted 11/24/15)
Secs. 48-68—48-90. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
Sec. 48-91. Resolution ordering construction.
The city commission whenever in its opinion the interests of the public demand the construction of sidewalks
along and upon any street and whenever in its opinion the construction of such sidewalks will enhance the
value of the lot, block, or tract along and in front of which it is constructed, in a sum at least equal to the cost
and expense of constructing such sidewalk, may, by resolution, order the construction of sidewalks along any
street or any part of a street under the provisions of this article, and such resolution shall particularly describe
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/283
the streets, or parts of streets, along and upon which said sidewalk shall be constructed, and shall designate
the lots, blocks, or tracts, along or in front of which such sidewalk shall be constructed. (1969 Code, sec. 23-62;
Ordinance 224, sec. 7, adopted 8/13/1907)
Sec. 48-92. Notice to owner to construct-Publication.
(a) Upon the passage of such resolution as is provided for in section 48-91, the city secretary may cause
notice thereof to be published in one issue of the official newspaper of the city, which notice in addition to the
facts set out in the resolution shall state that if the sidewalk is not constructed by the owners of said lots or
blocks, within 90 days after publication of such notice, such sidewalk will be constructed by the city and the cost
and expense thereof charged against and collected from the owners of said lots, and shall also be a lien on the
lots.
(b) The publisher of the official newspaper shall make an affidavit of the publication of said notice and attach
a printed copy thereof to the same and file the same among the papers with the city secretary, and such
affidavit shall be prima facie evidence of the publication of said notice.
(1969 Code, sec. 23-63; Ordinance 224, sec. 8, adopted 8/13/1907)
Sec. 48-93. Same-Personal service requirement; form.
The city secretary shall likewise issue and cause to be served on the owner of any lot or property described in
the resolution, if known, and if his residence can be ascertained, a written notice. (1969 Code, sec. 23-64;
Ordinance 224, sec. 9, adopted 8/13/1907)
Sec. 48-94. Same-Effecting service; return.
The notice required by section 48-93 may be served by any police officer by delivering a true copy thereof to
such owner in person, if a resident or is to be found in the city, or by leaving such copy with any agent of such
owner, who may control the lots referred to for him. The person serving the notice shall make his return
thereon, in writing, showing how and when he served the same, which shall be filed with the city secretary. If
the owner cannot be served in the manner as set out in this section, the city secretary, if such owner's address
is known, shall mail to him at said address a copy of the notice and shall make and file his affidavit to the fact
that he has so mailed him said notice. However, if for any reason any owner cannot be served with the notice in
any of the ways provided in this section, the publication of said notice provided for in section 48-92 in the official
paper shall be deemed as full legal notice to him. (1969 Code, sec. 23-65; Ordinance 224, sec. 10, adopted
8/13/1907)
Sec. 48-95. Construction by city on failure of owner.
Should the owner of any lot or block fail to construct the sidewalk as ordered by the resolution of the city
commission and within the time required, at the expiration of said time the city may by order of the commission
construct such sidewalks, either by buying material and employing labor to do the work or by letting the same
out by contract, as the commission may deem will be the more economical method of doing the work. (1969
Code, sec. 23-66; Ordinance 224, sec. 11, adopted 8/13/1907)
Sec. 48-96. Performing construction and reporting costs.
The city shall as speedily as practical construct or cause the sidewalk to be constructed in accordance with the
provisions of this article, the officer in charge to report the cost and expense thereof to the commission in
writing, stating separately the cost of the sidewalk abutting each lot and the amount assessed against each
owner. (1969 Code, sec. 23-67; Ordinance 224, sec. 12, adopted 8/13/1907)
Sec. 48-97. Construction to comply with article.
All sidewalks hereafter constructed along and upon any street within the city shall be constructed in accordance
with, and conform to, the requirements and conditions as set forth in this article. (1969 Code, sec. 23-68;
Ordinance 224, sec. 1, adopted 8/13/1907)
Sec. 48-98. Supervision; conformity to grade; establishing grade upon application.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/283
All sidewalks which may hereafter be constructed along and upon any street within the city shall be constructed
under the supervision, superintendence, and to the satisfaction of the city commission or designated city officer;
and all such sidewalks shall be constructed in strict conformity to the grade of the street upon which it is being
constructed as then established by the city commission, or under its direction; provided any person desiring to
construct a sidewalk upon and along any street the grade of which street has not then been established shall
apply to the city commission to have the grade of such street established, and the commission shall forthwith
cause the grade of such street to be regularly established at the cost and expense of the city. When such grade
is so established, such sidewalk shall be constructed in strict conformity therewith. (1969 Code, sec. 23-69;
Ordinance 224, sec. 2, adopted 8/13/1907)
Sec. 48-99. Slope.
All sidewalks hereafter constructed along and upon any street within the city shall have a uniform slope of one
inch in every six feet sloping towards the center of the street from the lot, block or tract line along which it is
constructed to the outside edge thereof. (1969 Code, sec. 23-70; Ordinance 224, sec. 3, adopted 8/13/1907)
Sec. 48-100. Minimum widths.
Unless a different width is specified in the resolution ordering sidewalk construction as hereinafter provided, all
sidewalks hereafter constructed shall be the width prescribed by the city commission. (1969 Code, sec. 23-71;
Ordinance 224, sec. 4, adopted 8/13/1907; Ordinance 272 adopted 2/15/1911)
Sec. 48-101. Construction at owner's expense; charge on land and debt of owner.
All sidewalks constructed along and upon any street shall be constructed by the owner of the lots, blocks, or
tracts along or in front of which such sidewalk is constructed and required as herein provided; and at the cost
and expense of such owners, and, if constructed by the city under and in accordance with the provisions of this
article, the reasonable cost and expense of constructing such sidewalk:
(1) Shall be a valid and subsisting charge and debt against such owners of such lots, blocks, or
tracts along or in front of which such sidewalk is constructed;
(2) Shall be personal debts against such owners; and
(3) Shall, in all cases where permitted by law to secure its payment, be a valid lien and charge
against and upon such lots, blocks, or tracts along or in front of which such sidewalk is constructed
to the extent of the amount of increased value of such lots, blocks, or tracts by reason of the
construction of such sidewalk.
(1969 Code, sec. 23-72; Ordinance 224, sec. 5, adopted 8/13/1907)
Sec. 48-102. Specifications.
All sidewalks hereafter constructed along and upon any street within the city shall be constructed of concrete or
as otherwise ordered by resolution of the commission in such manner as to furnish a reasonably smooth and
hard surface, and where constructed of concrete shall be constructed substantially in accordance with the
specifications prescribed by the city commission. (1969 Code, sec. 23-73; Ordinance 224, sec. 6, adopted
8/13/1907)
Sec. 48-103. Resolution assessing cost.
Upon receipt of the report the city commission shall by a resolution passed by a two-thirds vote of all its
members, the vote to be entered on the minutes, assess against each owner of said lots the cost of
constructing the sidewalks along and in front of the lots, and shall declare the same a lien on said lots. (1969
Code, sec. 23-74; Ordinance 224, sec. 13, adopted 8/13/1907)
Sec. 48-104. Collecting assessments.
If the amount assessed against any such person is not paid within 20 days after the passing of said resolution,
it is the duty of the city attorney, or any other attorney employed by the commission for the purpose, and they
are hereby authorized:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/283
(1) To bring suit in the name of the city in any court having jurisdiction thereof against each of said
persons so failing to pay the amount assessed against them in said 20 days;
(2) To recover against each of them the amount so assessed against each of them; and
if in the opinion of such attorney there is a valid lien against any lot to secure the same, then to foreclose the
same and to prosecute the suits to final judgment, and to collect and receive any sums so recovered and pay
the same into the city treasury, taking the treasurer's receipt therefor, and such sums shall be credited to the
street fund.
(1969 Code, sec. 23-75; Ordinance 224, sec. 14, adopted 8/13/1907)
Sec. 48-105. Repair-Order to owner.
Whenever any sidewalk shall become broken or otherwise out of repair, the city shall cause a written or printed
notice to be served on the owner or the agent of the owner or the person in possession of the premises
adjacent to said broken sidewalk, requiring the same to be repaired within a reasonable time to be mentioned
therein. (1969 Code, sec. 23-76; Ordinance 224, sec. 17, adopted 8/13/1907)
Sec. 48-106. Same-Performance by city; assessment of cost.
In any case where any owner, agent, or occupant cannot be found or refuses or fails to repair any sidewalk
pursuant to the notice within a reasonable time, the city shall repair the same, and the cost to be assessed and
collected in the same manner as provided in sections 48-101 through 48-104, in case new sidewalks are built
by the city. (1969 Code, sec. 23-77; Ordinance 224, sec. 18, adopted 8/13/1907)
Secs. 48-107—48-125. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. STREET PAVING ASSESSMENT
Sec. 48-126. Assessment policy.
(a) When the public works director receives a request for a street paving assessment from a property owner,
then a petition shall be prepared in accordance to an engineer's estimate. The cost of preparing the engineer's
estimate shall not cost the city.
(b) The petition must be signed by at least 60 percent of the abutting property owners.
(c) Costs of the paving project shall include:
(1) All street construction costs including street intersections, alley ways, curb and gutter and
drainage structures;
(2) Engineering fees associated with the paving project, and legal fees associated with the paving
assessments.
(d) Commission-approved bids or expenses of the paving project shall be shared with 75 percent by the
abutting property owners and 25 percent by the city.
(e) The actual costs shall be assessed against the abutting properties.
(f) Payment of the actual construction and other related costs are to be paid at the completion of the paving
project or the property owner may elect to sign a promissory note for 36 months at eight percent interest rate
with annual payments.
(1969 Code, sec. 23-91; Ordinance 1331, sec. 1, adopted 12/22/98)
Sec. 48-127. Street paving.
Nothing in this article will limit the city from paving any street at any time when approved by a majority vote of
the city commission.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/283
CHAPTER 50
TAXATION AND LICENSES*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 50-1. Additional penalty on delinquent taxes.
The city hereby adopts the provisions of V.T.C.A., Tax Code sec. 33.07 so that hereafter an additional penalty of
15 percent of the delinquent tax, penalty, and interest on delinquent taxes shall be imposed on taxes becoming
delinquent after January 31, 1983. (1969 Code, sec. 24-2; Ordinance 1020 adopted 3/8/83)
Sec. 50-2. Tax abatement policy, guidelines and criteria.
(a) Objective. The objective of this tax abatement program is to create new jobs, new capital investment, and
a broadened tax base for our community by:
(1) Providing an incentive for already established businesses to expand and/or modernize; and/or
(2) Providing an incentive to attract businesses that might not locate in our community otherwise.
The city may make exceptions to these guidelines at any time in order to fulfill the original purpose or intent.
(b) Candidate qualifications.
(1) Compliments existing businesses and/or increases the diversity of our community's economy
(2) Creates new jobs and capital investment as outlined in the following abatement schedule
(c) Abatement schedule. The amount and term of abatement will depend on the number of additional full-time
(or equivalent) jobs and/or the amount of capital investment according to schedule A.
Schedule A. Property Tax Abatement-City of Vernon
# Full-time
Jobs OR
Capital Investment % Abatement Term of Abatement
25 $5,000-5,000,000 AND
(Improvements total at least
10% of the total valuation at
the time of abatement)
100 Construction Period + 1 year
60 2nd Year
30 3rd Year
50 $5,000,001-7,500,000 100 Construction Period +1 year
80 2nd Year
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/283
60 3rd Year
40 4th Year
20 5th Year
75 $7,500,001-10,000,000 100 Construction Period + 2 years
80 3rd Year
70 4th Year
60 5th Year
40 6th Year
20 7th Year
100+ $10,000,001+ 100 Construction Period + 4 years
80 5th Year
60 6th Year
40 7th Year
30 8th Year
20 9th Year
10 10th Year
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/283
Only the increase in fair market value of real property directly resulting from the development, redevelopment
and/or improvement specified in the abatement contract will be eligible for abatement. Tax abatement must
benefit the party making the investment; by ownership or by contract.
The construction period may not exceed two (2) years.
The number of additional full-time (or equivalent) jobs specified in the abatement contract should be maintained
for the entire term of the abatement and pay no less than federal minimum wages.
(d) Abatement committee. Upon receipt of an application for tax abatement, the mayor will create a tax
abatement advisory committee consisting of the mayor, city manager and a representative from each of all
other affected taxing jurisdictions.
Said committee shall sit as to inform each taxing unit as to the particulars of each application and to concur in
the advisory committee's recommendation to each taxing unit.
(e) Guidelines.
(1) Tax abatements may be provided for both new facilities and structures and for the expansion
or modernization of existing facilities and structures. Each project proposed for tax abatement shall
be considered individually on its own merits, benefit to the public, and in context of any other
economic incentives for the project or existing in the reinvestment zone.
(2) The developer, project owner, or other recipient of a tax abatement must annually certify in
writing to the city commission of each participating taxing unit that the developer, owner or recipient
is in compliance with each applicable term of the agreement.
(3) The taxable value of improvements to a site and the inventory, furniture, fixtures, and
equipment will qualify for tax abatement. The taxable value and any reevaluation of the land prior to
improvement will be subject to taxation at the applicable rates.
(4) A tax abatement agreement must ensure that the periods of abatement are directly
proportional to the capital expenditures for improvements and/or the number of permanent fulltime
jobs created.
(5) Expansion or modernization of existing facilities qualifies for tax abatement if the expansion
meets the qualifications for capital expenditures and/or nets new jobs. The number of jobs created
must be new jobs and not replacement of jobs, which were in the payroll within the year immediately
prior to application for tax abatement. A tax abatement shall not be granted if the facility has been
the subject of or included in a prior tax abatement agreement.
(6) If a new facility is constructed to replace an existing facility, and the existing facility is
abandoned by the developer, only the difference in taxable value of the new facility over the existing
facility will qualify for tax abatement.
(7) An agreement will be executed by the developer which incorporates the terms of this section
and includes any other site and development specific terms, which might be found applicable at the
time.
(8) The tax abatement agreement will require, among other things, that the city will have the right
of access to the site and books and records of the applicant for tax abatement to determine
compliance with statutory requirements and the agreement. Failure to fulfill any of the requirements
of the agreement will result in cancellation of the agreement and retroactive loss of tax abatement.
(Ordinance 1560, secs. 1—4, adopted 5/24/11; Ordinance 1572, secs. 1-6, adopted 10/25/11; Ordinance 1603,
sec. 2, adopted 12/18/12)
Editor's note- Ordinance 1560, adopted May 25, 2011, repealed sec. 50-2, in its entirety. Sections 1-4 of said
ordinance, adopted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to this amendment, sec. 50-2 pertained to
criteria for tax abatement within reinvestment zones. See Code Comparative Table for derivation.
Sec. 50-3. Commercial filming.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/283
Persons seeking commercial use of city-owned property (streets, rights-of-way, parks, public buildings),
commercial use of private property which may affect adjacent public or private property, and the use of city
equipment and personnel in the filming of movies, TV shows, commercials, and related activities, must obtain
authorization of the city manager and obtain permits and pay fees according to the terms of the commercial
filming application. (Ordinance 1517 adopted 6/23/09)
Sec. 50-4. Chapter 380 incentive policy.
(a) Under these guidelines, to be eligible for consideration by the city for chapter 380 economic development
incentives, a company or project must meet and/or exceed all of the criteria, as described below:
(1) Minimum amounts of real and personal property investments must be achieved as outlined in
section 50-6.
(2) Minimum levels of full-time job creation or retention must be achieved as determined by the
city commission.
(b) The amount and term of the chapter 380 economic development incentive will also be impacted by:
(1) The location of the facility;
(2) Other incentives used for the same project; and
(3) Overall benefit to the community
(Ordinance 1640, sec. 1, adopted 6/2/14)
Sec. 50-5. Chapter 380 requirements.
(a) Either the project:
(1) Results in a minimum increased taxable value for the city of $5,000.00 in real and business
personal property; or
(2) Will result in a minimum increased taxable value for the city of $5,000.00 in real and business
personal property; or
(3) Is specifically determined by the city commission to bring extraordinary benefit to the city.
(b) A project shall not be eligible for incentives under this article if building permit has been issued for the
project prior to making application in accordance with this article.
(c) Incentives established under this program will be provided only to the extent that the revenues realized by
the city and attributable to a project exceeds a minimum amount established by agreement. The public benefit
or amount of revenue realized by the city and attributable to the project must be commensurate with value of
any incentives granted under this program.
(Ordinance 1640, sec. 1, adopted 6/2/14)
Sec. 50-6. Chapter 380 exceptional investment projects.
(a) A project will be considered an “exceptional investment” if the project has a total capital investment (real
property improvements and new personal property investments) of at least $5,000,000.00 in the property of
interest; and/or
(b) Creation and maintenance of at least 50 new, full-time, permanent jobs at the property of interest.
(Ordinance 1640, sec. 1, adopted 6/2/14)
Sec. 50-7. Chapter 380 agreement terms.
An agreement established for a program must include:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/283
(1) A complete description of the location of the proposed program;
(2) A timetable and list of the kind and amount of property values, revenues, incomes or other
public benefits that the proposed program will provide;
(3) A provision establishing the duration of the agreement;
(4) A provision identifying the method for calculating and sources of funding for any grant, loan or
other incentives provided in the Agreement;
(5) A provision providing a tangible means for measuring whether the applicant and other
responsible parties have met their obligations under the agreement;
(6) A provision providing for access to and authorize inspection of the property and applicant's
pertinent business records by municipal employees in order to determine compliance with the
agreement;
(7) A provision for cancellation of the agreement and/or nonpayment of incentives if the program
is determined to not be in compliance with the agreement;
(8) A provision for recapturing city funds granted or loaned, or for recapturing the value of other
public assets granted or loaned, if the applicant does not meet its duties and obligations under the
terms of the agreement;
(9) A provision that allows assignment of the agreement with prior written approval of the city
commission, or without the prior written approval of the city commission provided that:
(A) All rights, duties, obligations and liabilities under the agreement are assigned from the
assignor to the assignee; and
(B) The assignment is made subject and subordinate to the agreement and the chapter 380
policy; and
(C) The assignment document is in a form and contains content acceptable to the city
attorney's office;
(10) Provisions relating to administration, delinquent taxes, reporting requirements and
indemnification;
(11) A provision that the agreement may be amended by the parties to the agreement by using the
same procedure for approval as is required for entering into the agreement; and
(12) Such other provisions as the city commission shall deem appropriate.
(Ordinance 1640, sec. 1, adopted 6/2/14)
Secs. 50-8—50-24. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. CARNIVALS, TENT SHOWS, AND SKATING RINKS
Sec. 50-25. Permit-Required; liability for violation.
It shall be unlawful to hold, sponsor, or run a street carnival, tent show, or skating rink in the city unless a permit
to hold such carnival, tent show, skating rink is first obtained from the city in accordance with this article. Each
person aiding or abetting the holding of such street carnival, tent show, or skating rink or their subsidiary shows,
concessions, amusements and businesses shall be equally guilty of a violation of this article when the street
carnival, or tent show, or skating rink, commences without such a permit. (1969 Code, sec. 24-26; Ordinance
386, sec. 1, adopted 3/14/22)
Sec. 50-26. Same-Application.
A permit shall be issued by the city secretary to hold a carnival, tent show, or skating rink when a proper
application in writing is made therefor to the city secretary. Such application shall state in detail the component
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/283
parts of the carnival, tent show, or skating rink, and the proposed location of said carnival, tent show, or skating
rink, the time it is to run and the number of persons regularly traveling with it, if any, and the number of local
persons connected therewith, and shall give a full and complete plan of the proposed carnival, tent show, or
skating rink. (1969 Code, sec. 24-27; Ordinance 386, sec. 2, adopted 3/14/22)
Sec. 50-27. Same-Determining number of police; instructing city secretary on issuance.
If the proposed carnival, tent show, or skating rink appears to be entirely composed of lawful amusements and
lawful enterprises, the police chief shall determine the number of extra police necessary to properly superintend
such carnival, tent show, or skating rink and regulate the anticipated crowds. The police chief shall determine
whether the city secretary shall issue such permit. (1969 Code, sec. 24-28; Ordinance 386, sec. 3, adopted
3/14/22)
Sec. 50-28. Same-Fees.
The applicant for a permit under this article shall then pay in advance a permit fee of $100.00, together with
$5.00 per extra officer per day for so many days said carnival, tent show, or skating rink is issued a permit
specifying the length of time and the location. These fees are intended to be used for regulating, inspecting,
and policing such carnival, tent show, or skating rink and shall be deposited with the city treasurer. (1969 Code,
sec. 24-29; Ordinance 386, sec. 3, adopted 3/14/22)
Sec. 50-29. Same-Refusal or revocation.
If the proposed carnival, tent show or skating rink consists in part of any unlawful games or enterprises of any
kind, the permit shall be refused; and if such carnival, tent show, or skating rink is issued a permit and it
conducts itself in an unlawful manner in whole or in part, its permit may be revoked by the mayor and fees paid
shall be forfeited. (1969 Code, sec. 24-40; Ordinance 386, sec. 4, adopted 3/14/22)
Sec. 50-30. Same-Operation after expiration.
It shall be unlawful for any carnival, tent show or skating rink to operate in whole or in part after its permit
expires or after it is revoked for cause, and all persons assisting in such operation shall be guilty of an offense.
(1969 Code, sec. 24-31; Ordinance 386, sec. 6, adopted 3/14/22)
Sec. 50-31. Permits and business fees for amusement and gaming devices.
(a) Definitions.
(1) Gaming place means any real estate, building, room, tent, vehicle, boat, or other property
whatsoever, one of the uses of which is the making or settling of bets, bookmaking, or the
conducting of a lottery, sweepstakes, or the playing of gaming devices. [Penal Code 47:3]
Exemption: Business whose income from gaming machines is less than fifty percent (50%) of total
business income will not be considered a gaming place.
State Law reference- Similar definition, Penal Code sec. 47:01(3).
(2) Gaming devices means any electronic, electromechanical, computerized, or mechanical
contrivance that for a consideration affords the player an opportunity to obtain anything of value, the
award of which is determined solely or partially by chance, even though accompanied by some skill,
whether or not the prize is automatically paid by the contrivance. This includes, but is not limited to,
gambling device versions of bingo, keno, blackjack, lottery, roulette, video poker, or similar
electronic, electromechanical, computerized, or mechanical games, or facsimiles thereof, that
operate by chance or partially so, that as a result of the play or operation of the game award credits
or free games, and that record the number of free games or credits so awarded and the cancellation
or removal of the free games or credits; and does not include any electronic, electromechanical,
computerized, or mechanical contrivance designed, made, and adapted solely for bona fide
amusement purposes if the contrivance rewards the player exclusively with non-cash merchandise
prizes, toys, or novelties, or a representation of value redeemable for those items, that have a
wholesale value available from a single play of the game or device of not more than 10 times the
amount charged to play the game or device once or $5.00, whichever is less.
State Law reference- Similar definition, Penal Code sec. 47:01(4).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/283
(3) Private place means a place to which the public does not have access, and excludes, among
other places, streets, highways, restaurants, taverns, nightclubs, schools, hospitals, and the
common areas of apartment houses, hotels, motels, office buildings, transportation facilities, and
shops.
State Law reference- Similar definition, Penal Code sec. 47:01(8).
(4) Thing of value means any benefit, but does not include an unrecorded and immediate right of
replay not exchangeable for value.
State Law reference- Similar definition, Penal Code sec. 47:01(9).
(5) Amusement redemption machine means a skill or pleasure coin-operated machine that is
designed, made and adapted solely for bona fide amusement purposes, and that by operation of
chance or a combination of skill and change affords the user, in addition to any right of replay, an
opportunity to receive exclusively non-cash merchandise prizes, toys, or novelties, or a
representation of a value redeemable for those items. “Amusement redemption machine” does not
include:
(A) A machine that awards the user non-cash merchandise prizes, toys, or novelties solely
and directly from the machine, including claw, crane, or similar machines; nor
(B) A machine from which the opportunity to receive non-cash merchandise prizes, toys, or
novelties, or a representation of value redeemable for those items, varies depending upon the
user's ability to throw, roll, flip, toss, hit, or drop a ball or other physical objects into the
machine or a part thereof, including basketball, golf, bowling pusher, or similar machines.
(6) Coin-operated machine means a machine or devise operated by the payment or insertion of
paper currency or any other consideration.
(7) Representation of value means cash paid under authority of sweepstakes contests as
provided by Texas Business and Commerce Code, Section 43, or a gift certificate or gift card that is
presented to a merchant in exchange for merchandise.
(8) Total combined fee means the total number of machines times the annual fee per machine or
the total number of machines times the semi-annual fee per machine issued by the city.
(9) Placed in the establishment means all machines physically located in the establishment
whether operating or not.
(b) Local premises gaming permit for amusement redemption machines, coin-operated machines and
gaming devices.
(1) Application fee and license fee. An owner, operator, or lessee of premises on which an
amusement redemption machine is made available to others shall be required to secure a permit by
paying to the city an annual local premises gaming permit for amusement redemption machines,
coin-operated machines and gaming devices. Permit fee as follows:
(A) $200.00 permit application fee (one time unless permit expires).
(B) Application shall be made on a form as approved by the city secretary.
(C) Fee shall be $100.00 per machine (operable or inoperable).
(D) Upon approval of the application, and inspection by the building inspector, a fee of
$100.00 per machine per year shall be paid. By January 15 of each subsequent year, a
renewal fee shall be paid of $100.00 per machine per year. Failure to pay renewal fee by said
date shall result in immediate revocation of all permits and license.
(E) Denial of permits may appeal to the city manager.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/283
(2) Expiration and renewal of said fee. The total fee applicable for the number of machines
located on the premises with the addition of new machines after the annual permit is obtained and/or
renewed shall be the total fee due upon addition of added machines in one establishment and shall
hence forth be the fee due. Permits shall automatically expire December 31 of each year, except as
otherwise stated herein, such permit shall also automatically expire if the holder thereof sells,
transfers equity, or otherwise disposes of such devices. The city shall not refund any portion of a
local premises gaming permit for amusement redemption machines, coin-operated machines and
gaming devices fee after the permit is issued, nor shall it prorate or reduce in amount any fee due to
the city. It is the establishment's responsibility to notify the city secretary of additional machines
added to the premises within the permit year. The current permit will be replaced with a renewed
permit to include the additional machines and devices at the local premises gaming permit for
amusement redemption machines, coin-operated machines and gaming devices fee at the cost per
additional machine. Permits for each machine are non-transferable to other machines.
(3) Payment. Payments shall be made by January 15 for the current year. If payment is not made
by January 15 for existing businesses, the application will expire and a new application will be due.
(4) Late penalty. Upon the expiration of a permit, and within 30 days thereafter, the person making
the devise available to others shall obtain a renewal thereof in the same manner as an original
permit if he wishes to continue operating premises on which an amusement redemption machine is
made available to others.
(5) Sealing. The city shall have the authority to seal any amusement redemption machine located
at an establishment for which a local premises gaming permit fee has not been secured. A $10.00
fee will be charged for the release of any machine sealed for non-payment of said local premises
gaming permit fee.
(6) Permit posting. The permit shall be conspicuously posted on each device. Permits for each
machine are non-transferable to other machines.
(7) Revocation of permit. The city manager may revoke any permit to maintain and operate
premises on which an amusement redemption machine is made available to others when the
licensee has been found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provisions of this
section or any applicable state statue. After such conviction, the license may be reissued if the
circumstances leading to the conviction have been remedied and the premises are being maintained
and operated in full compliance with the law and this section. Provided, however, that an owner,
operator, or leasee of premises on which an amusement redemption machine is made available to
others, who is found to be in violation of this section based on a finding that the number of
amusement redemption machines exceeds the number for which the premises is permitted shall be
required to pay an amount equal to twice the difference of the original permit fee and the permit fee
required for the number of machines actually on the premises.
(8) Inventory. Each owner, operator, or lessee of premises on which an amusement redemption
machine is made available to others shall be required to provide the city with a complete inventory of
all machines located on the premises. The inventory shall include the make, model, serial number
and date placed in service of each amusement redemption machine.
(c) Limits on permits and location of premises (housing regulation); location of premises (housing
regulations). This housing regulation restricts amusement redemption machines, coin-operated machines and
gaming devices from being housed within 300 feet of a school, church or hospital. The commercial type zoned
areas of the city shall serve as the authorized boundaries for the operation and housing of amusement
redemption machines.
(d) Prohibitions.
(1) Persons under 21. The presence of persons under 21 years of age on premises subject to a
local premises gaming permit for amusement redemption machines is prohibited and is punishable
by a fine as provided in section 1-6. In addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by law,
violation of this section shall be cause for revocation of a local premises gaming permit for
amusement redemption machines issued pursuant to this section. It is an affirmative defense to
prosecution under this subsection that the person under 21 years of age was a bona fide employee
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/283
of the establishment subject to a local premises gaming permit for amusement redemption
machines.
(2) Alcoholic beverages. The presence of alcoholic beverages on premises subject to a local
premises gaming permit for amusement redemption machines that operate more than ten (10)
amusement redemption machines is prohibited and is punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-
6. In addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by law, violation of this section shall be
cause for revocation of a local premises gaming permit for amusement redemption machines issued
pursuant to this section.
(3) Offense. A person commits an offense if he makes a bet on the partial or final result of a game
or contest or on the performance of a participant in a game or contest; plays and bets for money or
other thing of value at any game played with cards, dice, balls, or any other gambling device; if he
played for money using an electronic, electromechanical, computerized or mechanical contrivance
including the definition of gambling device under subsection (a)(2) of this section and the Penal
Code sec. 47.01(4)(b).
(4) An offense under this section is a class “C” misdemeanor. Any person who violates any
provision of this section for which no other penalty is set forth shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
to a penalty as provided in section 1-6 per incident or per day in which such condition exists. Each
day that such violation is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. The term
“person” as used in this section shall include the owner, occupant, mortgager or vender in
possession, assignee or renter, receiver, executor, trustee, or lessee, agent or another person, firm
or corporation directly, or indirectly, in control of a building or tract of land.
(Ordinance 1591, secs. 1—4, adopted 5/22/12)
Secs. 50-32—50-48. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX
Sec. 50-49. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases for the purpose of this article, except where the context clearly
indicates another meaning, are respectively defined as follows:
City secretary means the city secretary of the City of Vernon, Texas.
Consideration means the cost of the room, sleeping space, bed, or dormitory space or other facility in such
hotel and includes the cost of food served or personal services rendered to the occupant not related to cleaning
and readying such room for occupancy. The term “consideration” shall not include any tax assessed for
occupancy therefore by any other governmental agency.
Finance director means the finance director of the city.
Hotel means any building, trailer, or other facility in which a member or members of the public way, for a
consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term “hotel” includes hotels, motels, tourist homes,
houses, or courts, lodginghouses, inns, roominghouses, trailer houses, trailer motels, dormitory space
(regardless of whether the bed space is rented to individuals or groups), apartments and all other facilities
where rooms or sleeping facilities or spaces are furnished for a consideration. The term “hotel” shall not be
defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums, or nursing homes.
Monthly period means any calendar month of the year.
Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room, space, or sleeping
facility in a hotel for any purpose.
Occupant means anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room
of sleeping space or facility in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract, or
agreement.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/283
Permanent resident means any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any rooms or
sleeping quarters or facility in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days during the current calendar year or
preceding year.
Person means any individual, company, corporation, or association owning, operating, managing, or controlling
any hotel.
(1969 Code, sec. 24-51; Ordinance 1291, sec. I, adopted 10/23/96; Ordinance 1337, sec. 1, adopted 8/24/99)
Sec. 50-50. Penalty for violation.
If any person required by the provisions of this article to collect the tax imposed herein, or make reports as
required herein, and pay to the finance director the tax imposed herein, or if any person shall file a false report,
or any person shall violate any of the provisions of this article, such person shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon a conviction be punished by a fine as provided in section 1-6 and shall pay to the
finance director the tax due, together with a penalty of five percent of the tax due for each 30 days that the
same is not timely filed. (1969 Code, sec. 24-56; Ordinance 1291, sec. VI, adopted 10/23/96; Ordinance 1337,
sec. 5, adopted 8/24/99)
Sec. 50-51. Levy of tax; rate; exceptions.
(a) There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any room or space furnished by any hotel
where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of $2.00 or more per day; such tax to be equal to seven percent of
the consideration paid by the occupant of such room, space, or facility to such hotel exclusive of other
occupancy taxes imposed by other governmental agencies.
(b) No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident.
(c) No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a corporation or association organized and operated exclusively
for religious, charitable, or education purposes, no part of the net earnings of which is to the benefit of any
private shareholder or individual.
(1969 Code, sec. 24-52; Ordinance 1291, sec. II, adopted 10/23/96; Ordinance 1337, sec. 2, adopted 8/24/99)
Sec. 50-52. Hotel operator required to collect tax.
Every person owning, operating, managing, or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed in section 50-
51 hereof for the city. (1969 Code, sec. 24-53; Ordinance 1291, sec. III, adopted 10/23/96)
Sec. 50-53. Reports.
On or before the last day of each month, every person required in section 50-52 to collect the tax imposed
herein shall file a report with the finance director showing the consideration paid for all room or sleeping space
occupancies in the immediately preceding month, the amount of tax collected on such occupancies, and any
other information the finance director may reasonably require, which report shall be in writing. Such persons
shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. Every person paying the tax on or
before the due date required by this paragraph shall be entitled to a discount of one percent of the tax due.
(1969 Code, sec. 24-54; Ordinance 1291, sec. IV, adopted 10/23/96; Ordinance 1337, sec. 3, adopted 8/24/99;
Ordinance 1533, sec. 1, adopted 1/26/10)
Sec. 50-54. Procedures; access to books.
The finance director shall adopt such procedures, rules and regulations as are reasonably necessary to
effectively collect the tax levied therein, and shall, upon request of any person owning, operating, managing, or
controlling any hotel, furnish a copy of such procedures, rules, and regulations for the guidance of such person
and facilitate the collection of such tax as such collection is required herein. Such procedures, rules, and
regulations shall be in writing and a copy thereof shall be placed on file with the city secretary. The finance
director shall be permitted to have any access to books and records during reasonable business hours as shall
be necessary to enable the finance director to determine the correctness of the amount due under the
provisions of this article, or to determine whether or not a report should have been filed and the amount, if
necessary, of taxes due. (1969 Code, sec. 24-55; Ordinance 1291, sec. V, adopted 10/23/96; Ordinance 1337,
sec. 4, adopted 8/24/99)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/283
Sec. 50-55. Use of proceeds.
The proceeds of the tax levied by this article shall be used only for those purposes allowed by the applicable
statues of the state in effect at the time such taxes are collected. (1969 Code, sec. 24-57; Ordinance 1291, sec.
VII, adopted 10/23/96)
Secs. 50-56—50-83. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 50-84—50-109. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. USE AND OCCUPANCY OF CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY*
Sec. 50-110. Purpose.
The purpose of this division is to:
(1) Assist in the management of the rights-of-way;
(2) Govern the use and occupancy of the rights-of-way by telecommunications service providers;
(3) Secure fair and reasonable compensation for the use and occupancy of the rights-of-way by
telecommunications service providers in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner; and
(4) Assist the city in its efforts to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(1969 Code, sec. 24-91; Ordinance 1324, sec. 1, adopted 8/25/98)
Sec. 50-111. Definitions.
Whenever used in this division, the following terms, as well as their singulars, plurals and possessives, shall
have the following definitions and meanings, unless the context of the sentence in which they are used
indicates otherwise:
Access line means:
(1) Each switched transmission path of the transmission media within the rights-of-way extended
to the end-user customer's premises network interface within the city that allows delivery of
telecommunications service;
(2) Each loop provided as an unbundled network element to a person pursuant to an agreement
under section 252 of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996; and
(3) Each termination point of a no switched telephone circuit consisting of transmission media
connecting specific locations identified by, and provided to, the end user for the delivery of nonswitched
telecommunications service within the city.
Cable service means “cable service” as defined in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended,
47 USC 532 et seq.
Direction of the city means all ordinances, laws, rules, resolutions, and regulations of the city that are not
inconsistent with this division and that are now in force or may hereafter be passed and adopted.
Facilities means any and all of the duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, underground, and overhead
passageways, and other equipment, structures, plant, and appurtenances and all associated transmission
media used for the provision of telecommunications service.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/283
Line fee means a monthly fee to be applied to each access line for the calculation of the total amount to be paid
to the city as a rights-of-way fee.
Permit holder means any telecommunications service provider issued a permit pursuant to the terms of this
division.
Person means a natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited
liability company, joint venture, joint stock company or association, and other such entity.
Public utility means a public utility as that term is used in the Public Utility Regulatory Act of 1995, V.T.C.A.,
Utilities Code sec. 11.004.
Rights-of-way means all present and future public streets, avenues, highways, alleys, sidewalks, boulevards,
drives, tunnels, easements, bridges, and other such similar passageways, thoroughfares, and public ways
within the city.
Rights-of-way fee means the total amount paid to the city on a quarterly basis for the use and occupancy of the
rights-of-way.
Telecommunications service means the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphics, and other communications
between or among points by wire, fiber optics, or other similar facilities, as well as the rental, lease, or
furnishing of the facilities to accomplish such transmittal. The term “telecommunications service” does not
include transmissions for long distance purposes (interLATA and intraLATA) or any wireless service as defined
by law.
Telecommunications service provider means any person that supplies telecommunications service to others
within the corporate limits of the city in exchange for money or other value.
Telecommunications utility means the term “telecommunications utility” as used in the Public Utility Regulatory
Act of 1995, V.T.C.A., Utilities Code sec. 51.002(11).
Transmission media means any and all of the cables, fibers, wires, or other physical devices owned,
maintained, or placed by a permit holder to transmit and/or receive communication signals, whether analog,
digital or of other characteristics, and whether for voice, data or other purposes.
Use and occupancy means the permit holder's acquisition, installation, construction, reconstruction,
maintenance, repair, control, or operation of any facilities within the rights-of-way for any purpose whatsoever.
(1969 Code, sec. 24-92; Ordinance 1324, sec. 2, adopted 8/25/98)
Sec. 50-112. Requirement for permit granting clause.
Any person that owns, places, or maintains facilities within the rights-of-way shall first obtain a permit pursuant
to the terms of this division. Subject to the restrictions set forth herein, the city under this division shall issue
permits to telecommunications service providers for the purpose of regulating the use and occupancy of the
public rights-of-way in the city for the provision of access lines. By acceptance of the permit, the permit holder
agrees to abide by the terms of this division in all its operations within the city, including all operations and
facilities and transmission media used in whole or in part in the provision of access lines in any newly annexed
areas as specified in section 50-114(c). (1969 Code, sec. 24-93; Ordinance 1324, sec. 3, adopted 8/25/98)
Sec. 50-113. General terms of this division.
(a) No rights agreed to in this division by the city shall be exclusive and the city reserves the right to grant
franchises, licenses, easements, or permissions to use the rights-of-way within the city to any person as the
city, in its sole discretion, may determine to be in the public interest.
(b) A permit holder is not authorized to provide cable service as a cable operator in the city under this
division, but must first obtain a franchise from the city for that purpose, under such terms and conditions as may
be required by law.
(c) The initial term of each permit issued under this division shall be three years from the date of issuance,
unless terminated earlier by mutual written agreement of the city and the permit holder or pursuant to law. At
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/283
the expiration of the initial permit period, the permit shall be automatically extended for successive periods of
one year, unless written notice of intent to terminate the permit is given not less than 90 days prior to the
termination of the then-current period by the city to the permit holder. When such notice is given, the permit
shall terminate at the expiration of the then current period.
(d) The rights granted by this division inure to the benefit of the permit holder licensed hereunder. The
ordinance rights granted by permit shall not be assigned, transferred, or sold to another by the permit holder
without the express written consent of the city. For the purposes of this section, assignment, transfer or sale
means a change of operating control of the permit holder, expressly excepting an assignment or transfer to
entities that control, are controlled by or are under common control with the permit holder. Any such consent by
the city shall not be withheld unreasonably.
(1969 Code, sec. 24-94; Ordinance 1324, sec. 4, adopted 8/25/98)
Sec. 50-114. Compensation.
(a) Rights-of-way fee. The permit holder shall pay to the city a rights-of-way fee that is calculated as of
month's end by applying the appropriate line fee to each access line owned, placed, or maintained by permit
holder that is activated for use by an end-user or for another telecommunications service provider that uses
permit holder's services or facilities for the provision of telecommunications service within the city. The line fee
to be applied to each access line on a monthly basis shall be:
Access Line Monthly Fee per Access Line
Residential $0.35
Nonresidential 0.80
Annually, effective on the anniversary date of the ordinance from which this division is derived the city has the
right to increase the monthly line fee by formal action of the city commission. The city must provide the permit
holder the increased amount in writing. After receipt by the permit holder, the permit holder shall have 60 days
in which to implement the new monthly line fee amounts.
(b) Number of access lines. Subject to the city's agreement not to disclose this information, each permit
holder must provide annually, within a reasonable time after receipt of the city's written request, a report
showing the number of each type of access line owned or placed and maintained by the permit holder within
the city that are activated for end-user customers and other telecommunications service providers at month's
end for each of the preceding 12 months. The city agrees that the report shall be used solely for the purpose of
verifying the number of the permit holder's access lines within the city that are activated for end-user customers
and telecommunications service providers. Upon written request, the permit holder shall verify the information
in the report and, upon reasonable advance notice, produce to the city and permit inspection by the city of all
noncustomer-specific records and documents reasonably calculated to verify the information. For purposes of
payment of fees for use of the rights-of-way, lines terminating at customer's premises that are billed as lifeline,
tel-assistance, or other service that is required to be similarly discounted pursuant to state or federal law or
regulation for the purpose of advancing universal service to the economically disadvantaged shall not be
included in the lines upon which the fee is calculated.
(c) Annexation and disannexation. Within 30 days following the date of the passage of any action effecting
the annexation of any property to or the disannexation of any property from the city's corporate boundaries, the
city agrees to furnish the permit holder written notice of the action and an accurate map of the city's corporate
boundaries showing, if available, street names and number details. For the purpose of compensating the city
under this division, a permit holder shall start including or excluding access lines within the affected area in the
permit holder's count of access lines on the effective date designated by the state comptroller of public
accounts for the imposition of state local sales and use taxes; but in no case less than 30 days from the date
the permit holder is notified by the city of the annexation or disannexation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/283
(d) Confidential records. If the permit holder notifies the city of the confidential nature of any information,
reports, documents, or writings, the city agrees to maintain the confidentiality of the information, reports,
documents, and writings to the extent permitted by law. Upon receipt by the city of requests for the permit
holder's confidential information, reports, documents, or writings, the city shall notify the permit holder of the
request in writing by facsimile transmission. The city shall request an attorney general's opinion before
disclosing any confidential information, reports, documents or writings and will furnish the permit holder with
copies of attorney general opinion requests it makes pertaining to the permit holder's confidential information,
reports, documents, or writings.
(e) No other fees. The payments due hereunder shall be in lieu of any permit, license, approval, inspection,
or other similar fees or charges, including, but not limited to, all general business license fees customarily
assessed by the city for the use of the rights-of-way against persons operating businesses similar to that of the
permit holder. Further, such rights-of-way fee shall constitute full compensation to the city for all of permit
holder's facilities located within the rights-of-way, including interoffice-transport and other transmission media
that do not terminate at an end-user customer's network interface device, even though those types of lines are
not used in the calculation of the rights-of-way fee.
(f) Timing of payment. Permit holders shall remit the line fee on a quarterly basis. The payment shall be due
on the 45th day following the close of each calendar quarter for which the payment is calculated.
(g) Uncollectible. The city and the permit holder understand and agree that the permit holder has a statutory
right to pass through to its customers on a pro rata basis any compensation paid to the city for access to the
rights-of-way. Any other provision of this division notwithstanding, the permit holder shall not be obligated to pay
the city for any access lines for which revenues remain uncollectible.
(h) Facilities provided to other telecommunications service providers. To the extent allowed by applicable
state and federal law, any telecommunications service providers that purchase unbundled network elements or
other facilities for the purpose of rebundling those facilities to create telecommunications service for sale to
persons within the city shall pay to the city a rights-of-way fee that is calculated as of month-end by applying the
appropriate line fee, as specified in subsection (a) of this section, to each access line created by rebundling
services or facilities. Such direct payment to the city is necessary because it is only the person creating the
services for resale that will be able to determine the number of access lines being provided, so that the rightsof-
way fee imposed herein can be applied on a nondiscriminatory basis to all telecommunications service
providers that sell telecommunications service within the city. Other provisions of this division notwithstanding,
the permit holder shall not include in its monthly count of access lines any unbundled network elements or other
facilities provided to other telecommunications service providers for rebundling into telecommunications
services, if the telecommunications service provider that is rebundling those facilities for resale has provided a
signed statement to the permit holder that the telecommunications service provider is paying the access line
fees applicable to those rebundled services directly to the city. If the permit holder provides a copy of the signed
statement to the city, then the permit holder is absolved of all responsibility for the line fees payable on the
services, unbundled network facilities, and other facilities rebundled for the creation of telecommunications
service for sale within the city.
(i) Fee application to leased facilities. Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Utilities Code sec. 54.206, a permit holder may
collect the line fee imposed by the city pursuant to this division through a pro rata charge to the customers in
the boundaries of the city, including any other persons who are leasing, reselling or otherwise using the permit
holder's access lines to provide telecommunications service. With respect to any person leasing, reselling, or
otherwise using a permit holder's access lines, if a permit holder believes he does not have sufficient
information to determine the appropriate rate to apply, then the higher line fee shall apply until such time as the
person using the access lines provides to the permit holder sufficient written information to determine the
correct line fee. If a person provides sufficient written information for the application of the line fee, the permit
holders may bill the person on the basis of the information provided. The permit holder shall provide to the city
any information regarding the locations to which it is providing service or facilities for use by another person for
the provision of telecommunications service to end-user customers, so long as city first obtains written
permission of such other person for permit holder to provide the information to the city. Any other provision of
this division notwithstanding, however, a permit holder shall not be liable for underpayment of line fees resulting
from the permit holder's reliance upon the written information provided by any person that uses the permit
holder's service or facilities for the provision of telecommunications service to end-user customers.
(1969 Code, sec. 24-95; Ordinance 1324, sec. 5, adopted 8/25/98)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/283
Sec. 50-115. Construction and maintenance of facilities.
(a) The location and route of all facilities and transmission media placed and constructed in the rights-of-way
shall be subject to the lawful, reasonable and proper control and direction of the city.
(b) Nothing contained in this division shall be construed to require or permit the attachment on or placement
in the permit holder's facilities of any electric light or power wires or communications facilities or other systems
not owned by the permit holder. If the city desires to attach or place electric light or power wires,
communications facilities or other similar systems or facilities in or on the permit holder's facilities, then a further
separate, noncontingent agreement with the permit holder shall be required. Nothing contained in this division
shall obligate the permit holder to exercise or restrict the permit holder from exercising its right to enter
voluntarily into pole attachment, pole usage, joint ownership or other wire space or facilities agreements with
any person authorized to operate as a public utility or a telecommunications utility or authorized to offer cable
service within the city.
(c) The surface of the rights-of-way disturbed by the permit holder in the construction or maintenance of its
telecommunications system shall be restored within a reasonable time after the completion of the work to as
good a condition as before the commencement of the work. The permit holder shall endeavor to minimize
disruptions to the efficient use of the rights-of-way by pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and rights-of-way shall
not be blocked for a longer period than shall be reasonably necessary to execute all construction, maintenance
and/or repair work.
(d) Upon request, the permit holder shall remove or raise or lower its aerial wires, fiber or cables temporarily
to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The expense of such temporary rearrangements shall
be paid by the party requesting them, and the permit holder may require payment in advance. The permit
holder shall be given not less than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary rearrangements.
(e) The permit holder, its contractors and agents have the right, permission and license to trim trees upon
and overhanging the rights-of-way to prevent trees from coming in contact with the permit holder's facilities and
transmission media. When directed by the city, tree trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction
of the city or under the supervision of the city's delegated representative.
(1969 Code, sec. 24-96; Ordinance 1324, sec. 6, adopted 8/25/98)
Sec. 50-116. Relocation and removal of facilities.
(a) In accordance with V.T.C.A., Utilities Code sec. 54.203(c), upon 30 days' notice by the city, the permit
holder shall begin relocation of its facilities within the rights-of-way at its own expense to permit the widening or
straightening of streets. The notice by the city shall include a specification of the new location for the permit
holder's facilities along the rights-of-way.
(b) The city retains the right to move any facilities within the rights-of-way to cure or otherwise address a
public health or safety emergency. The city shall cooperate to the extent possible with the permit holder in such
instances to ensure continuity of service and to afford to the permit holder the opportunity to make such
relocation itself.
(1969 Code, sec. 24-97; Ordinance 1324, sec. 7, adopted 8/25/98)
Sec. 50-117. Indemnification.
The permit holder shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from all costs, expenses, and damages to persons
or property arising directly or indirectly from the construction, maintenance, repair, or operation of the permit
holder's facilities located within the rights-of-way found to be caused solely by the negligence of the permit
holder. Expenses shall include any reasonable and necessary attorney's fees and court costs. The city shall
give the permit holder prompt written notice of any claim for which the city seeks indemnification. The permit
holder shall have the right to investigate, defend and compromise any such claim. This provision is not intended
to create a cause of action or liability for the benefit of third parties, but rather this provision is solely for the
benefit of the permit holder and the city. (1969 Code, sec. 24-98; Ordinance 1324, sec. 8, adopted 8/25/98)
Sec. 50-118. Administration of this division.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/283
(a) The city may, at any time, make reasonable inquiries pertaining to the terms, conditions, rights, and
obligations of this division, and the permit holder shall respond to such inquiries on a timely basis.
(b) Copies of petitions, applications, and reports submitted by the permit holder to the Federal
Communications Commission or the state public utility commission shall be provided to the city upon specific
request.
(c) After reasonable notice to the permit holder, the city may establish, to the extent permitted by law, such
reasonable and nondiscriminatory rules and regulations as may be appropriate for the administration of this
division and the construction of the permit holder's facilities in the rights-of-way, so long as those rules and
regulations are competitively neutral.
(1969 Code, sec. 24-99; Ordinance 1324, sec. 9, adopted 8/25/98)
Sec. 50-119. Future contingency.
In the event this division or any tariff or other provision that authorizes permit holders to recover the fee
provided for in this division, becomes unlawful or is declared or determined by a judicial or administrative
authority exercising its jurisdiction to be excessive, unenforceable, void, or illegal, in whole or in part, then the
city and all permit holders shall negotiate a new compensation arrangement that is in compliance with the
authority's decision. Unless explicitly prohibited, the new compensation arrangement shall provide the city with
a level of compensation comparable to that set forth in this division, as long as that compensation is
recoverable by permit holders in a manner permitted by law for the unexpired portion of the term of this division.
(1969 Code, sec. 24-100; Ordinance 1324, sec. 10, adopted 8/25/98)
Sec. 50-120. Governing law.
This division shall be construed in accordance with the city code in effect on the date of passage of the
ordinance from which this division is derived to the extent that such code is not in conflict with or in violation of
the Constitution and laws of the United States or the state. (1969 Code, sec. 24-101; Ordinance 1324, sec. 11,
adopted 8/25/98)
Sec. 50-121. Nondiscrimination and competitive neutrality.
The city hereby recognizes that it has the legal duty to obligate, on a going-forward basis, all permit holders to
abide by the same terms and conditions imposed by this division, including, but not limited to, the payment of
the line fee, and to apply substantively same requirements governing their use and occupancy of the rights-ofway.
(1969 Code, sec. 24-102; Ordinance 1324, sec. 12, adopted 8/25/98)
Sec. 50-122. Permit.
Any permit holder that owns facilities already located within the rights-of-way on the date the ordinance from
which this division is derived is enacted is hereby granted a permit hereunder; however, within 30 days from the
effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, all such permit holders shall provide to the
city a notice of preexisting facilities. All prospective permit holders shall file a permit application form at least 30
days before placing any facilities in the rights-of-way. A permit application form will not be accepted and a
permit granted unless the applicant provides on that form the name and address of the person to whom notices
hereunder are to be sent, the date on which the applicant expects to begin providing service within the city, a
24-hour per day contact number for the applicant, and the certificate number of the applicant's certificate issued
by the state public utility commission or a notarized statement from a principal or officer of the applicant that no
certification by the public utility commission is required for the type of service to be offered by applicant. (1969
Code, sec. 24-103; Ordinance 1324, sec. 13, adopted 8/25/98)
Sec. 50-123. Issuance and effective date of permit.
(a) The city shall deliver a properly certified copy of the ordinance from which this division is derived to the
permit holder, along with a permit hereunder, within 14 days after receipt of the notice of preexisting facilities or
the permit application form.
(b) The effective date for any permit shall be the date of issuance, however, the assessment of the line fee
shall not begin until the first day of the second month after the date of issuance of the permit. Permit holders
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/283
with preexisting facilities may continue the preexisting compensation arrangement until the first day of the
second month following the issuance of the permit.
(1969 Code, sec. 24-104; Ordinance 1324, sec. 14, adopted 8/25/98)
Secs. 50-124—50-144. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. ENTERPRISE ZONES
Sec. 50-145. Enterprise zone nominated.
(a) Enterprise zone nominated. The city hereby nominates the following area for designation as an enterprise
zone in accordance with the attached map which will remain on file in the office of the city secretary. Any
discrepancy between this description and the map, the map will prevail:
TRZ1
For a 1.95 square mile tract of land within the city's jurisdiction and particularly described as follows: Starting at
the intersection of Ranch Road 1949 and the south frontage road of U.S. Highway 287; thence west on the
south frontage road of U.S. Highway 287 to its intersection with the city limits; thence west on the city limits, all
the way across the north side of town, to their intersection with U.S. Highway 287; thence southeast and east
on U.S. Highway 287 to its intersection with the access road just east of Bentley Street; thence south on the
access road to its intersection with the south frontage road of U.S. Highway 287; thence east on the frontage
road to its intersection with Strahan Street; thence south on Strahan Street, turning into Turner Street, to its
intersection with Wilbarger Street (Business U.S. Highway 287); thence east on Wilbarger Street to its
intersection with Ranch Road 1949; thence north on Ranch Road 1949 to the starting point.
(b) Additional enterprise zone nominated. The city hereby nominates the following area for designation as an
enterprise zone in accordance with the attached map which will remain on file in the office of the city secretary.
Any discrepancy between this description and the map, the map will prevail:
TRZ2
A 115-acre (0.18 square mile) tract of land within the city's jurisdiction and particularly described as follows:
Starting at the intersection of College Drive and the northeast corner of 4601 College Drive (parcel #
67870689); thence south to Kelly Street (undeveloped); thence east along Kelly Street to the alley parallel to
and immediately west of Yucca Lane; thence north along said alley to Maple Street; thence east along Maple
Street to the property line between 4300 Maple Street (parcel # 6548001) and 4230 Maple Street (parcel #
1817001); thence north along said property line to the rear property line of 4230 Maple Street (parcel #
1817001); thence east along the northernmost rear property lines of parcels north of and parallel to Maple
Street to the southwest corner of 1200 Hillcrest (parcel # 8302001); thence north along rear property lines of
parcels off of and parallel to Hillcrest Drive to Hospital Drive; thence east along Hospital Drive to Hillcrest Drive;
thence north along Hillcrest Drive to the southwest corner of 1011 Hillcrest (parcel # 4751); thence east along
the southern property line of said property in a straight line until its intersection with south access road of U.S.
Highway 287; thence northwest along the south access road of U.S. Highway 287 to its intersection with the
city limits; thence west to its intersection of Hillcrest Drive; thence south along Hillcrest Drive to a point
perpendicular with the southernmost or rear property lines of parcels south of Augusta Street; thence west
along said rear property lines to the eastern property line 4125 Augusta (parcel # 248001); then south along the
eastern property line of parcel #248001 to the southeast corner of said property; thence east in a straight line to
the northwest corner of 700 Hillcrest Drive (parcel # 67870419); thence south along the western property line of
parcel #67870419 to its intersection with the northernmost property line of 4200 College Drive (parcel #
815276); thence west along the northern property lines of parcel #815276 and 4220 College Drive (parcel #
815002023) to the northwest corner of parcel #815002023; thence south along the west property line of parcel
#815002023 to its intersection with the south lane of College Drive; thence southwest along the southern lane
of College Drive to the starting point.
(c) The city commission finds these zone areas meet the qualifications of the Act.
(1969 Code, sec. 24-121; Ordinance 1380, secs. 1, 2, adopted 11/19/01; Ordinance 1603, sec. 1, adopted
12/18/12)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/283
Sec. 50-146. Economic and tax incentives.
(a) The city commission hereby ordains and declares that upon designation of the proposed enterprise zones
as an enterprise zone, the city may provide the following incentives, including tax incentives, which are not
applicable throughout the city:
(1) The city may refund to any qualified business located in such enterprise zone the amount of
tax paid under the Municipal Sales and Use Tax Act (V.T.C.A., Tax Code Ch. 321) by the business
and remitted to the comptroller of public accounts up to the maximum extent authorized by sections
2303.505 and 2303.506 of the Act, and for a period determined by the city, but which shall not
exceed five years.
(2) The city may waive development fees to enterprise zone businesses meeting minimum
standards and targeted industries.
(3) The city may accelerate zoning and permitting procedures. Enterprise zone businesses will be
processed upon receipt, before non-enterprise zone businesses already in hand.
(b) Other incentives may be provided by the city in the proposed enterprise zones upon its designation as an
enterprise zone and throughout the city, including:
(1) The city may provide capital improvements in water and sewer facilities and road repair.
(2) The city may apply for training and economic development grants for new and retained
permanent jobs as available and appropriate to the industry.
(3) The city may provide improved fire and police protection.
(4) The city may abate taxes on the increase in value of real property improvement and eligible
personal property that locate in the designated enterprise zones. The level of abatement shall be
based upon the extent to which the business receiving the abatement makes real property
improvements and creates jobs for qualified employees and with a qualified employee being defined
by the Act.
(1969 Code, sec. 24-122; Ordinance 1380, sec. 3, adopted 11/19/01; Ordinance 1603, sec. 1, adopted
12/18/12)
Sec. 50-147. State approval; administration.
(a) The areas described in this article are designated as an enterprise zone and a reinvestment zone, subject
to the approval of the state department of economic development.
(b) The city commission directs and designates the city manager as the city's authorized representative to act
in all matters pertaining to the nomination and designation of the area described herein as an enterprise zone
and reinvestment zone.
(c) The city commission further directs and designates the city manager as liaison for communication with the
state department of economic development and to oversee zone activities and communications with qualified
businesses.
(1969 Code, sec. 24-123; Ordinance 1380, secs. 4-6, adopted 11/19/01; Ordinance 1603, sec. 1, adopted
12/18/12)
Secs. 50-148—50-159. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. ESTABLISHMENTS NOT LICENSED BY THE TEXAS ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE
COMMISSION
Sec. 50-160. General provisions.
(a) It is a common practice for an establishment not licensed or permitted by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Commission to allow its patrons to bring their own alcoholic beverages onto the premises for consumption. This
practice is often referred to as “BYOB,” an acronym for “bring your own bottle.”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/283
(b) This chapter shall be enforceable within the city's municipal boundaries.
(c) As matters related to the public's health, safety, and welfare is of the utmost concern, the city shall be
authorized to enforce, through its city attorney, city manager, and other personnel, this article as may be
allowed by law herein.
(d) Except as provided in subsection (e), this article applies to any person, business, entity, corporation,
partnership, establishment, or event that:
(1) Is not licensed or permitted by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission; and
(2) Allows patrons to bring alcoholic beverages onto the premises for possession and
consumption.
(e) This article does not apply to:
(1) A residence, or private residential community that is governed by a homeowners association
or other managing association;
(2) An establishment or event operated by a governmental entity;
(3) A private club, as defined by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code;
(4) A college and university use;
(5) A religious assembly use;
(6) A restaurant, general or limited;
(7) A theater use.
(Ordinance 1620, sec. 1, adopted 9/24/13)
Sec. 50-161. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BYOB shall be defined for purposes of this article as an establishment, venue, or event that is not licensed or
permitted by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission, and allows persons or patrons to bring alcoholic
beverages onto the establishment, venue, or premises for possession and consumption. A BYOB
establishment, venue, or event is a public place.
Premises means the grounds and all buildings, vehicles, and appurtenances pertaining to the grounds,
including any adjacent premises if they are directly or indirectly under the control of the same person from the
establishment, venue, or event. A deck, patio, and garden are considered part of the premises. A parking area
is not considered the premises.
(Ordinance 1620, sec. 1, adopted 9/24/13)
Sec. 50-162. Permit required; permit application.
(a) A person, business, entity, corporation, or partnership, shall obtain a yearly permit issued by the director
of the office of community development before operating a BYOB venue or event. A permit issued under this
article is a grant of privilege and is not a property right.
(b) A person must obtain a separate permit for each BYOB venue location or event.
(c) A person, business, entity, corporation, or partnership who seeks a permit to operate a BYOB venue or
event must submit an application to the office of community development on a form provided by the
department. The application must include:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/283
(1) The names, addresses, and birth dates of all persons who have an ownership or other interest
in, and who will manage, the proposed BYOB venue or event;
(2) The authorization for the city to conduct a criminal background check on each person
described in paragraph (c)(1) and also the authorization allowing city personnel and law
enforcement personnel the right to enter the establishment, venue, and premises at all times to
ensure compliance with this article and other applicable laws;
(3) The name of the BYOB venue and its physical address, and a copy of any lease or rental
agreements for that location;
(4) A registration certificate for the establishment from the secretary of state, if registration is
required by law;
(5) Proof that the applicant has all other permits and approvals required to operate the
establishment, including appropriate zoning, occupancy, and conditional uses;
(6) A security plan that for review including the name and license of any security business and
security personnel;
(7) Scale drawings of the site, including:
(A) All site improvements;
(B) The floor plan of each building;
(C) A designation of the areas where the consumption of alcohol is to be allowed;
(8) Information required by other ordinances;
(9) Other information reasonably required by the director; and
(10) The maximum amount of persons the event will allow to attend on each day of the activity.
(d) An applicant shall pay the nonrefundable permit fee of $100.00 and/or yearly renewal fees of $100.00
along with the application.
(Ordinance 1620, sec. 1, adopted 9/24/13)
Sec. 50-163. Qualifications.
(a) A person may not apply for or hold a permit under this article unless the person is at least 21 years of
age.
(b) A person may not hold a permit under this article or manage a BYOB establishment or venue if the
person has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor that directly relates to an alcohol related offense,
organized criminal activity, providing alcohol to a minor, sale or transporting of narcotics, the duties and
responsibilities for operating a BYOB venue, and any other conviction that makes the person unfit to hold a
permit or manage a BYOB establishment or venue.
(Ordinance 1620, sec. 1, adopted 9/24/13)
Sec. 50-164. Permit review.
(a) The city shall adopt rules to implement, administer, and enforce this article. Following timely submission
of the initial or renewal application, fees, and all necessary information and materials, the application shall be
subject to review for not less than three business days by the following:
(1) Director or designee of the community development department;
(2) Director or designee of the public works department;
(3) Fire chief or designee; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/283
(4) Police chief or designee.
(b) The personnel considering the initial application or renewal shall determine compliance and suitability of
the application.
(c) An initial and renewal application shall also be subject to the requirements contained in this article as well
as the following factors:
(1) Adequacy of the location of the property where the event will be held;
(2) The dates and times of the activity;
(3) The maximum amount of persons the activity will allow to attend on each day of the activity;
(4) Reasonableness of the plan that will govern any and all cleanup procedures for the entire
activity that comply with legal and established standards of sanitation and health and prevention;
(5) Reasonableness of the plan that will govern any and all fire, smoke, traffic, food preparation
and sales, parking, and security hazards and prevention;
(6) Reasonableness of the plan that will govern any and all parking;
(7) Reasonableness of the preparations made to provide adequate medical care if necessary; and
(8) Adequacy and sufficiency of the general and/or special liability insurance policy and
declarations and/or bonds covering the event or activity, personnel, visitors, invitees, and
participants.
(d) After review, a permit application shall be denied if it is determined that:
(1) The applicant is under the age of 21 years;
(2) The BYOB establishment or venue as proposed would not comply with this article;
(3) The applicant had a permit required by this article revoked within the preceding 12-month
period; or
(4) The applicant provided incorrect or incomplete information on the application.
(e) An issued permit may be rescinded, revoked, voided, suspended, or terminated if it is determined that:
(1) The applicant no longer complies with the qualifications of this article;
(2) The applicant provided incorrect or incomplete information on the application;
(3) The applicant obtained the permit by knowingly providing false information on the application;
(4) It is in the best interests of the public's health, safety, and welfare;
(5) The permit holder, the manager, or an employee of the BYOB venue has engaged in serious
or repeated violations of this article.
(f) An applicant or permit holder may appeal the determination of the application or action taken toward the
permit by submitting a written appeal to the city manager not later than three days after receipt of notice. The
city manager may reconsider the action. If the city manager has not acted on the written request within three
days from receipt of the request, the appeal is considered denied. The city manager shall be charged with the
final decision in consideration the application.
(Ordinance 1620, sec. 1, adopted 9/24/13)
Sec. 50-165. Permit not transferable; expiration, renewal, duty to supplement; management; age of
admittance; premises unobstructed; consent to inspect.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/283
(a) A permit issued under this article is not transferable or assignable.
(b) A permit issued for a venue expires one year after the date it is issued. A permit issued for an event
expires 72 hours after it is issued.
(c) A permit holder shall file an application for permit renewal not sooner than the ninetieth day and not later
than the forty-fifth day before the permit expires. An application that is not filed within the described time period
is a new application.
(d) A permit application or renewal is not considered timely unless accompanied by the required fees.
(e) While a permit application or renewal is pending or a permit is in effect, an applicant or permit holder shall
immediately supplement the required information provided in the permit application if the information is or
becomes inaccurate, incomplete, or misleading.
(f) A permit holder shall post the permit at or reasonably near the entry of the premises of each event or
venue.
(g) A permit holder shall ensure that a qualified manager is continuously present on the premises of the
BYOB establishment or venue during the hours of operation. A permit holder may serve as the manager.
(h) A permit holder, manager, employee, and security personnel at a BYOB establishment or venue shall not
allow a person under the age of 21 years of age onto the premises unless accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian.
(i) During the hours of operation, a person may not lock or obstruct:
(1) An exterior entrance door that is designated or available for use by patrons; or
(2) An interior door that provides access to a portion of the premises that is designated or
available for use by patrons.
(j) A permit holder, manager, or an employee of a BYOB establishment or venue shall provide immediate
access to all portions of the premises to city representatives and personnel including but not limited to:
administration, law enforcement, code enforcement, health inspectors, and firefighters.
(Ordinance 1620, sec. 1, adopted 9/24/13)
Sec. 50-166. Hours of operation.
(a) A permit holder, manager, or an employee of a BYOB establishment or venue shall close a BYOB
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. each day. A person who is on the premises at 2:00 a.m. may
remain until not later than 2:15 a.m.
(b) A permit holder, manager, or an employee of a BYOB establishment, event, or venue may not allow a
person to consume an alcoholic beverage between the hours of 2:15 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(c) A permit holder, manager, or an employee of a BYOB establishment, venue or event shall not allow a
member of the public on the premises, including the parking area between 2:30 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(Ordinance 1620, sec. 1, adopted 9/24/13)
Sec. 50-167. Management of consumption and parking areas.
(a) A permit holder, manager, or an employee of a BYOB establishment, event or venue shall oversee and
properly manage the consumption of alcoholic beverages to ensure that:
(1) No adverse effects or disturbance occurs to adjacent property or residents;
(2) The establishment, venue, and premises is clean, safe, and properly maintained for use by
patrons;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/283
(3) No open alcoholic beverages or open containers are removed from the establishment or
venue including the parking areas.
(b) A permit holder, manager, employee, or sub-contractor of a BYOB event or venue shall not allow the
consumption of alcohol outside of the premises.
(c) A permit holder, manager, employee, or sub-contractor of a BYOB event or venue may not allow persons
to congregate or loiter in a parking area.
(d) A permit holder, manager, or an employee of a BYOB event or venue shall post visible signs in
designated parking areas prohibiting alcoholic beverage consumption.
(e) A permit holder, manager, or an employee of a BYOB event or venue shall not allow the sale of alcoholic
beverages during or at a BYOB venue or event.
(f) A permit holder, manager, employee, or sub-contractor of a BYOB event or venue shall not:
(1) Consume alcoholic beverages while on duty or during the effective period of a permitted event;
(2) Purchase or otherwise acquire an alcoholic beverage for a patron;
(3) Provide an alcoholic beverage to a patron.
(Ordinance 1620, sec. 1, adopted 9/24/13)
Sec. 50-168. Crime prevention and reporting requirements.
(a) A permit holder, manager, employee, or sub-contractor of a BYOB event or venue shall:
(1) Take reasonable measures to prevent criminal activity on the premises; and
(2) Immediately report to law enforcement personnel all suspected criminal activity in the
establishment, venue, or the surrounding areas.
(Ordinance 1620, sec. 1, adopted 9/24/13)
Sec. 50-169. Enforcement, punishment and penalties.
(a) Should any person or business violate the prohibitions contained herein, or allow the commission of any
act or condition that proximately resulted in a violation of this article, the city manager, city attorney, and other
designated personnel may take any action to enforce this section or any ordinance to prevent and summarily
abate the action and remove or seize any objects used to violate this article. These actions may also include
but not be limited to allowing for municipal resources and personnel to: abate any premises or property, closure,
condemn, remove any person or thing, court action, suspend, cancel, or void any license or permit issued by
the city or a state or federal agency, and any and all other relief as may be necessary.
(b) Any violation of this article shall be subject to both civil and criminal penalties. A criminal conviction shall
be a class C misdemeanor. A violator shall also be subject to the maximum penalties allowed by law for failing
to appear in court when charged with an offense as described herein. If conduct constituting an offense under
this article also constitutes an offense under another law, the person may be prosecuted under all applicable
laws.
(c) A liable party shall be subject to a civil penalty up to $1,000.00 per violation, or the maximum allowed by
law.
(d) It shall also be unlawful for the holder of a permit to knowingly conspire to circumvent this article by
allowing the use of its permit, facility or property by any person, business, or entity that does not have a legally
obtained permit from the city.
(e) An appellant who seeks judicial review of the action taken by the city must file a petition with a court of
competent jurisdiction not later than 30 days of the action.
(Ordinance 1620, sec. 1, adopted 9/24/13)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/283
CHAPTER 52
TRAFFIC*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 52-1. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
Alley means a public way in the city extending either partly or through any city block in the rear of city lots and
in a direction generally from avenue to avenue, not more than 20 feet in width and capable of being traversed
by a vehicle.
Authorized emergency vehicle means vehicles of the fire department (fire patrol), police vehicles, public and
private ambulances for which permits have been issued by the state board of health, emergency vehicles of city
departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the city commission, and private
vehicles operated by volunteer firemen while answering a fire alarm.
Bus means a commercial vehicle carrying passengers for hire and operating over and along a fixed route.
Business district means the territory contiguous to and including a roadway when, within any 600 feet along
such roadway, there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes which occupy 300 feet of frontage
on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the roadway.
Bus stop means a section of the roadway, along the edge thereof, authorized by order of the city commission,
marked by signs reading “bus stop,” as a place for the sole use and convenience of the general public to board
and depart from any bus.
Crosswalk means that part of a roadway at any intersection included within the connection of the lateral lines of
the sidewalks on opposite sides of the street, whether marked or not, measured from the curb or, in the
absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway. The term “crosswalk” also includes any portion of
a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings
on the surface.
Digging out means the practice of starting any motor vehicle from a standing position by applying a sudden
burst of power, recognized by spinning rear wheels and noise of tires on the surface of the roadway.
Driver means that person who drives or is in actual physical control of the movements of a vehicle.
Driveway, private, means any entrance or exit over the sidewalk or sidewalk area of any street affording a
means of ingress or egress for vehicles to or from any private property, or the entrance or exit of any private
garage into or from any alley.
Driveway, public, means any entrance or exit over the sidewalk or sidewalk area of any street affording a
means of ingress or egress for vehicles to or from any public property.
Intersection means the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines, or if none,
then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two streets which join one another at, or approximately at,
right angles; or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets joining at any other angle may
come in conflict. Where a street includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each
roadway of such divided street by an intersecting street shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the
event such intersecting street also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of two
roadways of such streets shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
Laned roadway means a roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/283
Limited-access or control-access highway means every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners
or occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same
except as such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction
over such highway, street or roadway.
Loading zone means that portion of any roadway set apart, marked, and numbered for the sole use of the
public as a place for loading or unloading passengers, merchandise, or other cargo.
Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric
power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails.
Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not
more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
No parking zone means a space on the roadway adjacent to the curb, whether marked by official signs or not,
in which no vehicle may be parked.
Official traffic control devices means all signs, signals, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this chapter
placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic.
Park or parking means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than a temporary stopping
of such vehicle for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers,
merchandise, or other cargo; except an involuntary stopping of such vehicle by reason of mechanical failure or
direction of a policeman.
Parking stall or parking space means that portion or section of a roadway adjacent to the curbing or edge, set
apart, marked and bounded by lines painted or marked upon the surface of the roadway and extending into the
roadway for the use of parking vehicles; or that portion of any alley marked by official signs showing such space
to be a parking zone.
Pedestrian means any person afoot.
Police officer means any member of the police department of the city authorized by law to make arrests in
traffic offenses.
Residence district means the territory contiguous to and including a street not comprising a business district,
when the property on such street for a distance of 300 feet or more is, in the main, improved with residences
and buildings in use for business.
Right-of-way means the privilege of immediate use of the roadway.
Roadway means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In the event
a street includes two or more separate roadways, the term “roadway” shall refer to any such roadway
separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians
and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while
set apart as a safety zone.
Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the
adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians.
Stop, when required, means complete cessation of movement.
Stop, stopping or standing, when prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic control sign or signal.
Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when
any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/283
Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, and other conveyances, either singly or together,
while using any street for purposes of travel.
Traffic control signal means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic
is alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
Truck means a motor vehicle designed primarily for the transportation of cargo.
U-turn means the turning or causing the turning of a vehicle, so that when such turn is completed that such
vehicle will be headed in the opposite direction from that in which it was headed before such turning was
begun, whether or not such vehicle is pulled into a driveway or any space beyond the curbline of the street.
Vehicle means any device in, upon, or by which any person or property may be or is transported upon any
street within the corporate limits of the city, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-1)
Sec. 52-2. Purpose.
The purpose of the regulations prescribed by this chapter is to ensure to the people the maximum use and
benefit of the public streets of the city and yet retain the maximum degree of safety to prevent injury to persons
and property. (1969 Code, sec. 25-2)
Sec. 52-3. Authority of police officers to direct traffic.
Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to
direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with this chapter and other traffic laws. In the event of
fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may
direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter and other traffic laws.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-3)
Sec. 52-4. Authority of officers of fire department to direct traffic.
Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic
thereat or in the immediate vicinity. (1969 Code, sec. 25-4)
Sec. 52-5. Obedience to traffic officers.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire
department official given to direct or control traffic as authorized in this chapter. (1969 Code, sec. 25-5)
Sec. 52-6. Propelling pushcarts, riding animals, etc.
Every person propelling any pushcart, or riding any animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any
animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle,
except those provisions which, by their very nature, can have no application. (1969 Code, sec. 25-6)
Sec. 52-7. Application of chapter to drivers of government vehicles.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the
United States government, this state, county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any of
the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted herein or by state statute. (1969 Code, sec. 25-7)
Sec. 52-8. Application of chapter to authorized emergency vehicles.
(a) The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall apply to
authorized emergency vehicles, except that a driver, when operating any such vehicle in an emergency or in
the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, except when otherwise directed by a police
officer, may:
(1) Park or stand notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/283
(2) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be
necessary for safe operation.
(3) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions so
long as he does not endanger life or property.
(4) Exceed the prima facie speed limits established by this chapter so long as life or property is
not endangered; provided however, that this exception shall not apply to ambulances.
(b) The exemption granted in subsection (a) of this section shall apply only when the driver of the vehicle
sounds a siren, bell, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and the vehicle displays a lighted red
lamp visible from the front as a warning to others.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-8)
Sec. 52-9. Application to workmen, equipment.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and other equipment while
actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway or street but shall apply to such persons and vehicles
when traveling to or from such work. (1969 Code, sec. 25-9)
Sec. 52-10. Traffic violations by minors.
(a) Any male minor who has passed his 14th birthday but has not reached his 17th birthday, and any female
minor who has passed her 14th birthday but has not reached her 18th birthday, and who drives or operates an
automobile or any other motor vehicle on any street, alley, public way, overpass, or avenue within the corporate
limits of the city while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, or who drives or operates an automobile or other
motor vehicle in such a way as to violate any traffic ordinance of the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. No
such minor, after conviction or plea of guilty and imposition of fine, shall be committed to jail in default of
payment of the fine imposed, but the court imposing such fine shall have the power to suspend and take
possession of such minor's driving license and retain the same until such fine has been paid.
(b) If any such minor shall drive any motor vehicle upon any street, alley, public way, overpass, or avenue
within the corporate limits of the city without having a valid driver's license authorizing such driving, such minor
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-10)
Sec. 52-11. Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers.
No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designated or intended for the use of
passengers. This provision shall not apply to any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to
persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. (1969 Code, sec. 25-11)
Sec. 52-12. Riding motorcycles.
A person operating a motorcycle shall, at all times while so operating the same, wear a crash helmet approved
by the state department of public safety, and shall not ride other than upon the permanent and regular seat
attached thereto or carry any other person, nor shall any other person ride upon such motorcycle other than
upon a firmly attached seat to the rear or the side of the operator. (1969 Code, sec. 25-12)
Sec. 52-13. Bicycle riding on sidewalk.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride any bicycle upon any sidewalk in the city. (1969 Code, sec. 5-1;
Ordinance 328 adopted 10/12/1915)
State Law reference- Local authorities may regulate and license bicycles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code sec.
542.202(a)(4).
Sec. 52-14. Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles.
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. (1969 Code, sec. 25-13)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/283
Sec. 52-15. Clinging to moving vehicles.
No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates, or any toy vehicle shall attach the
same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. (1969 Code, sec. 25-14)
Sec. 52-16. Use of roller skates, coasters, etc., on roadway.
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, skate board, toy vehicle, or similar device
shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a street or a crosswalk, and when so crossing, such person
shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. (1969 Code,
sec. 25-15)
Sec. 52-17. Glass, nails, etc., not to be deposited in street; removal of same.
(a) No person shall throw or deposit upon any street or alley any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans,
or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal, or vehicle upon such street or alley.
(b) Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any street or alley any destructive or
injurious material shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed.
(c) Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from any street or alley shall remove any glass or
other injurious substance dropped upon such street or alley from the vehicle.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-16)
Sec. 52-18. Projecting loads.
Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or more beyond the bed or body of such
vehicle there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of the load, between 30 minutes after sunset and 30
minutes after sunrise, a red light or lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and
rear of such vehicle. Such red light shall be in addition to the red rear lights required on every vehicle. At any
other time there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less than 12
inches square and so hung that the entire area is visible to the driver of a vehicle approaching from the rear.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-17)
Sec. 52-19. Removing or damaging traffic barriers.
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a city employee, to remove or damage any barriers erected under
the direction of city officers either closing a street or for the purpose of warning traffic of an obstruction in the
street. (1969 Code, sec. 25-18)
Sec. 52-20. Disposition of fines and forfeitures.
All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail of any person charged with a
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be paid into the city treasury and deposited in the general
fund. (1969 Code, sec. 25-20)
Sec. 52-21. Failure to obey notice or summons.
(a) Any person who violates his written promise to appear, given to an officer upon an arrest for any traffic
violation, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge on which he was
originally arrested.
(b) Any driver of a motor vehicle who unlawfully neglects to answer to the charges set forth in a written notice
affixed to such motor vehicle by a police officer shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the
disposition of the charge for which said notice was originally given.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-21)
Secs. 52-22—52-45. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ACCIDENTS
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/283
Sec. 52-46. Accidents involving damage to vehicle.
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident, resulting only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or
attended by any person, shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto
as possible, and shall forthwith return to said damaged vehicle and remain at the scene of such accident until
he has fulfilled the requirements of section 52-47. Every such stop shall be made in such a way as not to
obstruct traffic. (1969 Code, sec. 25-48)
Sec. 52-47. Duty to give information and render aid.
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person, or damage to any
vehicle which is driven or attended by any person:
(1) Shall give his name, address, and the registration number of the vehicle he is driving;
(2) Shall, upon request, exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's license to the person struck or to the
driver or occupants of or persons attending any vehicle collided with, or any peace officer; and
(3) Shall render to any person injured in such accident, assistance, including the carrying or the
making of arrangements for the carrying of such person to a physician, surgeon, or hospital for
medical or surgical treatment, if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary, or if such carrying is
requested by the injured person.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-49)
Sec. 52-48. Duty upon striking unattended vehicle.
The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop, and shall
then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the
driver or owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle, or shall leave securely fastened in a conspicuous
place in or on the vehicle struck, a written notice, giving the name and address of the driver and of the owner of
the vehicle doing the striking, and a statement of the circumstances thereof. (1969 Code, sec. 25-50)
Sec. 52-49. Duty upon striking fixtures on public thoroughfare.
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damages of fixtures legally upon or adjacent
to a street, roadway, or highway:
(1) Shall take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such
property of such fact, and of his name and address, and of the registration number of the vehicle he
is driving;
(2) Shall upon request and, if available, exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's license; and
(3) Shall make a report of such accident when and as required in section 52-50.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-51)
Sec. 52-50. Accident reports-Required.
(a) The drivers of all vehicles involved in an accident within the city resulting in an injury to or death of any
person, or damage to any property to an apparent extent of $25.00 or more, shall immediately by the quickest
means of communication give notice of such accident to the police department.
(b) The police department may require any driver of a vehicle involved in an accident of which a report must
be made, as provided herein, to file a supplemental report whenever the original report is insufficient. It is
hereby made the duty of all persons witnessing any accident or collision of a vehicle of any kind to report the
same to the police department.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-52)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, secs. 43, 44(b).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/283
Sec. 52-51. Same-Filing with city.
Every law enforcement officer, other than members of the city police department and state department of public
safety, who in the regular course of duty investigates a motor vehicle accident of which a report must be made,
either at the time of and at the scene of the accident or thereafter by interviewing participants or witnesses
shall, within 24 hours after completing such investigation, file a written report of such accident to the police
department. Every such accident report shall be made on the appropriate form and shall contain all of the
information required therein unless not available. Such reports shall be without prejudice to the officer so
reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the police department. (1969 Code, sec. 25-53)
Sec. 52-52. Removing vehicle from scene.
It shall be unlawful for the driver or any other person to remove any vehicle involved in an accident from the
scene of the accident until authorized to do so by a police officer; provided, however, that this section shall not
apply if there exists or arises a duty on the part of such driver or other person in control of such vehicle to use
said vehicle in carrying any person injured in said accident to a physician or surgeon for medical or surgical
treatment. (1969 Code, sec. 25-54)
Sec. 52-53. When driver unable to report accident.
When the driver or operator of a vehicle is unable physically to make the required accident report, if there were
other occupants of the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of making the report, such occupant or
occupants shall make or cause to be made said report. (1969 Code, sec. 25-55)
Sec. 52-54. Garages to report damaged vehicles.
The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any motor vehicle which shows evidence
of having been involved in an accident of which report must be made, as provided by state law or struck by any
bullet, shall report to the police department within 24 hours after such motor vehicle is received, giving the
engine number, registration number, and the name and address of the owner or operator of such vehicle. (1969
Code, sec. 25-56)
Sec. 52-55. Moving, removal of wrecked vehicles by wrecker trucks.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle equipped with a crane, hoist, winch, or towing device who has
answered a call to, or is attending the scene of any collision or accident of one or more vehicles on any
highway or street in the city, to remove or attempt to remove any vehicle involved in such collision or accident,
or in any way to interfere with or change the position of any such vehicle, except upon authority or direction and
in the presence of a police officer of the city, unless such change is made or attempted for the purpose of
releasing a person imprisoned within or under such vehicle; provided, however, that it shall be unlawful for such
operator of any such vehicle equipped with a crane, hoist, winch, or towing device to remove any vehicle from
the scene of accident or collision without the consent of the owner of the vehicle so removed, unless directed
by a police officer to remove such vehicle as a public safety measure or for the protection of private property.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-57)
Secs. 52-56—52-90. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. VEHICLE EQUIPMENT
Sec. 52-91. Headlights-When required.
Every vehicle upon a highway at any time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise and at
any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the
highway at a distance of 500 feet ahead shall display lighted lamps and illuminating devices as hereinafter
respectively required for different classes of vehicles, subject to exceptions with respect to parked vehicles.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-68)
Sec. 52-92. Same-Visibility distance; mounted height.
(a) Whenever requirement is hereinafter declared as to the distance from which certain lamps and devices
shall render objects visible or within which such lamps or devices shall be visible, said provisions shall apply
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/283
during the times stated in section 52-91 in respect to a vehicle without load when upon a straight, level,
unlighted highway under normal atmospheric conditions unless a different time or condition is expressly stated.
(b) Whenever requirement is hereinafter declared as to the mounted height of lamps or devices, it shall mean
from the center of such lamp or device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands when such vehicle is
without a load.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-69)
Sec. 52-93. Same-On motor vehicles.
(a) Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, shall be equipped with at least two
head lamps with one on each side of the front of the motor vehicle, which lamp shall comply with the
requirements and limitations set forth in this article.
(b) Every motorcycle and every motor-driven cycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more than two
headlamps which shall comply with the requirements and limitations of this article.
(c) Every headlamp upon every motor vehicle, including every motorcycle and motor-driven cycle, shall be
located at a height measured from the center of the headlamp of not more than 54 inches nor less than 24
inches to be measured as set forth in section 52-92(b).
(1969 Code, sec. 25-70)
Sec. 52-94. Taillights.
(a) Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and pole trailer, and every other vehicle which is being drawn at
the end of a train of vehicles, shall be equipped with at least one tail lamp mounted on the rear, which, when
lighted, shall emit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear, provided that in the case of a
train of vehicles only the tail lamp on the rearmost vehicle need actually be seen from the distance specified.
(b) Either a tail lamp or a separate lamp shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with a white light
the rear registration plate and render it clearly legible from a distance of 50 feet to the rear. Any tail lamp,
together with any separate lamp for illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted
whenever the headlamps or auxiliary driving lamps are lighted.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-71)
Sec. 52-95. Stoplights; turn signals.
(a) Any motor vehicle may be equipped and when required under this article shall be equipped with the
following signal lights or devices:
(1) A stoplight on the rear which shall emit a red or yellow light and which shall be actuated upon
application of the service (foot) brake and which may but need not be incorporated with a tail lamp.
(2) A light or mechanical signal device capable of clearly indicating any intention to turn either to
the right or to the left and which shall be visible both from the front and rear.
(b) A stoplight shall be plainly visible and understandable from a distance of 100 feet to the rear, both during
normal sunlight and at nighttime, and a signal light indicating intention to turn shall be visible and
understandable during daytime and nighttime from a distance of 100 feet both to the front and rear. When a
vehicle is equipped with a stoplight or other signal light, such light shall at all times be maintained in good
working condition. No stoplight or signal light shall project a glaring or dazzling light.
(c) All mechanical signal devices shall be self-illuminated when in use at the times mentioned in section 52-
91.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-72)
Sec. 52-96. Lights required or permitted.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/283
(a) At all times specified in section 52-91, at least two lighted lights shall be displayed, one on each side at
the front of every motor vehicle other than a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, except when such vehicle is
parked subject to the regulations governing lights on parked vehicles.
(b) Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also equipped with any auxiliary lights or a
spotlight or any other light on the front thereof projecting a beam of intensity greater than 300 candlepower, not
more than a total of four of any such lamps on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at any one time when upon
a street or highway.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-73)
Sec. 52-97. Brakes-Required.
(a) Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, when operated upon a roadway, shall
be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold such vehicle, including two
separate means of applying the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at least
two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so
constructed that failure of any one part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without
brakes on at least two wheels.
(b) Every motorcycle and every motor-driven cycle, when operated upon a highway, shall be equipped with at
least one brake which may be operated by hand or foot.
(c) Every trailer or semitrailer of a gross weight of 3,000 pounds or more when operated upon a roadway
shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to hold such vehicle and so
designed as to be applied by the driver of the towing motor vehicle from its cab, and said brakes shall be so
designed and connected that in case of an accidental breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be
automatically applied.
(d) In any combination of motor-drawn vehicles, a means shall be provided for applying the rearmost trailer
brakes, of any trailer equipped with brakes, in proximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicles
and developing the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest rate; or a means shall be
provided for applying braking effort first on the rearmost trailer wheels equipped with brakes; or both of the
above means capable of being used alternately may be employed.
(e) One of the means of brakes operation shall consist of a mechanical connection from the operation lever
to the brake shoes or bands and this brake shall be capable of holding the vehicle, or combination of vehicles,
stationary under any condition of loading on any upgrade or downgrade upon which it is operated.
(f) The brake shoes operating within or upon the drums on the vehicle wheels of any motor vehicle may be
used for both service and hand operation.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-74)
Sec. 52-98. Same-Performance ability.
Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall be capable at all times and under all
conditions of loading, of being stopped on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon application of
the service (foot) brake, within the distance specified below, or shall be capable of being decelerated at a
sustained rate corresponding to these distances:
Feet to Stop (from 20
miles per hour)
Deceleration (in
feet per second)
Vehicles or combination of vehicles having brakes on all
wheels
30 14
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/283
Vehicles or combination of vehicles not having brakes on all
wheels
40 10.7
(1969 Code, sec. 25-75)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, sec. 132(b).
Sec. 52-99. Same-Maintenance.
All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be so adjusted as to operate as equally as
possible with respect to the wheels on opposite sides of the vehicle. (1969 Code, sec. 25-76)
Sec. 52-100. Horns and warning devices.
(a) Every motor vehicle when operated upon a public thoroughfare shall be equipped with a horn in good
working order and capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than
200 feet, but no horn or other warning device shall emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound or whistle. The
driver of a motor vehicle shall when reasonably necessary to ensure safe operation give audible warning with
his horn but shall not otherwise use such horn when upon a thoroughfare.
(b) No vehicle shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a vehicle any siren, whistle or bell,
except as otherwise permitted in this section.
(c) It is permissible, but not required, that any commercial vehicle be equipped with a theft alarm signal
device which is so arranged that it cannot be used by the driver as an ordinary warning signal.
(d) Any authorized emergency vehicle may be equipped with a siren, whistle, or bell, capable of emitting
sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet but such siren shall not be
used, except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an
actual or suspected violator of the law, in which said latter events the driver of such vehicle shall sound said
siren when reasonably necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-77)
Sec. 52-101. Mirrors.
Every motor vehicle which is so constructed or loaded as to obstruct the driver's view to the rear thereof from
the driver's position shall be equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the roadway
for a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of such vehicle. (1969 Code, sec. 25-78)
Sec. 52-102. Mufflers; prevention of noise.
(a) Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant
operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke and no person shall use a muffler cut-out,
bypass, or similar device upon a motor vehicle in the city.
(b) The engine and power mechanism of every motor vehicle shall be so equipped and adjusted as to
prevent the escape of excessive fumes or smoke.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-79)
Sec. 52-103. Windshields must be unobstructed and equipped with wipers.
(a) No person shall drive any motor vehicle with any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon the
front windshield, side wings, or side or rear windows of such vehicle which obstructs the driver's clear view of
the roadway or any intersecting roadway.
(b) The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for cleaning rain, snow or other
moisture from the windshield, which device shall be so constructed as to be controlled or operated by the driver
of the vehicle.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/283
(c) Every windshield wiper upon a motor vehicle shall be maintained in good working order.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-80)
Secs. 52-104—52-140. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. OPERATION OF VEHICLES
Sec. 52-141. Duty to drive on right side of street.
Upon all streets, the driver of a vehicle shall drive upon the right half of the street, except as follows:
(1) When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the
rules governing such movement;
(2) When the right half of a street is closed to traffic while under construction or repair;
(3) Upon a street divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon; or
(4) Upon a street designated and signposted for one-way traffic.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-91)
Sec. 52-142. Passing vehicle proceeding in same direction-Generally.
(a) Except as provided in section 52-144, the driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the
street until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.
(b) No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the street in overtaking and passing another
vehicle proceeding in the same direction, unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic
for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering
with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction of any vehicle overtaken. In
every event, the overtaking vehicle must return to the right-hand side of the street before coming within 100 feet
of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction.
(c) No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left of the street for the purpose of passing a vehicle
proceeding in the same direction when approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad
grade crossing or when approaching within 100 feet of any bridge, viaduct, or tunnel.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-92)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, secs. 54, 56, 57.
Sec. 52-143. Same-Duty of driver of overtaken vehicle.
It shall be the duty of the driver of a vehicle, upon an audible signal that he is about to be overtaken on the left,
to give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle and he shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until
completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. (1969 Code, sec. 25-93)
Sec. 52-144. Same-On right side.
(a) The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass to the right of a vehicle proceeding in the same direction
only under the following conditions:
(1) When the overtaken vehicle is making or about to make a left turn.
(2) Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by parked vehicles of
sufficient width for two or more lines of moving traffic in each direction.
(3) Upon a one-way street where the roadway is free from obstruction and of sufficient width for
two or more lines of traffic.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/283
(b) The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle on the right only under conditions
permitting such movement in safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or
main-traveled portion of the street.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-94)
Sec. 52-145. Passing vehicle proceeding in opposite direction.
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right and, upon streets having
width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of
the main-traveled portion of the street, as nearly as possible. (1969 Code, sec. 25-95)
Sec. 52-146. Turning movements.
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows:
(1) Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the
right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
(2) The approach for a left turn from a two way street into a two way street shall be made in that
portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and, after entering the
intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of
the roadway being entered.
(3) The approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall be made in that
portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of
such centerline where it enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way
street shall be made by passing to the right of the centerline of the street being entered upon leaving
the intersection.
(4) Where both streets or roadways are one-way, both the approach for a left turn and a left turn
shall be made as close as practicable to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-96)
Sec. 52-147. Stopping and turning signals-Generally.
(a) When any other traffic may be affected by such movement, no person shall turn any vehicle without giving
a signal of his intention to turn right or left. Such signal shall be given continuously during not less than the last
100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning.
(b) No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate
signal to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to give such signal.
(c) A stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given by means of the hand and arm or by a signal
lamp or mechanical signal device of a type approved by the state department of public safety; provided,
however, that when the body of a vehicle or the body and load of a vehicle projects 24 inches or more to the left
of the center of the steering wheel, or under any condition when a hand and arm signal would not be visible
both to the front and rear of the vehicle, the vehicle must be equipped with and the signals must be given by
such turn-indicating lamp or device.
(d) The signal lamps provided for in subsection (c) of this section shall be used to indicate an intention to
turn, change lanes, or start from a parked position and shall not be flashed on a moving vehicle as a courtesy
or do-pass signal to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-97)
Sec. 52-148. Same-Manner of giving with hand and arm.
All signals required by section 52-147, when given by hand and arm, shall be given from the left side of the
vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall indicate as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/283
(1) Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally.
(2) Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward.
(3) Stop or decrease speed. Hand and arm extended downward.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-98)
Sec. 52-149. Limitations on turning around.
(a) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite
direction, unless such movement can be made in safety and without backing or otherwise interfering with other
traffic.
(b) A complete turn shall not be made at any intersection of any two streets or upon any street or alley in the
city where the city commission may determine that it is unsafe to make a complete turn and shall have caused
to be posted at such place in the street or alley a sign showing that a complete turn is prohibited.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-99)
Sec. 52-150. Right-of-way at intersections-Generally.
(a) The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle which has
entered the intersection from a different street or highway. When two vehicles enter an intersection which is not
controlled by a traffic sign or device from different streets at approximately the same time, the driver of the
vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
(b) When two vehicles approach one another on the same street going in opposite directions and the driver
of one of the vehicles desires to turn off such street, the vehicle which continues on the street in the original
direction has the right-of-way over the turning vehicle. In the event both drivers desire to turn off, then the
vehicle turning to the right has the right-of-way over the vehicle turning to the left.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-100)
Sec. 52-151. Same-When turning left.
The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to
constitute an immediate hazard, but such driver, having so yielded and having given a signal when and as
required by this article, may make such left turn, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the
intersection from the opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn. (1969
Code, sec. 25-101)
Sec. 52-152. Limitations on backing.
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same, unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety
and without interfering with other traffic. (1969 Code, sec. 25-102)
Sec. 52-153. Driving on divided streets.
Whenever any street or highway in the city has been divided into two roadways by leaving an intervening space
or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every
vehicle shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over, across or within
any such dividing space, barrier, or section, except through an opening therein or at a crossover or intersection.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-103)
Sec. 52-154. Driving on roadways laned for traffic.
Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules, in
addition to all others consistent herewith, shall apply:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/283
(1) The driver of a vehicle shall drive as nearly as practical entirely within a single lane and shall
not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made
with safety.
(2) Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes, the driver of a vehicle shall not drive in the
center lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly
visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn or
where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the
vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of such allocation.
(3) Official signs may be erected directing slow moving traffic to use a designated lane or
designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center
of the roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the direction of every such sign.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-104)
Sec. 52-155. Procedure upon approach of authorized emergency vehicle.
(a) Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle equipped with at least one lighted
lamp exhibiting red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of
such vehicle, and when the driver of such vehicle is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell, the
driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and
as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and
remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by
a police officer.
(b) This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to
drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-105)
Sec. 52-156. Procedure when meeting or overtaking stopped school bus.
The driver of a vehicle upon any of the public streets or highways within the city limits shall, upon meeting or
overtaking, from either direction, any school bus which has stopped on the highway for the purpose of receiving
or discharging any school children, stop his vehicle immediately before passing the school bus. After making
such stop, he may proceed past such bus at a speed which is prudent and not exceeding ten miles per hour,
and with due caution for the safety of such children. (1969 Code, sec. 25-106)
Sec. 52-157. Obstructing traffic generally.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, drive or propel a vehicle in such a manner as to block or obstruct the
traffic on any street or alley of the city. (1969 Code, sec. 25-107)
Sec. 52-158. Obstructing intersection or crosswalk.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk, unless there is sufficient space on the other side of
the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. (1969 Code, sec.
25-108)
Sec. 52-159. Following too closely.
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent,
having due regard for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and conditions of the street. (1969 Code,
sec. 25-109)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, sec. 61(a).
Sec. 52-160. Following emergency vehicles or driving near scene of fire.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/283
No driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall follow any fire apparatus traveling in response
to a fire alarm or any other emergency vehicle while on an emergency call closer than 500 feet, nor shall such
driver drive into or park such vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus has stopped to answer a fire
alarm. (1969 Code, sec. 25-110)
Sec. 52-161. Driving over fire hose.
No driver of any vehicle shall drive over an unprotected hose of the fire department when such hose has been
laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire
department official in command. (1969 Code, sec. 25-111)
Sec. 52-162. Processions-Funeral identification.
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of
each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and
designated by the city manager. (1969 Code, sec. 25-112)
Sec. 52-163. Same-Driving through.
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession
while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as such. This provision shall not
apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or police officers. (1969 Code, sec. 25-
113)
Sec. 52-164. Same-Drivers.
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand side of the roadway as practical
and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. (1969 Code, sec. 25-114)
Sec. 52-165. Driving on sidewalks.
Any driver of any vehicle who shall drive such vehicle upon or across any sidewalk or sidewalk area of any
street within the city, except on a driveway, public or private, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1969
Code, sec. 25-115)
Sec. 52-166. Driving through safety zones.
No driver of any vehicle shall, at any time, drive through or within a safety zone. (1969 Code, sec. 25-116)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, sec. 85.
Sec. 52-167. Rotary traffic island.
The driver of a vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall drive only to the right of such island. (1969
Code, sec. 25-117)
Sec. 52-168. Driving on fresh pavement.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle upon any portion of any street in the city that has been
freshly paved, unless all barriers or signal lights have been lawfully removed therefrom indicating that the street
is ready for travel. (1969 Code, sec. 25-118)
Sec. 52-169. Operation of vehicles in parks, etc.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle whatsoever through or upon or to park such
vehicle upon any park, hospital grounds, or other public property within the city except upon official, designated
roadways or parking lots. (1969 Code, sec. 25-119)
Sec. 52-170. Digging out prohibited.
Any driver of any motor vehicle who shall willfully cause such vehicle to dig out or shall cause any such vehicle
to make unnecessary noise by reason of operating such vehicle in such a manner as to cause the wheels
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/283
thereof to spin or slide on the roadway of any street when starting such vehicle or while making any turning
movement shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1969 Code, sec. 25-120)
Sec. 52-171. Control of vehicle.
It shall be the duty of every person who shall operate any vehicle within the city to keep the same under control
at all times and to avoid whenever possible colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian. (1969 Code, sec. 25-
121)
Sec. 52-172. Parades and processions.
No parade or procession, excepting the forces of the United States Army, Navy, Air Force or Marines, the
military forces of the state, and forces of the police and fire departments, shall occupy, march or proceed along
any street, sidewalk or any other public place or way in the city, except in accordance with a permit therefor
issued by the chief of police and such other regulations as are set forth herein which may apply. (1969 Code,
sec. 25-122; Ordinance 1545, sec. 1, adopted 8/23/10)
Editor's note- Ordinance 1545, sec. 1, adopted Aug. 23, 2010, renamed sec. 52-172 from “Parades and
processions; permit required; exceptions” to “Parades and processions”.
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate parades and processions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d,
sec. 27(a)(3).
Sec. 52-172.1. Prohibitions.
Interference with any authorized parade is prohibited which include but are not limited to unauthorized driving,
walking, or riding in the procession or throwing and placing of liquids or any other materials on the street,
parade entries, or at any participant. (Ordinance 1545, sec. 2, adopted 8/23/10)
Sec. 52-172.2. Penalty for violation.
Any violation of this article is punishable upon conviction by a penalty as provided in section 1-6 of these
ordinances. (Ordinance 1545, sec. 3, adopted 8/23/10)
Sec. 52-173. Displaying advertising.
(a) It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate any vehicle on any street within the corporate limits of the city
for the primary purpose of displaying advertising unless a permit is first obtained from the chief of police.
(b) It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle on city streets for the primary purpose of displaying advertising.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-123)
Sec. 52-174. Opening doors into traffic.
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is
reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to
traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. (1969 Code, sec. 25-124)
Sec. 52-175. Corner cutting prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle over any sidewalk area and through any driveway, parking
lot, or any business entrance at any intersection, in making either a right or left turn, except for the purpose of
coming to a complete stop to obtain or render some service or make a sale or purchase. It is the intention of
this section to prohibit corner cutting by driving a vehicle from one street into another across any sidewalk
and/or driveway and/or through any driveway. (1969 Code, sec. 25-125)
Sec. 52-176. Overloading, crowding of vehicles.
(a) No person shall drive a vehicle when it is loaded with material or passengers so as to obstruct the view of
the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving
mechanism of the vehicle.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/283
(b) No passenger in a vehicle or bus shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's or operator's
view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle or bus.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-126)
Sec. 52-177. Driving in public parks, etc.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle whatsoever through or upon any public park
or any property owned by the city within the city except upon official, designated roadways. (1969 Code, sec.
25-127; Ordinance 991 adopted 5/12/81)
Secs. 52-178—52-210. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Sec. 52-211. Conformity with manual and specifications of state highway department; uniformity.
All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the
state highway department. All signs and signals required under this chapter for a particular purpose shall, so far
as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and
not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic control devices. (1969
Code, sec. 25-137)
Sec. 52-212. General powers and duties relative to devices.
(a) The location, removal, and content of all traffic control signs, including but not limited to stop signs, yield
signs, and speed limit signs, shall be placed and determined by the street superintendent and police chief
subject to review and approval by the city manager. Prior to the implementation of any changes hereunder, the
city manager shall notify the commission in writing of such change; and if requested by any commissioner, each
such change shall be considered and adopted or rejected in public hearing by the commission at a regular or
special meeting.
(b) All locations and determinations of content changes made hereafter, as provided in subsection (a) of this
section, are hereby ratified, approved, and adopted by the city commission.
(c) The street superintendent shall keep a record of the location and content of all such signs in his office
available for public inspection during normal business hours.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-138; Ordinance 1040 adopted 11/21/83)
Sec. 52-213. Obedience to devices.
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto placed
in accordance with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of this city, unless otherwise directed by a police
officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle. (1969 Code, sec. 25-
139)
Sec. 52-214. Necessity of signs.
No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the
time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen
by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such
section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. (1969 Code, sec. 25-140)
Sec. 52-215. Ratification of existing devices.
All traffic control signs, signals, devices, and markings placed or erected prior to the adoption of this Code and
in use for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified, and declared to be
official traffic control devices, provided such traffic control devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter or state law. (1969 Code, sec. 25-141)
Sec. 52-216. Unauthorized signs, signals, etc.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/283
(a) No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any road, street or highway any
unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an limitation or resembles an official
traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which
hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad signal or
sign, and no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway or street any
traffic signal or sign bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This shall not be deemed to prohibit the
erection, upon private property adjacent to streets or highways, of signs giving useful directional information
and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signals.
(b) Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is declared to be a public nuisance and the city is
empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-142)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, sec. 36.
Sec. 52-217. Altering, injuring, etc., devices.
No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any
official traffic control device or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon or any other part thereof. (1969 Code,
sec. 25-143)
Sec. 52-218. Installation of traffic lights.
The city manager, as authorized by the city commission from time to time, shall designate intersections at which
traffic shall be controlled by electric traffic control signals or lights and shall cause such signals or lights to be
installed and maintained at such intersections. (1969 Code, sec. 25-144)
Sec. 52-219. Traffic control signal legend.
(a) Use of colored indicators. Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the words
“Go,” “Caution,” or “Stop,” or exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time or with arrows, the
following colors only shall be used and such terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and
pedestrians as follows:
(1) Green alone or “go.”
(A) Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left, unless
a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning
right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.
(B) Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or
unmarked crosswalk.
(2) Yellow alone or “caution” when shown following the green or “go” signal.
(A) Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red or “stop” signal will be
exhibited immediately thereafter and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the
intersection when the red or “stop” signal is exhibited.
(B) Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross
the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles.
(3) Red alone or “stop.”
(A) Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain until
green or “go” is shown alone; provided that, after stopping and yielding to all pedestrians and
vehicles, the driver of a vehicle may enter the intersection for the purpose of making a right
turn only, if a sign is in place indicating that such turn can be legally made.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/283
(B) No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway, unless he can do so safely and
without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
(4) Red with green arrow.
(A) Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the
movement indicated by such arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully
within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
(B) No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway, unless he can do so safely and
without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
(b) Traffic control signals at non-intersections. In the event an official traffic control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to
those provisions which, by nature, can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or
marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or
marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-145)
Sec. 52-220. Flashing signals.
Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
(1) Flashing red stop signal. When a red lens is illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of
vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when
marked and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop
sign.
(2) Flashing yellow caution signal. When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent
flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with
caution.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-146)
Sec. 52-221. Pedestrian walk and don't walk signals.
Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words “walk” or “don't walk” are in place, such
signals shall indicate as follows:
(1) Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the
signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
(2) Don't walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but
any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the walk signal may proceed to the
sidewalk or safety zone while the don't walk signal is showing.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-147)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, sec. 34.
Sec. 52-222. Stop intersections.
The city manager, with the approval of the city commission, may designate any street intersection as a stop
intersection and designate the streets upon which vehicles shall stop before entering such intersection.
Whenever any intersection has been so designated, the city manager shall cause the same to be identified by
the erection of stop signs indicating which vehicles approaching the intersection shall stop, and it shall be the
duty of the driver of any vehicle approaching such a sign to bring such vehicle to a complete stop at such sign
or at a clearly marked stop line before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police
officer or a traffic control signal. After having so stopped, such driver shall yield the right-of-way to other
vehicles which have entered the intersection or which are approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate
hazard. Such driver, after having so yielded, may proceed and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching on
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/283
the intersecting street shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding into or across the intersection.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-148)
Sec. 52-223. Yield right-of-way signs.
The city manager, as authorized from time to time by the city commission, may install and maintain yield rightof-
way signs at intersections where a special hazard may exist anywhere vehicles shall be required to yield the
right-of-way. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield right-of-way sign shall, in obedience to such sign, slow
down to a speed not in excess of 15 miles per hour, or shall stop if necessary, and shall yield the right-of-way to
any pedestrian crossing the roadway on which he is driving and to any vehicle in the intersection or
approaching on another street so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. (1969 Code, sec. 25-149)
Sec. 52-224. Designation of crosswalks, zones and marking traffic lanes.
The city manager, with approval of city commission, is authorized:
(1) To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the
roadway, crosswalks at any intersection where, in his opinion, there is particular danger to
pedestrians crossing the roadway; and at such other places as he may deem necessary.
(2) To establish safety, quiet, play and other zones of such kind and character and at such places
as he may deem necessary for the protection of the public.
(3) To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable,
consistent with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of this city.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-150)
Sec. 52-225. One-way streets and alleys.
(a) Whenever any ordinance of the city commission designates any one-way street or alley, the city manager
shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such
signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection
where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
(b) Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys which are designated as one-way streets or
alleys, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction where signs indicating the direction of traffic
are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-151)
Sec. 52-226. Prohibited turns at intersections.
(a) The city manager is authorized, subject to approval by the city commission, to determine those
intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, and/or U-turn, and shall place proper signs
at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and
permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be
removed when such turns are permitted. When authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left, or Uturn
is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such signs.
(b) No driver of any vehicle shall make a U-turn at any intersection within the city where there is suspended
and operating a traffic control signal light.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-152)
Sec. 52-227. Turning markers.
(a) The city commission is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections
indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections and such course to be traveled as
so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by any provision of this Code, state law or city
ordinance, rule or regulation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/283
(b) When authorized markers, buttons or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the
course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such
indications.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-153)
Sec. 52-228. No passing zone.
The city commission is hereby authorized to determine by resolution those portions of any highway in the city
where overtaking and passing or driving on the left side of the roadway would be especially hazardous and
may, by appropriate signs or markings on the roadway, indicate the beginning and end of such zones and when
such signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to any ordinarily observant person every driver of a
vehicle shall obey the directions thereof. (1969 Code, sec. 25-154)
Secs. 52-229—52-260. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. SPEED REGULATIONS
Sec. 52-261. Maximum limits-Generally.
(a) No person shall operate or drive any vehicle on any street within the city at a greater speed than 30 miles
per hour, unless signs are erected designating another speed in accordance with this article.
(b) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no person shall drive a vehicle on a street at a speed
greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential
hazards then existing. In every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with
any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the street in compliance with legal requirements and
the duty of all persons to use due care.
(c) The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of subsection (b) of this section, drive
at an appropriate reduced speed when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding
roadway, when approaching an intersection or railway grade crossing, when approaching and going around a
curve, and when special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or
highway conditions.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-165)
Sec. 52-262. Same-On specific streets.
(a) The city commission may alter the maximum speed limit established by section 52-261, on any street or
portion thereof within the city in accord with the provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, sec. 169.
Whenever signs are posted giving notice of the maximum legal speed limit so established for a particular street
or portion thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess
of such limit.
(b) The city manager, upon recommendation of the police chief, may alter the speed limit established by
section 52-261, on any street or portion thereof within the city, in a construction zone, for up to 90 days.
Whenever signs are posted giving notice of the maximum legal speed limit so established for a particular street
or portion thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess
of such limit.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-166; Ordinance 1599, sec. 1, adopted 8/28/12)
Sec. 52-263. School zones.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive any vehicle at a speed greater than 20 miles per hour or
to overtake or pass any other vehicle in any school zone as may be marked or designated within the city during
the hours indicated upon signs erected in such zones or whenever children are present in such zones. (1969
Code, sec. 25-167)
Sec. 52-264. Racing prohibited.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/283
Any person who shall race or engage in a contest for speed between motor vehicles of any kind upon any
public street or alley within the city shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. The fact that the actual speed
attained by any vehicle engaged in racing or a contest for speed is less than the prima facie legal speed limit
shall be no defense to a complaint of racing or engaging in a contest for speed in violation of this section. (1969
Code, sec. 25-168)
Sec. 52-265. Minimum limits.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable
movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with the law.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-169)
Sec. 52-266. Exemptions from article.
The provisions of this article and other ordinances of the city regulating the speed of vehicles shall not apply to
vehicles of the fire department when responding to a call, nor to police patrols, nor to physicians or ambulances
when actually engaged in responding to emergency calls; provided, however, that this section shall not
authorize any ambulance driver to exceed the speed of 45 miles per hour. (1969 Code, sec. 25-170)
Secs. 52-267—25-300. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Sec. 52-301. Presumption that owner of vehicle illegally parked same.
In any prosecution charging a violation of any ordinance or regulation governing the standing or parking of a
vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such
ordinance or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such
parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the
registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for
the time during which, such violation occurred. (1969 Code, sec. 25-181)
Sec. 52-302. Impoundment of standing or parked vehicles-Generally.
(a) Any vehicle which shall be or remain standing or parked upon any public street, avenue, way, alley, or
other public place, may be removed by or upon order of the chief of police, and placed in storage in a privately
operated garage or other place designated by or maintained by the city, under the following circumstances:
(1) When any vehicle is found upon a street, avenue, alley, way, or public place and a report has
been previously made that such vehicle has been stolen or complaint has been filed and a warrant
issued thereon, charging that such vehicle has been stolen or converted in violation of the law.
(2) When any police officer of the city has reasonable grounds to believe that any vehicle has
been abandoned.
(3) When a police officer arrests any person driving or in control of a vehicle for an alleged offense
and such officer is or may be required by law to take the one arrested immediately before a
magistrate, or if the arrested one is immediately taken before a magistrate, and when the arrested
one is the sole occupant or the owner of the vehicle and is immediately placed in custody.
(4) When a vehicle is so disabled that its normal operation is impossible or impractical and the
persons in charge of the vehicle are incapacitated by reason of physical injury or other causes to
such an extent as to be unable to provide for its removal or custody, or cannot be found or are not in
immediate vicinity of such vehicle.
(5) When such vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct, or causeway or in a tunnel or
tube and constitutes an obstruction to traffic.
(6) When any such vehicle is illegally parked so as to block the entrance to any private driveway
and it is impracticable to move such vehicle from in front of the driveway to any other point on the
highway.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/283
(7) When any vehicle constitutes a hazard, or interferes with a normal function of a governmental
agency, or by reason of any catastrophe, emergency, or unusual circumstances the safety of the
vehicle is imperiled.
(8) When any vehicle is left standing or parked unattended for more than 48 hours in violation of
any applicable section of this Code, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations; provided,
however, that in the event such vehicle is parked or standing immediately in front of or immediately
adjacent to property owned by the owner of such vehicle, or property rented by such owner, before
such vehicle shall be removed, the owner thereof shall be given written notice after the expiration of
48 hours and shall be given an additional 24 hours to remove or cause to be removed such vehicle.
Such written notice may be given by depositing the same in the United States mail, addressed to the
owner at the address given on the registration receipt of the vehicle, or his last known address.
(9) The vehicle is stopped by a police officer and the vehicle's owner or operator fails to show
evidence of financial responsibility as required under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 601, as
amended.
(10) The vehicle is stopped by a police officer for an alleged violation of a city or state traffic law or
other law applicable to the operation of a vehicle on the roadway and the vehicle's owner or operator
fails to show evidence of financial responsibility as required under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch.
601, as amended.
(b) In order to obtain possession of a vehicle stored under the provisions of this section, the claimant must
produce satisfactory evidence of ownership or right to possession, along with proof of financial responsibility,
within 30 days from the date of such storage and, in addition thereto, must pay all charges for towing,
impoundment, and storage of such vehicle, in addition to any fine.
(c) If a vehicle removed under this section is not claimed within 30 days from the date of storage, the same
may be sold by the city or the garage where the same is stored, for storage charges, as provided by law.
(d) The chief of police or a designated representative may release a vehicle without payment of towing,
impoundment, or storage fees under the following circumstances:
(1) A vehicle was taken into protective custody when the incident did not involve an arrest,
violation, or automobile accident;
(2) A vehicle is owned by or belongs to the victim of a violent crime and was taken into custody for
evidentiary purposes;
(3) Subsequent investigation results in a determination that there was no violation of this code or
the Texas Motor Vehicle Laws or that the arrested person did not commit a criminal offense; or
(4) A vehicle is owned by or belongs to the victim of a violent crime and was taken into custody for
evidentiary purposes.
(e) A person commits an offense if he removes or attempts to remove a vehicle from a city owned or
designated impound location without first paying the towage, impoundment and storage fees that have accrued
on the vehicle.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-182; Ordinance 1588, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/12)
Sec. 52-303. Same-Liability of city.
The provisions of section 52-302 shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any
person who shall leave his vehicle parked on the streets of the city in such a manner that the same may be
impounded; nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability by reason of impounding or causing to be
impounded such vehicle. (1969 Code, sec. 25-183)
Sec. 52-304. Prohibited in specific places.
(a) No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/283
(1) On a sidewalk or sidewalk area.
(2) In front of a public or private driveway.
(3) Within an intersection.
(4) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant, except within an officially marked parking stall.
(5) On a crosswalk.
(6) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection, except within an officially marked parking stall.
(7) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic control signal
located at the side of a roadway.
(8) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb
immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or
markings.
(9) Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
(10) Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and, on the side of a street opposite
the entrance to any fire station, within 75 feet of such entrance, when properly signposted.
(11) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or
parking would obstruct traffic.
(12) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street.
(13) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel.
(14) Within any alley.
(15) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
(b) No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any prohibited area specified in
subsection (a) of this section or away from a curb such distance as is lawful.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-185)
Sec. 52-305. Ten feet of roadway to be left available for traffic.
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner or under such conditions as to
leave available less than ten feet of the width of either lane of a roadway for free movement of the vehicular
traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers or when
necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals of a police officer. (1969 Code, sec. 25-
186)
Sec. 52-306. Stop required when emerging from alley, driveway, or building.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to
driving onto a sidewalk or onto a sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, yielding the right-ofway
to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway, shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. (1969 Code, sec. 25-187)
Sec. 52-307. Stop when traffic obstructed.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of
the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. (1969 Code, sec.
25-188)
Sec. 52-308. Parallel and angle parking.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/283
(a) No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway
headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches
of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in this section. On one-way streets, vehicles
may be parked on the left side of the street, with the left-hand wheels within 18 inches of the curb or edge of the
roadway, unless signs prohibit parking.
(b) The city manager, with the approval of the city commission, shall determine upon which streets angle
parking shall be permitted and shall mark or sign such streets, but such angle parking shall not be indicated
upon any federal-aid or state highway within the city, unless the state highway commission has determined by
resolution or order entered in its minutes that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without
interfering with the free movement of traffic. Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place
where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street or upon any
railway tracks.
(c) Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a
vehicle other than at the angle to, and with the hood or front end of such vehicle next to, the curb, or edge of
the roadway indicated by such signs or markings.
(d) Whenever parking spaces are marked by lines on the pavement, whether for parallel or angle parking, a
vehicle must be parked entirely within the lines of the parking space.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-189)
Sec. 52-309. Unattended vehicles.
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the
engine, and effectively setting the brakes thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels
to the curb or side of the roadway. (1969 Code, sec. 25-190)
Sec. 52-310. Parking for more than 72 hours prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to allow, cause or permit such vehicle to remain
standing or parked on any street, alley, avenue, or public way, within the city for more than 72 hours
continuously. (1969 Code, sec. 25-191)
Sec. 52-311. Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street in the city for the principal purpose of:
(1) Displaying such vehicle for sale;
(2) Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency;
(3) Advertising, except by permit issued by the chief of police and under the conditions stipulated
therein.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-192)
Sec. 52-312. Designating, marking prohibited or limited parking stalls and areas.
(a) The city manager shall cause parking stalls to be maintained and marked off in and on such streets and
parts thereof as may be designated by the city commission from time to time and he shall cause spaces in
which parking is prohibited to be maintained and marked off in and on such streets and parts thereof as may be
designated by the city commission from time to time. The city manager shall also cause time-limit parking areas
to be maintained and marked off in and on such part or parts of streets as may be designated by the city
commission from time to time. All such spaces or areas shall be clearly indicated by appropriate signs or by
markings on the pavement or curb.
(b) In areas designated as time-limit parking areas, parking may be limited to any period prescribed by the
commission, the same to be designated with clearly distinguished markings or signs at both ends of the timelimit
area and at reasonable intervals between the beginning and ending of such time-limit area, indicating the
time allowed for parking in such area.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/283
(c) Any prohibition of or time limit on parking established under this section shall apply on such days and
between such hours as prescribed by the commission.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-193)
Sec. 52-313. Parking in prohibited areas; overtime parking.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle registered in his name or owned
or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to be or remain in any space or area in which
parking is prohibited as provided in section 52-312, or in a time-limit parking area for a longer period of time
than that designated by the markings on the street or by signs clearly visible. (1969 Code, sec. 25-194)
Sec. 52-314. Starting parked vehicle.
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked, unless and until such movement can be
made with safety. (1969 Code, sec. 25-195)
Sec. 52-315. Lights on parked vehicles.
(a) Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked at nighttime upon any street within a business or residential district,
no lights need be displayed upon such parked vehicle.
(b) Whenever a vehicle is parked upon a street or highway outside of a business or residential district during
the hours between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, such vehicle shall be equipped
with one or more lamps which shall exhibit a light on the roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
front of the vehicle and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear.
(c) Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-196)
Sec. 52-316. Loading, unloading zones-Designation.
The city manager is authorized to determine and designate the location of passenger and freight curb loading
zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which
the provisions therefor are applicable. (1969 Code, sec. 25-197)
Sec. 52-317. Same-Use of passenger zones.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious
loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when
the regulations applicable to such curb loading zones are effective; and then only for a period of time not to
exceed three minutes, except when such spaces are adjacent to and serving a hotel or bus station, when such
period of time may not exceed 15 minutes. (1969 Code, sec. 25-198)
Sec. 52-318. Same-Use of freight zones.
(a) No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any length of time in any place marked as a freight curb
loading zone during the hours so set aside except that commercial vehicles may so stop, stand or park for the
expeditious unloading and delivery or loading and pickup of material. In no case shall the stop for unloading,
loading, pickup or delivery of material exceed 30 minutes.
(b) The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone
for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not
interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or about to
enter such zone.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-199)
Sec. 52-319. Vehicles exceeding 25 feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/283
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle, trailer or combination thereof on the streets, alleys, or
other public ways of the city which shall exceed 25 feet in length. (1969 Code, sec. 25-200)
Sec. 52-320. Parking, standing in alleys.
(a) No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to block the
free passage of other vehicles in such alley.
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to park
a vehicle in any alley within the fire limits of the city, except when such vehicle is actually being used for the
purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-201)
Sec. 52-321. Parking restrictions in spaces designated for the disabled in private parking lots.
(a) A person commits an offense if the person is neither temporarily or permanently disabled nor transporting
a temporarily or permanently disabled person and parks a vehicle with such special device or displaying a
disabled person identification card in a parking space or parking area designated specifically for the disabled by
a person who owns or controls private property used for parking.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person parks a vehicle neither displaying the special device nor
displaying a disabled person identification card in a parking space or parking area designated specifically for
the disabled by a person who owns or controls private property used for parking.
(c) A person commits an offense if the person parks a vehicle so that the vehicle blocks an access or curb
ramp or any other architectural improvement designed to aid the disabled.
(d) A person commits an offense if he lends an identification card issued to him under this act to a person
who uses the identification card in violation of this section.
(e) The special device and disabled person identification card referenced in this section refers to the special
devices and identification cards provided by the Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation
in accordance with state law.
(f) A parking space or area designated for the disabled is one which is marked by:
(1) An international wheelchair emblem clearly painted on the parking space; or
(2) A vertical sign five feet above the space bearing the international wheelchair emblem. If
several disabled spaces are adjacent to each other, the spaces may be designated by a vertical sign
five feet above each end space bearing the international wheelchair emblem and an arrow showing
the designation of adjacent spaces.
(g) Any parking space or area designated in accordance with subsection (f) of this section shall constitute
prima facie evidence that the owner or controller of a private parking lot having designated such space for
disabled parking.
(h) An offense committed under this section shall be a class C misdemeanor, and shall be punishable as
provided in section 1-6.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-202; Ordinance 1088 adopted 4/9/85)
Secs. 52-322—52-360. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. PEDESTRIANS
Sec. 52-361. Application of article.
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as provided in this chapter, but at all other places
pedestrians shall be granted those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this article. (1969 Code,
sec. 25-231)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/283
Sec. 52-362. Duty of drivers with regard to pedestrians.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding
with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall
exercise proper precautions upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-232)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, sec. 79.
Sec. 52-363. Use right half of crosswalk.
Pedestrians shall move, whenever possible, upon the right half of crosswalks. (1969 Code, sec. 25-233)
Sec. 52-364. Right-of-way in crosswalks.
(a) When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the rightof-
way, slowing down or stopping, if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a
crosswalk, when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the
pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian
shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle, which is so close
that it is impossible for the driver to yield.
(b) Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-234)
Sec. 52-365. When pedestrian shall yield.
(a) Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an
unmarked crosswalk at any intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(b) Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing
has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-235)
Sec. 52-366. Roadway to be crossed at right angles; exception.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the
shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a crosswalk. (1969 Code, sec. 25-236)
Sec. 52-367. When crosswalk required for crossings.
Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at
any place except in a marked crosswalk. (1969 Code, sec. 25-237)
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, sec. 76(b).
Sec. 52-368. Walking on roadways.
(a) Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent
roadway.
(b) Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a street or highway shall,
when practicable, walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach
from the opposite direction.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-238)
Sec. 52-369. Hitchhiking.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/283
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand in any street or other roadway in the city for the purpose of
hitchhiking or otherwise soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle. (1969 Code, sec. 25-239)
Sec. 52-370. Blind pedestrians.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, except persons wholly or partially blind, to carry or use on the public
streets of the city any cane or walking stick which is white in color, or white with red end.
(b) Any driver of a vehicle, operator of a motor-driven vehicle, or pedestrian, who approaches or comes in
contact with a person wholly or partially blind and carrying a cane or walking stick white in color, or white with
red end, shall immediately come to a full stop and take such other precautions before proceeding as may be
necessary to avoid accident or injury to the person carrying such cane or walking stick.
(1969 Code, sec. 25-240)
Secs. 52-371—52-400. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. MOTORIZED CARTS
Sec. 52-401. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Driver means the person driving and having physical control over the motorized cart.
Motorized cart means those electric powered carts, commonly referred to as golf carts, but which must have a
minimum of four wheels and which have an attainable top speed not greater than 25 miles per hour on a paved
level surface and which is manufactured in compliance with those federal motor vehicle safety standards for
low-speed vehicles. Specifically excluded from this definition are those motorized conveyances commonly
referred to as ATVs, four-wheelers, mules, and gators.
Owner means the person holding title to the motorized cart and the person required to register the motorized
cart with the city.
Parking area means those areas accessible to the public by motor vehicular traffic and which are designated for
temporary parking of motor vehicles, usually in places referred to as parking lots.
Street means the public roadways of the city by whatever name (e.g., road, alley, avenue, highway, route,
boulevard, etc.) that:
(1) Has a posted speed limit of 35 miles per hour or less; or
(2) Provides for no more than two lanes of vehicular traffic per direction; or
(3) Is not designated as part of either the state or federal highway system.
(Ordinance 1529, sec. 1, adopted 10/27/09)
Sec. 52-402. Registration permit.
Before any motorized cart may be operated over the authorized streets and parking areas of the city, it must be
registered and provided a permit with the city secretary located at city hall. Registration for a permit will consist
of an annual fee of $50.00 which covers the registration, permit decal, and administrative costs involved. The
registration process includes the following specifics:
(1) The permit decal shall be attached and displayed upon the rear of the motorized cart so as to
be clearly visible.
(2) The registration application affidavit shall be made on a form supplied by the city and shall
contain the following information:
(A) Name and address of owner.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/283
(B) Location in which the vehicle is stored.
(C) Model, make, name and motorized cart identification number.
(D) Type of motorized cart.
(E) Current driver's license number of owner.
(F) A statement that all users will carry a current driver's license and that all equipment
required hereinbelow in section 52-405 will be kept current during the registration period.
(G) A statement that the registration holder will carry the liability insurance coverage
according to subsection (4) of this section, it will remain in effect and good standing for the
term of the permit, and if for any reason the coverage gets suspended, terminated, or
cancelled the individual will immediately notify the city and cease golf cart use on city streets.
(H) Any user shall indemnify and hold harmless the city for any and all issuance or
nonissuance of said registration and enforcement or failure to enforce these regulations and
waives any and all rights to sue or allow subrogation by insurance company.
(I) Such other information which the city may require.
(3) The registration application shall be accompanied by a fee of $50.00.
(4) The registration application shall be accompanied by evidence of personal liability insurance
coverage consistent with the minimum requirements of state law for operational motor vehicles, and
a copy of the owner's driver's license.
(5) The registration shall be effective until November 30 of each year or such time as revoked or
the motorized cart is transferred to a new owner.
(Ordinance 1529, sec. 2, adopted 10/27/09)
Sec. 52-403. Revocation of permit.
The registration permit under this article may be revoked if:
(1) The owner or driver of a motorized cart fails to abide by the rules and regulations of this article.
(2) The owner or driver of a motorized cart fails to abide by the traffic laws and the use of a
motorized cart on any authorized street or parking area.
(Ordinance 1529, sec. 3, adopted 10/27/09)
Sec. 52-404. Transfer of ownership.
Upon transfer of ownership of the motorized cart to a person who intends to operate it over authorized streets
and parking areas, the new owner must register the motorized cart and pay the fee as outlined in section 52-
402. (Ordinance 1529, sec. 4, adopted 10/27/09)
Sec. 52-405. Required equipment.
Every motorized cart must be equipped as mandated by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code sec. 551.404(a), and/or
required by the city, including the following:
(1) Operational headlamps;
(2) Operational taillamps;
(3) Side reflectors;
(4) Operational parking brake;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/283
(5) Rearview mirror; and
(6) Horn.
(Ordinance 1529, sec. 5, adopted 10/27/09)
Sec. 52-406. Operation regulations.
(a) All drivers must carry a current and valid state driver's license, and be 18 years of age.
(b) All drivers of motorized carts shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using
the authorized streets and parking areas of the city.
(c) Motorized carts shall not be operated on sidewalks at any time.
(d) All motorized carts are entitled to a full use of a lane on the authorized streets and parking areas of the
city and no motor vehicle shall be driven in such a manner as to deprive any motorized cart of the full use of a
lane.
(e) The driver of a motorized cart shall not overtake and pass in the same lane occupied by the vehicle being
overtaken.
(f) No driver shall operate a motorized cart between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines of rows of
vehicles.
(g) The driver of a motorized cart with a current and valid state driver's license operating the cart on a street
(as defined in this article) can cross a multilane or a county or state route only at a signalized intersection.
(Ordinance 1529, sec. 6, adopted 10/27/09)
Sec. 52-407. Liability.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as an assumption of liability by the city for any injuries to persons, pets
or property which may result from the operation of a motorized cart by a registered permit holder or authorized
driver, or by the failure of the city to revoke said permit. Registered owners and permit holders are fully liable
and accountable for the actions of any individual that they provide permission to operate and drive said
motorized cart, both on personal and/or city and public properties. This described liability responsibility
especially applies to personal injuries or property damage resulting from motorized cart drivers. (Ordinance
1529, sec. 7, adopted 10/27/09)
Sec. 52-408. Penalties.
Any person who violates the terms of this article shall be penalized as follows:
(1) In addition to traffic violations that the driver of the motorized cart may be subject to pursuant
to state law, the registered owner of the motorized cart shall be subject to the following civil
penalties:
(A) For the first offense, a fine of not less than $75.00; and if not timely paid (within 30 days),
revocation of the permit.
(B) For the second offense, a fine of not less than $100.00; and if not timely paid (within 30
days), revocation of the permit.
(C) For the third offense, the registration for the motorized cart shall be revoked. This cart
cannot thereafter be reregistered by the same owner or any family member for a period of one
year.
(2) After a 12-month revocation period, the motorized cart owner can reregister for a reregistration
fee of $100.00.
(Ordinance 1529, sec. 8, adopted 10/27/09)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/283
CHAPTER 54
UTILITIES*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 54-1—54-18. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. LIQUID WASTE DISPOSAL
Sec. 54-19. Penalties.
(a) Any violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute an offense and shall be punishable by a fine
of more than $2,000.00. Each instance of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) Disposal of any liquid or semisolid wastes as described in this article at any location without authorization
from the wastewater treatment department shall be a violation of this article and shall be punishable by a fine of
not more than $2,000.00. Each instance of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(c) Any person who disposes of wastes at the city wastewater treatment plant which causes harm to the
plant, creates a hazard to humans or animals, causes a violation of Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (TPDES) or state discharge permits, or interferes with the use and disposal of sludge, shall be subject
to being banned from disposal of wastes at the city wastewater treatment plant.
(d) A director, officer, employee or other person authorized to act in behalf of a corporation or association
having primary responsibility for the discharge of a duty to act imposed by law on a corporation or association is
criminally responsible for a violation under this article to the same extent as if such person were criminally
responsible under this article.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-52; Ordinance 1354, sec. 6, adopted 10/24/00)
Sec. 54-20. Permit required.
No person shall engage in the business of collection, transportation, and disposal, or any of them, of liquid or
semisolid wastes from septic tanks, cesspools, chemical toilets, grease traps, sand and mud traps, or other
similar activity within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction without a permit from the state natural resource
conservation commission for each vehicle used in such activity. No person may dispose of such wastes in the
city's sanitary wastewater system without such a permit. (1969 Code, sec. 26-47; Ordinance 1354, sec. 1,
adopted 10/24/00)
Sec. 54-21. Operation requirements.
A permit holder under this article shall take all reasonable measures to prevent hazards to health, which can
arise from operations within the scope of this article and shall be subject to the following requirements:
(1) No material taken from a septic tank, cesspool, chemical toilet, sewage seepage pit, privy,
grease trap, sand and mud trap or other liquid or semisolid waste container shall be disposed of
other than in a manner and place approved by the wastewater treatment department.
(2) Tanks on such vehicles shall have the capacity of the tank indicated with two-inch numerals on
the side of the tank.
(3) No vehicle or auxiliary equipment used for carrying, transporting, or handling the wastes as
described herein shall be allowed to stand or remain overnight within 100 feet of an occupied
premises; nor shall the loading and unloading of such vehicles and the transportation thereof
through any street, place, or premises consume an unreasonable period of time.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-48; Ordinance 1354, sec. 2, adopted 10/24/00)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/283
Sec. 54-22. Acceptable wastes.
(a) Only domestic septic wastes or other specifically permitted wastes may be disposed of at the city
wastewater treatment plants.
(b) All other wastes as described herein shall be disposed of in a state and federal approved site.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-49; Ordinance 1354, sec. 3, adopted 10/24/00)
Sec. 54-23. Waste control records.
Any person who collects, transports, and disposes of waste as described in this article shall maintain a record
of each collection and each deposit on a manifest trip ticket form approved by the state. The manifest shall
include:
(1) Name, address, telephone, and commission registration number of transporter;
(2) Name, signature, address, and phone number of person who generated the waste and the
date collected;
(3) Type and amount of waste collected or transported;
(4) Name and signature of responsible person collecting, transporting, and depositing the waste;
(5) Date and place where the waste was deposited;
(6) Identification (permit or site registration number, location, and operator) of the facility where
the waste was deposited;
(7) Name and signature of facility on-site representative acknowledging receipt of the waste and
the amount of waste received; and
(8) The volume of the grease and grit trap or the septic tank deposited.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-50; Ordinance 1354, sec. 4, adopted 10/24/00)
Sec. 54-24. Disposal charge for liquid waste disposal.
(a) A disposal charge will be assessed each time that wastes as described in this article are deposited.
(1) For septic loads originating in Wilbarger County the minimum fee per 500 gallons or less will
be $35.00 per load.
Loads over 500 gallons will be charged $35.00 for the first 500 gallons plus $7.00 per 100 gallons
in excess of 500 gallons.
(2) For septic loads originating in Archer, Baylor, Foard, Hardeman or Wichita County the
minimum fee per 500 gallons or less will be $70.00 per load.
Loads over 500 gallons will be charged $70.00 for the first 500 gallons plus $14.00 per 100
gallons in excess of 500 gallons.
(3) For septic loads originating from Childress, Clay, Cottle, Haskell, Jack, King, Knox,
Throckmorton or Young County the minimum fee per 500 gallons or less will be $140.00 per load.
Loads over 500 gallons will be charged $140.00 for the first 500 gallons plus $28.00 per 100
gallons in excess of 500 gallons.
(4) Septic loads originating from counties other than those listed above may be accepted only by
approval from the public works director at a negotiated rate.
(b) Disposal may be made after normal operating hours at the city wastewater treatment plant for an
additional charge of $100.00 per load.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/283
(c) The charges shall be payable to the city within ten days after such charge is rendered.
(d) If any charge for disposal services is not paid within ten days after such charge is rendered, the city shall
charge and collect an additional service charge in the amount of ten percent of the net amount of such charge.
(e) Any person who shall fail or refuse to pay the charge herein specified within 15 days from the date it shall
have become due and payable shall have his disposal privileges suspended.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-51; Ordinance 1354, sec. 5, adopted 10/24/00; Ordinance 1610, sec. 1, adopted 3/26/13)
Secs. 54-25—54-51. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. SEWERS
Sec. 54-52. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Commercial class means those users which have three or more living units served by a single water meter, or
which have one or more businesses served by a single water meter.
Industrial class means those users whose wastewater results from a product manufactured, processed or
fabricated by the customer.
Living unit means a residential unit providing dwelling facilities for one family, including permanent provisions
for living, sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation.
Normal sewage has the same meaning as normal strength wastewater, as defined in article IV of this chapter.
Residential class means those users who have no more than two living units served by a single meter.
User has the meaning provided in article IV of this chapter.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-77; Ordinance 1356, sec. 1, adopted 9/26/00)
Sec. 54-53. Sewer cleaning services.
(a) City personnel are hereby authorized to perform sewer cleaning services on privately owned sewer piping
of industrial and public institutions that are utility customers of the city. The charge for such sewer cleaning
services is as follows: minimum $100.00 per hour or fraction thereof after the first four hours. The private
industries or public institutions that receive these municipal performed sewer cleaning services shall agree to
indemnify and hold harmless the city against all claims, demands, suits, judgments, costs, or expenses arising
from such loss or injury.
(b) City personnel are not authorized to perform sewer cleaning services on residential or nonindustrial
privately owned sewer piping.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-68; Ordinance 437, sec. 60, adopted 12/17/26; Ordinance 1319, secs. 1, 2, adopted
6/23/98)
Sec. 54-54. Sewer system use required for adjacent property.
It shall be unlawful for any person when living on property abutting or adjoining any street or alley upon which
sanitary sewer pipes have been laid, to throw or allow to be thrown or deposited on the surface of the ground,
or in any hole, cesspool or vault in or under the surface of the ground, or in any place other than the sanitary
sewer system, after authorized connection, except the proper fertilizing of the soil, any water which has been
used for domestic purposes or any liquids or solid filth, feces, or urine. (1969 Code, sec. 26-69; Ordinance 245,
sec. 1, adopted 10/15/09)
Sec. 54-55. Connections-Applications.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/283
Applications for connection with the city sewer system, must be made in writing by the owner of the property to
be connected, or by his authorized agent. Such application shall give the precise location of the property, the
type of service desired and the name of the owner, and shall be made on blanks furnished for the purpose.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-70; Ordinance 437, sec. 5, adopted 12/17/26)
Sec. 54-56. Same-Tapping fee.
The tapping fee for connection with the sewer system shall be $2.00. (1969 Code, sec. 26-71; Ordinance
adopted 12/9/52, sec. 4)
Sec. 54-57. Same-Compliance before issuance of permit.
Permits to make connections with the sewer system will be issued only when the plumbing in the house or
building to be connected is in accordance with the plumbing code. (1969 Code, sec. 26-72; Ordinance 437, sec.
5, adopted 12/17/26)
Sec. 54-58. Same-Designating “Y” branch position; connection under city supervision.
The city will designate the position of the “Y” branch in the street, as shown by the records in the city hall. All
connections made with the sanitary sewers or drains shall be made under the direction of the city. (1969 Code,
sec. 26-73; Ordinance 437, sec. 5, adopted 12/17/26; Ordinance adopted 12/9/52, sec. 5)
Sec. 54-59. Same-Old plumbing.
Before any old private or other drain shall be connected with the sewer system, the owner of any such drain or
sewer shall prove to the satisfaction of the city that it is clean and conforms in every respect with the city rules
and regulations. (1969 Code, sec. 26-74; Ordinance 437, sec. 13, adopted 12/17/26)
Sec. 54-60. Damaging system.
(a) No person willfully or negligently break, damage, uncover, deface, or tamper with any of the city's
wastewater system facilities or equipment which is a part of the city's wastewater system.
(b) No person, without the expressed authorization of the city, shall discharge wastes into any part of the
wastewater system. Any violation of this section shall constitute an offense punishable as provided in section 1-
6 for each violation.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-75; Ordinance 437, sec. 10, adopted 12/17/26; Ordinance 1354, sec. 7, adopted 10/24/00)
Sec. 54-61. Private system discharges.
The city shall have power to stop and prevent from discharging into the sewer system any private sewer or
drain. (1969 Code, sec. 26-76; Ordinance 437, sec. 12, adopted 12/17/26)
Sec. 54-62. Rate schedules.
Every user whose premises are served by a connection with the wastewater system of the city, whereby the
wastewater is disposed of by the city, shall pay a service charge as follows:
(1) All users located inside the corporate boundary limits shall pay a monthly service charge of
$35.45.
(2) All residential class users with two living units shall pay an additional monthly service charge of
$26.60 for a total of $62.05.
(3) A monthly service charge shall also be charged to all users in the amount of $2.45 per 1,000
gallons of water used after the first 1,000 gallons, or $2.45 per 1,000 gallons of wastewater
produced, as more specifically set forth hereinafter.
(A) The monthly volume charges for residential class users will be based on the individual
user's average monthly water use during the preceding winter quarter months of December,
January, and February. The volumes used to compute these charges are based on the amount
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/283
of water used by the residential class user as measured by a water meter. Where no preceding
winter quarter average is available from records, the finance director shall estimate a volume to
be used for this monthly volume charge, such estimate to be the current system-wide
residential average.
(B) The monthly volume charge to all other users will be based on the total water use as
measured by appropriate meters except as by subsection d. below.
(C) Users, other than residential class users, connected to the wastewater system who have
a source of water supply that is in addition to, or in lieu of, the city supply, must have a meter
approved and tested by the city for that source of supply and the volume charge as set forth
herein above shall be based on the sum of the volumes delivered by all sources of water
supply except as by subsection e. below.
(D) Users, other than residential class users, may install an approved meter on the
wastewater discharge, or use other approved methods to determine actual wastewater flows,
and be charged per 1,000 gallons of wastewater produced as set forth herein above.
(E) Residential class users connected to the wastewater system who have a water source in
lieu of the city supply shall be charged a monthly service charge and a monthly volume charge
equal to the current system-wide residential average.
(F) The monthly volume charge for industrial class users will be based on an approved
meter of $2.45 per 1,000 gallons of wastewater produced.
(G) The monthly charges for industrial class users who discharge other than normal strength
wastewater shall be charged, in addition to volume charge of $2.45, a surcharge for BOD and
TSS, as defined in article V of this chapter. The surcharges for BOD and TSS are $0.17 per
pound and $0.17 per pound respectively that are above the limits, as set in article IV of this
chapter.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-78; Ordinance 1356, sec. 2, adopted 9/26/00; Ordinance 1392, sec. 1, adopted 7/23/02;
Ordinance 1449, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/05; Ordinance 1532, sec. 2, adopted 12/22/09; Ordinance 1555, sec. 1,
adopted 2/22/11; Ordinance 1568, sec. 2, adopted 9/27/11; Ordinance 1597, sec. 2, adopted 9/25/12;
Ordinance 1606, sec. 2, adopted 3/26/13; Ordinance 1619, sec. 2, adopted 9/24/13; Ordinance 1660, sec. 4,
adopted 4/28/15)
Sec. 54-63. Monthly billing.
(a) The wastewater service charge shall be billed monthly in conjunction with the billing of water and
sanitation service charges.
(b) Any user, who shall fail to pay any authorized wastewater service charge within the time limit prescribed
for the payment of water, sewer and sanitation bills shall have his water line disconnected from the city's water
system. Water service shall not be restored until the user has paid all amounts due and in arrears and the water
reconnecting charge provided for in section 54-154.
(c) Any user, who shall fail to pay any authorized wastewater service charge within the time limit prescribed
for the payment of water, sewer and sanitation bills shall be subject to having his wastewater service line
disconnected from the city wastewater system. Wastewater service shall not be restored until the user shall
have paid all amounts due and in arrears and the actual cost of the disconnection and reconnection. The
estimated cost of the disconnection and reconnection shall be deposited with the city before the reconnection is
made.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-79; Ordinance 1354, sec. 8, adopted 10/24/00)
Sec. 54-64. Determining bill in special cases; measuring actual discharge.
Water usage by commercial or industrial customers in excess of 50,000 gallons per month may be reviewed by
the director of utilities for in-plant consumption. (1969 Code, sec. 26-80; Ordinance 1354, sec. 9, adopted
10/24/00)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/283
Sec. 54-65. Powers, authority of enforcing agents.
The duly authorized employees of the city presenting proper identification may enter upon all properties with the
consent of the owner or occupant or upon compliance with law if permission is refused, for the purposes of
inspection, observations measurement, sampling, and testing, in accordance with any provisions of this
chapter. Only in the event of an emergency affecting life, public health or property may private property be
entered without consent or without a search warrant. (1969 Code, sec. 26-81; Code 1969, sec. 26-81;
Ordinance 1354, sec. 10, adopted 10/24/00)
Secs. 54-66—54-88. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. DISCHARGE OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES
Sec. 54-89. Definitions.
Unless the context specially indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall
have the meanings designated in this section:
Abnormal sewage means any industrial wastewater having a pollutant content in excess of that found in the
definition of “normal waste.”
Approval authority means the executive director of the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission, or
his duly designated representative.
Authorized representative of industrial user means an authorized representative of an industrial user may be a
principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation; a general
partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; a duly authorized
representative of the individual designated in this definition if such representative is responsible for the overall
operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of
organic matter under laboratory procedures in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter
by weight. The methodology shall follow EPA approved methods.
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the
discharge from soil waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning three feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
Categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317(b),
(c)) which applies to a specific category of industrial user.
Categorical standards means national categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment standard, as
referenced by 40 CFR 403.
Chief operator means the chief operator of wastewater treatment of the city or his authorized deputy, agent or
representative.
City manager means the city manager of the City of Vernon, Texas, or his authorized agent or representative.
Composite sample means a mixture of grab samples collected at the same sample point at different times. A
flow-composite sample takes into account the variation in flow of the sample stream at the different times of
collection.
Control authority means the person employed as utilities director for the city or his authorized representative.
Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state.
Director means the person employed as utilities director for the city or his authorized representative.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/283
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where
appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of
such agency.
Fats, oils and greases (FOG) means any material including biological and mineral hydrocarbons measured in
any EPA approved FOG method. Any FOG sample must be a grab sample.
Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling,
storage or sale of produce.
Grab sample means a sample that is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow
in the waste stream and without consideration of time.
Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers,
septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
Indirect discharge means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated
under section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317(b), (c)), into the POTW, including holding tank waste
discharged into the system.
Industrial user means a source of indirect discharge.
Industrial waste means the water-borne solids, liquid or gaseous wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade or business as distinguished from sanitary sewage.
Interference means the inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations, may contribute
to a violation of any requirement of the city's TPDES permit. The term “interference” includes prevention of
sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with section 405 of the Act (33 USC 1345) or any
criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air
Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use
employed by the POTW.
Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means the concentration by weight per unit volume of liquid, also parts per million.
National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive discharge standard means any regulation developed
under the authority of section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5.
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or
groundwater.
New source means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of proposed
regulations prescribing a section 307(c) (33 USC 1317(c)) categorical pretreatment standard which will be
applicable to such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated. The term “new source” includes the
conditions of 40 CFR 403.3(k), as amended.
Normal strength wastewater means wastewater having a maximum BOD of 300 mg/l, a maximum TSS of 300
mg/l, a maximum TOC of 200 mg/l, a maximum FOG of 100 mg/l, and a maximum TPH of 20 mg/l. The quantity
of other pollutants shall be those values determined in the latest domestic waste survey,
Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or
concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge from other sources, is a cause of a violation of
any requirement of the POTW's TPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation).
pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions measured in grams
per liter of solution. Any pH sample must be a grab sample.
Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment,
rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/283
Pollution means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological
integrity of water.
Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the
alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained
by physical, chemical or biological processes, or by process changes and other means, except as prohibited by
40 CFR 4036(d).
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other
than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user.
Properly shredded garbage means the waste from the preparation, cooking or dispensing of food that have
been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half-inch in any dimension.
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means the city's wastewater treatment works designed to provide
treatment to wastewater.
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries wastewater and to which stormwaters, surface waters and
groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater.
Shall, when used in the context of this article, connotes a mandatory requirement; the term “may,” in contrast, is
permissive.
Significant industrial user (SIU) means:
(1) All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 or 40
CFR 405-471; and
(2) Any other industrial user that discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of
process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling up five percent or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated
as such by the control authority as defined in 40 CFR 403.12(a) on the basis that the industrial user
has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6)).
Slug load means any discharge of a nonroutine episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill
or a noncustomary batch discharge.
Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, Latest Edition.
State means the State of Texas.
Storm water means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting
therefrom.
Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission means the state agency delegated the responsibility of
TPDES permitting system and enforcing the Clean Water Act or other acts and regulations promulgated by the
Environmental Protection Agency.
Texas Pollution Discharge Elimination System or TPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to section 402
of the Act (33 USC 1342).
Total suspended solids (TSS) means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of (or is suspended
in) water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering per EPA approved method.
Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by
the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of the Clean Water Act 307(a) or other acts.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/283
User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city's
POTW.
Waste means anything left over, not needed or superfluous as an excess material or byproduct.
Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial
buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater
that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-89; Ordinance 1354, sec. 11, adopted 10/24/00; Ordinance 1638, sec. 1, adopted 6/24/14)
Sec. 54-90. Penalties.
(a) All industrial users discharging wastewater to the city's POTW are required to be in compliance with the
applicable provisions of the EPA's Pretreatment Rule before discharging into the city's POTW. A copy of the
Pretreatment Rule, in its entirety, can be obtained from the EPA's website.
Those industries and/or businesses not meeting compliance, or not possessing an industrial wastewater
discharge permit issued by the city will be denied access to the city's wastewater collection system, nor will they
be conditionally allowed to discharge to the POTW, in addition a penalty will be assessed for not meeting these
requirements.
Industry users discharging or desiring to discharge into the city's wastewater collection/wastewater treatment
plant will be permitted to do so, but under specific permit conditions only. The industrial wastewater discharge
permit must be developed by a registered professional engineer retained by the city.
(b) Penalties for exceeding permitted effluent limits will result when specific permitted effluent limits are not
met, and/or the occurrence results in an interference or pass through at the POTW, and such violation is likely
to recur, then the following corrective actions will be taken against the industrial user:
(1) First offense: The industrial user is required to submit a corrective action plan addressing the
cause for each permitted effluent limit failure. The corrective action plan must directly address the
cause of the failure, and provide a schedule for completing the action(s) necessary for correcting the
failure, and the corrective action plan must meet the approval of the POTW chief operator and the
city public works director.
(2) Second offense: The industrial user will be issued a notice of violation (NOV), and will be
expected to immediately take corrective action(s) to eliminate the cause of the failure. The NOV will
be issued by the public works director direct to the manager of the facility that is in violation. In the
event the manager does not accept the NOV, then the facility will be placed into enforcement with
penalties not to exceed $1,000.00 per day per offense. The facility manager may appeal to the city
commission, at their next regular meeting, who may consider the circumstances and validity of the
facility being fined. The city commission's ruling will be final.
(3) Third offense. The industrial user will be fined up to $500.00 per day per violation.
(4) Fourth offense. The industrial user's wastewater discharge permit will be revoked (per section
54-106).
(c) Criminal penalties. Any user who is found to have violated an order of the public works director or who
has willfully, knowingly or with criminal negligence failed to comply with any provision of this article or the
orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,000.00
for each offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct
offense.
(d) Falsifying information. Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained
pursuant to this article, or industrial waste permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate
any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine as
provided in subsection (a) of this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/283
(e) Corporate responsibility. A director, officer, employee or other person authorized to act on behalf of a
corporation or association having responsibility for the discharge of a duty to act imposed by law on a
corporation or association is criminally responsible for a violation under this chapter to the same extent as if
such person were criminally responsible under this chapter.
(f) Public participation will be solicited before an industrial wastewater discharge permit is issued, or a permit
waiver is approved, to any part or whole thereof, to the permit. Public participation is required during the
development, and/or revision, of any regulation standard, effluent limitation, plan, or program established by the
administrator (EPA) or the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) under the Clean Water Act,
Sec. 101(e). The director of public works will post such notices at City Hall for a period of at least one week,
and will advertise twice in a week, in the local newspaper, the notice will provide the name of the industrial user
making the request, his address and contact information, and also that of the director of public works, will be
provided on the notice so that anyone wishing to make comments, suggestions, or that may have questions,
may contact both, or either one, of these individuals and provide their input.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-99.7; Ordinance 1354, sec. 28, adopted 10/24/00; Ordinance 1638, sec. 1, adopted
6/24/14)
Sec. 54-91. Purpose and policy.
(a) This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater
collection and treatment system for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal
laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR 403). The
objectives of this article are to:
(1) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city's wastewater system, which will interfere with
the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge or final effluent, or both;
(2) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city's wastewater system which will pass through
the system, inadequately treated into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be
incompatible with the system; and
(3) Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the system.
(b) This article shall apply to all users of the city's sewer system. Except as otherwise provided herein, the
utilities director of the city shall administer, implement and enforce, or cause to be enforced, the provisions of
this article.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-90; Ordinance 1354, sec. 12 adopted 10/24/00)
Sec. 54-92. Use of public sewers generally.
(a) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof
runoff, or subsurface drainage to any sanitary sewer.
(b) Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically
designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the director. Unpolluted industrial process
waters may be discharged, upon approval of the director, to a storm sewer, or natural outlet, or into the sanitary
sewer system upon prior written approval of the director. It shall be the responsibility of the city to monitor and
control the quality of all discharges to the storm sewer system.
(c) In cases where, and in the opinion of the director, the character of the wastewater from any manufacturer
or industrial plant, building or other premises is such that it will damage the system or cannot be treated
satisfactorily in the system, the director shall have the authority to require such user to dispose of such
wastewater otherwise, and prevent it from entering the system.
(d) The director shall have the authority to deny or condition any new or increased contributions.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-91; Ordinance 1354, sec. 13, adopted 10/24/00)
Sec. 54-93. General discharge prohibitions.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/283
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will
interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. A user shall not contribute the following substances to
any POTW:
(1) Pollutants which create a risk of fire or explosion in the POTW, including but not limited to
wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees
centigrade using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
(2) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will
cause interference or pass through;
(3) Any solid or viscous substances in amounts which may cause obstruction to the flow in a
sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not
limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or
tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes,
cinders, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent
grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues from refining, or
processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes;
(4) Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than ten, or wastewater having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel
of the POTW;
(5) Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction
with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a
hazard to human beings or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or to
exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard; a toxic pollutant shall include
but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the Act;
(6) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either singly or by interaction with
other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent
entry into a sewer for maintenance and repair;
(7) Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such
as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be
in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under
section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances
Control Act or State criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used;
(8) Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate either its TPDES or state disposal system
permit, or both, or the receiving water quality standards;
(9) Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but
not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions;
(10) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW
treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the
introduction into the sewer system which exceeds 180 degrees Fahrenheit, or which, singularly or in
combination with other users, will cause the POTW plant influent to exceed 95 degrees Fahrenheit;
(11) Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate or
pollutant concentration which a user knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the
POTW;
(12) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the director in compliance with applicable state or
federal regulations;
(13) Any wastewater which is known to cause a hazard to human life or which constitutes a public
nuisance; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/283
(14) Any trucked or hauled-in pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-92; Ordinance 1354, sec. 14, adopted 10/24/00)
Sec. 54-94. Specific pollutant limitations and wastewater characteristics.
No user shall discharge the following pollutants in amounts greater than allowed by an industrial waste permit.
Pollutants not specifically regulated by permit shall be considered background pollutants. Permit limits shall be
set and allocated according to the pretreatment program. Limits for the following parameters and any other
parameters, the city may want to regulate shall be placed in the permit.
Arsenic
Cadmium
Chromium
Copper
Cyanide
Lead
Mercury
Molybdenum
Nickel
Selenium
Silver
Zinc
Phenols
Specific permitted limits are established as following:
(1) BOD 300 mg/l
(2) TSS 300 mg/l
(3) TOC 200 mg/l
(4) FOG 100 mg/l
(5) TPH 20 mg/l
Notice: If an industrial user exceeds the 300 mg/l limits for BOD and/or 300 mg/l limit TSS 66 percent of the
time over a six-month period, the industrial user will receive a $500.00 fine per day, per violation, until the
condition has been brought under control, as determined by the chief operator of the POTW. If an industrial
user exceeds 600 mg/l for BOD and/or TSS the industrial user will be fined up to $500.00 per day, per violation,
until the condition has been brought under control, as determined by the chief operator of the POTW.
The permit limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for
metallic substances are for total metal, unless indicated otherwise. The director may impose mass limitations in
addition to, or in place of, the concentration based on limitations listed in this section.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-93; Ordinance 1354, sec. 15, adopted 10/24/00; Ordinance 1638, sec. 1, adopted 6/24/14)
Sec. 54-95. Federal categorical pretreatment standards.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/283
Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory,
the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed upon this article for sources in that subcategory,
shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article. The director shall notify all affected
users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. (1969 Code, sec. 26-94; Ordinance 1354,
sec. 16, adopted 10/24/00)
Sec. 54-96. State requirements.
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than
federal requirements and limitations or those in this article. (1969 Code, sec. 26-95; Ordinance 1354, sec. 17,
adopted 10/24/00)
Sec. 54-97. Excessive discharge.
No user shall increase the use of water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical
pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state, except as
specified in section 54-101(c)(2). (1969 Code, sec. 26-96; Ordinance 1354, sec. 18, adopted 10/24/00)
Sec. 54-98. Accidental discharges.
(a) Policy. Each significant industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other substances regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans
showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review,
and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. All existing significant industrial users shall
complete such a plan and implementation schedule by December 1, 2000. Such plan and implementation
schedule shall specify a definite completion date for the construction of facilities to prevent accidental discharge
of prohibited materials. No user who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date of the
ordinance from which this article is derived shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the sewer system until
the city has approved accidental discharge procedures. Review and approval of such plans and operating
procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify such user's facility as necessary
to meet the requirements of this article. Such plans shall be reviewed every two years and modified as
necessary to meet changing conditions. In the case of an accidental discharge, the user shall immediately
notify by telephone the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of
discharge, its concentration and volume, and type of corrective actions taken by the user.
(b) Written notice to city. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the
director a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences, such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills or any other
damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other
liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law.
(c) Emergency notification procedure. An emergency notification procedure shall be made available to
employees on whom to call in the event of an accidental discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees
who may cause or suffer such an accidental discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification
procedure.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-97; Ordinance 1354, sec. 19, adopted 10/24/00)
Sec. 54-99. Excessive strength surcharge.
Wastewater containing BOD or TSS in excess of that provided for in a prohibited discharge standard or normal
strength wastewater may be discharged into the sanitary sewer provided:
(1) The waste will not cause damage to the collection system;
(2) The waste will not impair the treatment process;
(3) The person discharging such wastewater pays a monthly surcharge to the city utilities division
in addition to the usual monthly sewer service charges. Computation of such surcharge shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/283
based on the following formulas:
DBOD in pounds = (ABOD mg/L × V million gal × 8.34)/D days in month
DBOD = (ABOD × V × 8.34)/D
S1 surcharge is for all BOD over 300 mg/L for the month
S1 = a × 8.34 × V × (ABOD - 300)
If ABOD is less than or equal to 300 mg/L, S1 = 0
If DBOD is greater than 1,560 lbs calculate S2
S2 = (b - a) × (DBOD - 1,560) × D
If DBOD is less than or equal to 1,560, S2 = 0
If DBOD is greater than 1,944 lbs calculate S3
S3 = (c - b) × (DBOD - 1,944) × D
If DBOD is less than or equal to 1,944 lbs, S3 = 0
S4 is surcharge for TSS over 300 mg/L
S4 = d × (TSS - 300) × 8.34 × V
If TSS is less than or equal to 300 mg/L, S4 = 0
S5 is surcharge for FOG over 100 mg/L
S5 = e × (FOG - 100) × 8.34 × V
If FOG is less than or equal to 100 mg/L, S5 = 0
Total surcharge = S1 + S2 + S3 + S4 + S5
Where:
S = Surcharge for extra strength wastewater per day.
V = Monthly wastewater flow in million gallons.
D = Days of the month.
a = Unit cost for removing one pound of BOD for DBOD amounts up to 1,560 (section 54-
62(g)).
b = Unit cost for removing one pound of BOD for DBOD amounts between 1,560 and 1,944
(section 54-62(g)).
c = Unit cost for removing one pound of BOD when daily BOD is 1,944 or more (section 54-
62(g)).
d = Unit cost for removing one pound of TSS (section 54-62(g)).
e = Unit cost for removing one pound of FOG (section 54-62(g)).
BOD = Actual BOD measured at point of discharge mg/l.
TSS = Actual average TSS measured at point of discharge mg/l.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/283
FOG = Actual average FOG measured at point of discharge mg/l.
DBOD = Daily average BOD (in pounds).
ABOD = Actual average BOD in mg/l.
300 = Normal BOD in mg/l.
300 = Normal TSS in mg/l.
100 = Normal FOG.
8.34 = Conversion factor (to convert mg/l to lbs/1,000,000 gal.)
Unit cost for removing BOD, FOG and TSS shall be set in article III of this chapter.
Methods and frequency of testing shall be established by permit.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-98; Ordinance 1354, sec. 20, adopted 10/24/00; Ordinance 1555, sec. 2, adopted 2/22/11;
Ordinance 1638, sec. 1, adopted 6/24/14; Ordinance 1658 adopted 3/24/15)
Sec. 54-100. User permit.
(a) Required. All potential significant and categorical industrial users must apply for and obtain an industrial
waste permit prior to discharging, unless such user is an existing user. Existing users, reclassified as significant
or categorical, must apply for and obtain an industrial waste permit or waiver within 90 days of notice of
reclassification.
(b) Policy. Where the user is a significant user, or a categorical user, a written statement on a standard form
provided by the chief operator, setting forth the nature of operation contemplated or presently carried on, shall
be filed with the director of utilities. The statement shall contain the amount of water which will be used and its
source, the proposed point of discharge of such wastes into the public sewers, the estimated amount to be so
discharged, and a fair statement setting forth the known or expected physical, chemical and other
characteristics of the wastes. The director shall approve such applications and grant an industrial waste permit
only when the evidence submitted by the applicant demonstrates that the wastes or wastewater to be deposited
by the applicant in the sanitary sewer will comply with all the regulations of this chapter. Any violations of the
conditions of this industrial waste permit shall make the permittee subject to the penalties provided in section
54-90.
(c) Permit modifications. Within nine months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment
standard, the industrial waste permit of users subject to such standard shall be revised to require compliance
with such standard within the time prescribed by such standard. Where a user which is subject to a national
categorical pretreatment standard has not previously submitted an application for an industrial waste permit as
required, the user shall apply for an industrial waste permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the
applicable pretreatment standard.
(d) Permit fee. Permit fee is $3,300.00. The fee is payable upon issuance of the permit and is for the duration
of the permit.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-99; Ordinance 1354, sec. 21, adopted 10/24/00; Ordinance 1638, sec. 1, adopted 6/24/14)
Sec. 54-101. Reporting requirements for permittee.
(a) Baseline monitoring report required. All new or reclassified categorical users must submit a baseline
monitoring report, which meets or exceeds the requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b).
(b) Compliance date report. Within 90 days following the date of final compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
director a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated
process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily
flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/283
requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being
met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into
compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an
authorized representative of the industrial user, and certified by a professional person qualified by training to
render such certification.
(c) Periodic compliance reports.
(1) All categorical or significant users shall submit to the chief operator during the months of June
and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the director, a
report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by the
industrial waste permit. At the discretion of the director and in consideration of such factors as local
high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the director may agree to alter the months
during which the above reports are to be submitted.
(2) The director may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable
standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are
appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subsection (c)(1) of this section shall include the
mass of pollutants regulated in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of
sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or
production and mass where requested by the director, of pollutants contained therein which are
limited by the applicable standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the
applicable standard. All analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by
the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments
thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the EPA. Sampling shall be performed in
accordance with the techniques approved by the EPA. The director may waive the semi-annual
reporting requirement in subsection (c)(1) of this section when the chief operator collects all the
information required in the semiannual report.
(3) The user shall report any significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-99.1; Ordinance 1354, sec. 22, adopted 10/24/00)
Sec. 54-102. Monitoring facilities.
(a) Every user shall provide and operate at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection,
sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility
shall normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical
or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in a public street or sidewalk area and
located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
(b) There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling for
analysis. The facility and flow measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition at the expense of the user.
(c) Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided
in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications.
Construction shall be completed within 120 days following written notification by the city to begin construction.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-99.2; Ordinance 1354, sec. 23, adopted 10/24/00)
Sec. 54-103. Inspection and sampling.
(a) Policy. The city may inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article is
being met and all requirements are being complied with. Occupants of premises where wastewater is created
or discharged shall allow the city or its representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling and records examination or in the performance of their
duties. The city, the state natural resource conservation commission and the EPA shall have the right to set up
on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring or
metering operations or all of these operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would
require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/283
arrangements with its security so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, the
state natural resource conservation commission and the EPA will be permitted to enter the user's premises,
without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
(b) Determining character, volume, and concentration of waste.
(1) The industrial waste discharged or deposited into the sanitary sewers shall be subject to
periodic inspection and sampling as often as may be deemed necessary by the director. Samples
shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative of the character and concentration of the
wastewater under operational conditions. The determination of the character and concentration of
industrial waste shall be made by the director at such times and on such schedules as may be
established by the director. Should a user discharging industrial waste into the sanitary sewers
desire that a determination of the quality of such industrial waste be made at some time other than
that scheduled by the director, such special determination may be made by the director at the
expense of the user discharging such industrial waste.
(2) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing greases in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other prohibited
ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the chief operator and shall be
located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil
interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and
extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped
with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. Sizing of
such grease and oil interceptors shall be in accordance with the provisions of the city's plumbing
code. Where installed, all grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the user at his
expense in proper operating condition at all times.
(c) Measurement of flow.
(1) The volume of flow used in computing abnormal sewage surcharges shall be based upon
metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter readings maintained by the water
department. If a user discharging waste into the city's sanitary sewer system produces evidence to
the director demonstrating that a substantial portion of the total amount of metered water does not
reach the city's sewer system, an estimated percentage of total water consumption to be used in
computing charges may be established by the director.
(2) Any user who procures any part or all of his water supply from sources other than the city
water department, all or part of which is discharged into the sanitary sewer, shall install and maintain
at his expense water meters of the type approved by the director for the purpose of determining the
proper volume of flow to be used in computing sewer service charges. Such meters shall be read
monthly and tested for accuracy when deemed necessary by the director. Where it can be shown to
the satisfaction of the director that a substantial portion of the water as measured by the aforesaid
meter does not enter the sanitary sewer system of the city, then the director may require or permit
the installation of additional meters at the user's expense in such manner as to measure the quantity
of water actually entering the sanitary sewer system from the lot, parcel of land, building or premises
of such user, and the quantity of water used to determine the sewer service charge may be the
quantity of water actually entering the sewer system as so determined, if the director so elects.
If the director finds that it is not practicable to measure the quantity or quality of waste by the aforesaid meters
or monitoring devices, he shall determine the quantity or quality, or both, of the waste in any manner or method
he may find practicable in order to arrive at the percentage of water entering the sanitary sewer system of the
city and the quality of the sewage to be used to determine the sewer service charge.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-99.3; Ordinance 1354, sec. 24, adopted 10/24/00)
Sec. 54-104. Pretreatment.
Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve
compliance with all industrial waste permit limits within the time limitations as specified by the industrial waste
permit. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated
and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/283
procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of
the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the
provisions of the article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be
reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. (1969 Code, sec. 26-99.4;
Ordinance 1354, sec. 25, adopted 10/24/00)
Sec. 54-105. Confidential information; trade secrets.
(a) Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and
monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without
restriction, unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the
release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods or production entitled to protection
as trade secrets of the user.
(b) When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade
secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, unless ordered to be
disclosed by the attorney general of the state but shall be made available upon written request to governmental
agencies for uses related to this article, the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) permit,
state disposal system permit or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report
shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as
confidential information.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-99.5; Ordinance 1354, sec. 26, adopted 10/24/00)
Sec. 54-106. Enforcement procedures; revocation of permit.
Enforcement procedures for violations of this article shall be as stated in the approved pretreatment program,
including but not limited to the following:
(1) Immediate danger. When in the opinion of the director of utilities a continuing or proposed
discharge presents an immediate danger to the health or welfare of citizens or the environment, or
an immediate danger to the wastewater collection and treatment system or any of its components,
he shall immediately terminate the discharging person's sewer and water service. The discharging
person shall be notified as soon as possible of the termination of service and of the reason for the
termination. After notice, the discharging person may appeal the decision of the director of utilities to
the city manager who may uphold, amend or overrule the director of utilities' decision. Any person
dissatisfied with the city manager's decision may appeal to the city commission by filing a written
notice of appeal within five days of the city manager's decision with the city secretary. The city
commission may uphold, amend or overrule the city manager's decision after a hearing into that
decision has been held. In any hearing before the city commission under this section the substantial
evidence rule shall govern its determination of the matter.
(2) Substantial danger.
(A) The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service or an industrial waste permit or
both when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the director of utilities, in order to
stop an actual or threatened discharge which endangers or might endanger the health or
welfare of persons or the environment, or causes, or could cause, interference with the POTW,
or causes, or could cause, the city to violate any condition of its state or TPDES permits.
(B) Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service, or the industrial
waste permit, or both shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a
failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such
steps as it deems necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection and
termination of the violator's water service, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW
system, danger to any individuals, or violation of the city's state or TPDES permits. The city
shall, if possible, conduct an administrative hearing prior to the severance of a user's sewer
service. Such administrative hearing shall be conducted in the same manner as is prescribed
for a show cause hearing in the case of revocation of a permit; provided, however, three days'
notice shall be deemed sufficient notice to the violator of the administrative hearing if such
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/283
notice is personally served by the city. The city shall reinstate the industrial waste permit or the
wastewater treatment service or both upon proof of the permanent elimination of the
noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the
causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence
shall be submitted to the city within 15 days of the date of occurrence.
(3) Revocation of permit.
(A) Policy. Any user who violates the conditions of this article, or applicable state and federal
regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of this
section. The following are specific, but not inclusive, violations:
(i) Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics
of his discharge;
(ii) Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater
constituents and characteristics;
(iii) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection
or monitoring; or
(iv) Violation of conditions of the permit.
(B) Notification of violation. Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating
this article, his industrial waste permit, or any prohibition, limitation of requirements contained
herein, the city shall serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation
and providing a reasonable time for satisfactory correction thereof.
(C) Show cause hearing.
(i) The city shall order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to
enter the POTW to show cause before the director of utilities, why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying
the time and place of a hearing to be held by the director of utilities, regarding the
violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action,
and directing the user to show cause before the director of utilities, why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days
before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporate user.
(ii) The public works director may conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may
designate any officer or employee of the city to:
a. Issue in the name of the director of utilities, notices of hearing requesting the
attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to
any matter involved in such hearings;
b. Take the evidence;
c. Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other
evidence together with recommendations to the director of utilities, for action
thereon.
(iii) After the director of utilities, has reviewed the evidence, he may issue an order to
the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the
sewer service shall be discontinued, unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or
other related appurtenances shall have been installed on existing treatment facilities.
Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.
(iv) Failure of a user to attend a show cause hearing or failure of a user to present
evidence required by the person conducting the hearing shall be cause for immediate
termination of sewer service.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/283
(4) Civil legal action. If any person discharges wastewater, industrial wastes or other wastes into
the city's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this article, or federal or state
pretreatment requirements, or any order of the city, the city attorney may commence an action for
appropriate relief in the proper court of the county. In addition to the penalties provided in section 54-
90, the city may recover actual costs, including, but not limited to, repairs, fines and penalties,
reasonable attorney's fees, court costs and other expenses of litigation against the person found to
have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder.
(5) Other remedies. The director of utilities may employ any other remedies authorized for
enforcement by federal regulations.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-99.6; Ordinance 1354, sec. 27, adopted 10/24/00; Ordinance 1638, sec. 1, adopted
6/24/14)
Secs. 54-107—54-126. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. WATER
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 54-127. Utilities director-Appointment; general duties.
There shall be appointed by the city manager a utilities director, who shall be the administrative officer of the
waterworks system, including all pump and motor houses, pumps and motors, reservoirs, standpipes, ground
and elevated storage tanks, pipelines, hydrants, water meters, valves, automation equipment to operate the
water system, wells, testing equipment, and all other equipment or property used in connection in the operation
of the water system. He shall have general supervision of all employees in the water department, responsibility
to ensure adequate water pressure, and responsibility to plan all work schedules for maintenance and repairs
deemed necessary and consistent with his job description. He shall serve and be compensated in accordance
to the city charter. He shall be subject to all city ordinances, rules and regulations. (1969 Code, sec. 26-100;
Ordinance 646, sec. 1, adopted 9/24/59; Ordinance 1322, sec. 1, adopted 6/23/98)
Sec. 54-128. Same-Reporting offenders.
The utilities director shall cause complaints to be filed on violators of this article with the proper court of
jurisdiction. (1969 Code, sec. 26-101; Ordinance 646, sec. 1, adopted 9/24/59; Ordinance 1322, sec. 2,
adopted 6/23/98)
Sec. 54-129. Same-Attending to control of water supply.
The utilities director shall attend to and control the water supply and at all times see to the sufficiency thereof,
and shall notify the community and customers, unless an emergency requires otherwise, of the necessity of
shutting off any pipeline for the purpose of making repairs, extensions, connections, or any other purpose.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-102; Ordinance 646, sec. 1, adopted 9/24/59; Ordinance 1322, sec. 3, adopted 6/23/98)
Sec. 54-130. Right of entry.
The superintendent and any other authorized city officer shall have access at all reasonable hours to all parts of
the premises to which water is supplied for the purpose of examination. (1969 Code, sec. 26-104; Code 1969,
sec. 26-104; Ordinance 248, sec. 16, adopted 11/9/1909)
Sec. 54-131. Department separate; special fund.
The waterworks department shall be a separate and independent department of the city, and all revenues
arising from this source shall constitute a special fund to be used first for the payment of all expenses of said
waterworks. There shall be kept a separate account of said funds received and disbursed, and the warrants
drawn against this fund shall so state on the face that they are drawn against this fund and for what purpose.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-105; Ordinance 248, sec. 1, adopted 11/9/1909)
Sec. 54-132. Liability of city for breaks or discontinuance or diminution of water.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/283
The city shall not be liable for any damage by reason of the breaking of any pipe or service cock, or the
discontinuance of service for repair or other necessity or for diminution of water supply. (1969 Code, sec. 26-
106; Ordinance 248, sec. 15, adopted 11/9/1909)
Sec. 54-133. Reports of leaks and violations.
It shall be the duty of all employees of the city, including officers and members of the police force, to report to
the superintendent of the waterworks system, any leaks or unnecessary waste of water that may come to their
attention, and also any violations of this article. (1969 Code, sec. 26-107; Ordinance 646, sec. 4, adopted
9/24/59)
Sec. 54-134. Service rate for inadvertent, accidental, and unknown loss of water.
If a water user's monthly bill exceeds $50.00; and the water usage for that bill shows a usage of water three
times in excess of the average monthly water usage on an annualized basis; and a licensed plumber verifies
that the loss of water could not be detected from the exterior of a premises, but in fact the loss was hidden and
concealed and not easily discoverable by the water user, or the loss of water could not reasonably be foreseen
during the customer's absence, then the water rate for the month shall be adjusted to be as follows:
(1) An amount equal to the average water bill paid by the user on an annualized basis in the event
there is no prior history of use for a particular customer seeking benefit from this section, the water
and sewer superintendent shall be responsible for determining an equitable average water bill; and
(2) An amount equal to the cost to the city of water used in excess of the average annualized use.
The cost to the city has been determined to be $0.555 per 1,000 gallons as of January 1, 1984. The
cost to the city shall be calculated not less than annually by the water and sewer superintendent,
and the cost used pursuant to this section shall be the most recent calculated cost.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-107.1; Ordinance 1046 adopted 1/18/84)
Sec. 54-135. Illegal acts in connection with the waterworks system.
It shall be unlawful for any person to do, commit, or assist in committing any of the following things or acts in
the city, or in connection with any part of the waterworks system located outside the city:
(1) Open or close any fireplug, fire hydrant or stopcock connected with the city waterworks
system, or lift or remove the covers of any gate valves or shutoffs thereof, without the permission of
the superintendent of the waterworks, except in case of fire, and then only under the direction of
officers of the fire department;
(2) Interfere with, destroy, deface, impair, injure, or wantonly force open any valve gate, or door, or
in any way whatsoever destroy, injure or deface any part of any engine-house, reservoir, standpipe,
elevated tank, building or appurtenances, fence, tree, shrub, or fixture or property pertaining to the
waterworks system;
(3) Go upon or ascend the stairway or steps, on any elevated water storage tank or standpipe of
the waterworks system, except by permission of the waterworks superintendent;
(4) Place any telegraph, telephone, or electric light pole, or any obstruction whatsoever within
three feet of any fire hydrant;
(5) Resort to any fraudulent device or arrangement for the purpose of procuring water for himself
or others from private connections on privately owned premises contrary to the city regulations or
ordinances;
(6) Interfere with or injure any reservoir, tank, fountain, hydrant, pipecock, valve, or other
apparatus pertaining to the waterworks system, or to turn on or off without authority the water in any
street hydrant, fireplug, fire hydrant, or other water fixture, or to hitch or tie any animal thereto;
(7) Make or permit to be made any connections with a fireplug, or with main or service pipes of
the waterworks system or to turn on or use the water of said system without first obtaining a permit
therefor;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/283
(8) Cover over or conceal from view any water valve box, or service or meter box;
(9) Remove any water meter that has been placed by the city, or to in any manner change,
interfere with or tamper with any water meter; the provisions of this section shall not apply to the
employees of the city when acting in their official capacity; or
(10) Turn on the water supply to any building or to any supply pipe where the supply has been
turned off for the nonpayment of the monthly water charge or for the violation of any rule or
ordinance governing the waterworks system.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-108; Ordinance 646, sec. 2, adopted 9/24/59)
Sec. 54-136. Public water supply wells.
(a) Location. Public water supply wells shall be located so that there will be no danger of pollution from
flooding or from unsanitary surroundings, such as privies, sewage treatment plants, livestock and animal pens,
solid waste disposal sites or underground petroleum and chemical storage tanks and liquid transmission
pipelines, or abandoned and improperly sealed wells.
(b) Prohibited activities within the corporate limit of the city.
(1) Prohibited activities that are within 50 feet of a public water supply wells is a tile or concrete
sanitary sewer, sewerage appurtenance, septic tank, storm sewer, or cemetery; or prohibited
activities that are within 150 feet of a septic tank perforated drainfield, areas irrigated by low dosage,
low angle spray on-site sewage facilities, absorption bed, evapotranspiration bed, improperly
constructed water well, underground petroleum and chemical storage tank or liquid transmission
pipeline. However, sanitary or storm sewers constructed of ductile iron or PVC pipe meeting AWWA
standards, having a minimum working pressure of 150 psi or greater, and equipped with pressuretype
joints may be located at a distance of less than 50 feet from a proposed well site but in no case
shall the distance be less than ten feet. For the purposes of this section, improperly constructed
water wells are those, which do not meet the surface and subsurface construction standards for a
public water supply well.
(2) Prohibited activities located within 500 feet of a public water supply wells include a sewage
treatment plant or within 300 feet of the public water supply well a sewage wet well, sewage
pumping station or a drainage ditch which contains industrial waste discharges or the wastes from
sewage treatment systems.
(3) Prohibited activities from within 500 feet of a public water supply well are animal feed lots,
solid waste disposal sites, lands on which sewage plant or septic tank sludge is applied, or lands
irrigated by sewage plant effluent.
(4) Livestock shall not be permitted within 50 feet of any public water supply well.
(c) Permitted activities.
(1) Nothing in this section shall prohibit the construction of homes or buildings upon properties
within the areas described in subsections (a) and (b) of this section; provided that all restrictions
described in subsections (a) and (b) of this section are recognized and followed.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit normal farming and ranching operations
allowed elsewhere by this Code.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-111; Ordinance 1366, sec. 1, adopted 3/27/01; Ordinance 1385, sec. 1, adopted 2/26/02)
Sec. 54-137. Water conservation and drought contingency plans.
The city commission hereby approves and adopts the water conservation and drought contingency plans which
are kept on file in the office of the city secretary. (1969 Code, sec. 26-110; Ordinance 1516, sec. 2, adopted
6/23/09; Ordinance 1632, sec. 1, adopted 4/22/14)
Secs. 54-138—54-147. Reserved.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/283
DIVISION 2. SERVICE
Sec. 54-148. Connections-Application; performing; furnishing apparatus.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any connection to the mains or pipes of the waterworks system
without first making application to the city, stating fully the several and various uses for which water is wanted,
giving the name of the owner of the property, the number of the lot and block, the name of the street and house
number. Upon the payment of the tapping fee, the superintendent shall make, or have made, the necessary
connections and furnish a curb stop box and curb cock, the cost of which is included in the tapping fee, and
every premises connected with any water main, or being supplied with any water from the city waterworks, shall
have a separate service connection, curbstop box and curb cock. All fees and charges shall be paid for at
amounts and rates fixed by ordinance or resolution of the city commission. (1969 Code, sec. 26-120; Ordinance
646, sec. 3, adopted 9/24/59)
Sec. 54-149. Same-Misrepresentations or waste of water; stopping service.
In case of any willful misrepresentation on the part of any applicant, or any unreasonable water or diversion of
the water, the water supply will be stopped. (1969 Code, sec. 26-121; Ordinance 248, sec. 4, adopted
11/9/1909)
Sec. 54-150. Same-Issuance of permit.
When the application mentioned in section 54-148, together with the fee charged by the city for tapping the
mains, has been deposited with the city secretary, he shall issue a permit directed to the superintendent
showing the connection to be made and that the fee has been paid. (1969 Code, sec. 26-122; Ordinance 248,
sec. 3A, adopted 11/9/1909)
Sec. 54-151. Same-Tapping fee schedule and regulations.
(a) Tapping fee schedule. The tapping fee schedule for all taps that are to be located within the corporate
boundary of the city and are to be charged and collected by the city as follows:
3/4-inch tap $ 460.00
1-inch tap $ 547.00
1 ½-inch tap $1,007.00
2-inch tap, and larger Actual cost
Note: Actual cost means all costs, including labor, meter and meter vault, and bores underneath paved streets
and alleyways, based on the extension of a water service line to the customer's side of the meter.
(b) Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, tap enlargements which require a new tap will be
charged the tap fee for the size tap as set out in subsection (a) of this section, plus an additional fee of $75.00
for abandoning the existing tap.
(c) Fees for meter enlargements from three-fourths inch to one inch shall be $225.00.
(d) For taps made under a paved surface shall be charged a fee as by the city permit to cut the asphalt or
concrete. See section 48-2(b).
(e) Fees for plugging abandoned water service taps shall be $200.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/283
(f) Fees for boring under a paved street or alleyway inside or outside the corporate city limits of the city shall
be based on actual current cost per linear foot and is in addition to the tap fee.
(g) The tapping fee for water service located outside the corporate limit of the city shall be based upon the
actual cost to provide such taps and as prescribed in this article.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-123; Ordinance adopted 12/9/52, sec. 3; Ordinance 1033, sec. 1, adopted 9/28/83;
Ordinance 1074 adopted 10/19/84; Ordinance 1107 adopted 9/23/85; Ordinance 1366, sec. 2, adopted 3/27/01;
Ordinance 1449, sec. 2, adopted 9/27/05; Ordinance 1635, sec. 1, adopted 5/27/14)
Sec. 54-152. Service charges; monthly rate schedule for inside and outside the city and private
contracts.
Every user whose premise is served by a connection to the water system of the city, whereby the water is used
by the user, shall pay based on the following rate schedules:
(1) All residential and commercial class users located inside the corporate boundary limits, shall
pay as follows:
(A) First 1,000 gallons (minimum monthly bill) ..... $41.62
(B) All over 1,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.40
(2) All industrial class users receiving treated water located inside the corporate boundary limits,
shall pay as follows:
(A) First 1,000 gallons (minimum monthly bill) ..... 41.62
(B) All over 1,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.40
(3) All industrial class users receiving raw water located inside the corporate boundary limits, shall
pay as follows:
(A) First 1,000 gallons (minimum monthly bill) ..... 41.62
(B) All over 1,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons ..... 2.47
(4) All classes of users receiving treated water, except contract customers as mentioned below in
another subparagraph, located outside the corporate boundary limits, shall pay as follows:
(A) First 2,000 gallons (minimum monthly bill) ..... 55.83
(B) All over 2,000 gallons, but less than 20,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons ..... 4.18
(C) All over 20,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons ..... 4.40
(5) All classes of users receiving raw water, except contract customers as mentioned below in
another subparagraph, located outside the corporate boundary limits, shall pay as follows:
(A) First 2,000 gallons (minimum monthly bill) ..... 43.19
(B) All over 2,000 gallons, but less than 20,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.18
(C) All over 20,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.33
(6) All contract users receiving treated water, located outside the corporate boundary limits, their
rate is based on the water consumed that is below the listed demand base in this subparagraph, and
shall pay $4.09 per 1,000 gallons. All water consumed in an amount above the demand base, as set
out below, shall be charged at a rate of $4.87 per 1,000 gallons.
System Maximum Number of Demand Base Per Month
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/283
Meters
Red River Authority of Texas-
Lockett/Western Lane
300 7.776 MG up to 16.848 MG
Red River Authority of Texas-Box 73 1.892 MG up to 6.394 MG
Oklaunion Water Supply
Corporation
72 1.944 MG up to 6.250 MG
Paradise Water Supply 4 0.105 MG
Harrold Water Supply 75 1.500 MG
Systems utilizing these upper limits, due to not utilizing adequate storage tank and pumping
systems, will be charged a higher rate of $4.87 per 1,000 gallons over the demand base lower
number indicated in the above table.
(7) All contract users receiving raw water, located outside the corporate boundary limits, their rate
is based on the water consumed that is below the listed demand base in this subparagraph, and
shall pay $2.38 per 1,000 gallons. All water consumed in an amount above the demand base, as set
out below, shall be charged at a rate of $2.82 per 1,000 gallons.
System Maximum Number
of Meters
Demand Base Per
Month
(1) Red River Authority of Texas-
Hines/Wildcat
81 2.122 MG
(2) Northside Water Supply Corporation 79 2.075 MG
(1969 Code, sec. 26-124; Ordinance adopted 12/9/52, sec. 1; Ordinance 879 adopted 10/9/73; Ordinance 913
adopted 10/12/76; Ordinance 958 adopted 10/9/79; Ordinance 1029 adopted 9/29/83; Ordinance 1093 adopted
4/11/85; Ordinance 1103 adopted 9/23/85; Ordinance 1121 adopted 6/10/86; Ordinance 1122 adopted 6/10/86;
Ordinance 1155 adopted 10/13/87; Ordinance 1215 adopted 9/26/91; Ordinance 1249 adopted 2/15/94;
Ordinance 1263 adopted 11/9/94; Ordinance 1267 adopted 1/11/95; Ordinance 1275 adopted 9/20/95;
Ordinance 1269 adopted 2/8/95; Ordinance 26-124, sec. 5, adopted 7/28/98; Ordinance 1356, sec. 3, adopted
9/26/00; Ordinance 1405, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/03; Ordinance 1449, sec. 2, adopted 9/27/05; Ordinance 1468,
sec. 1, adopted 9/11/06; Ordinance 1491, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/07; Ordinance 1532, sec. 1, adopted 12/22/09;
Ordinance 1568, sec. 1, adopted 9/27/11; Ordinance 1597, sec. 1, adopted 9/25/12; Ordinance 1606, sec. 1,
adopted 3/26/13; Ordinance 1619, sec. 1, adopted 9/24/13; Ordinance 1634, sec. 1, adopted 4/22/14;
Ordinance 1642, sec. 1, adopted 7/22/14; Ordinance 1660, sec. 3, adopted 4/28/15)
Sec. 54-153. Deposits and after hours turn-on service fee.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/283
Along with the application for water, sewer, or sanitation service a deposit must be collected as follows:
(1) Before any customer may have water, sewer, or sanitation service from the city as provided by
this Code, a minimum deposit of $100.00 shall be made for residential service, unless the customer
can demonstrate good utility credit, then the deposit is waived; and for a multi-family dwelling,
commercial, and industrial service a sum equal to three times the average monthly billing shall be
deposited, unless the customer can demonstrate good utility credit, then the deposit is waived. Good
utility credit is demonstrated by presentation of a letter or other documentation from a municipal,
gas, or electric utility indicating that the customer has had utility service for the preceding 12 months
and has not missed a payment due date during that period. If there is a disagreement as to whether
the customer has demonstrated good utility credit, the decision of the finance director shall control.
In the event that a customer's service is discontinued by the city for failure to pay for any service, the
customer shall be required to pay a deposit equivalent to 3/12 of the estimated annual billing prior to
restoration of service. The deposit shall be refunded to the depositor when he discontinues the use
of all services. All bills and accounts due the city for water, sewer, or sanitation services must be
paid.
(2) A deposit is required as a guarantee for the payment of water, sewer, and sanitation service
accounts or damages to service connections or meters caused through the neglect, abuses, or
failure of the customer or his agents to use proper care. The deposit or any part thereof may be
applied by the city to the payment of any such accounts when they become past due.
(3) Should a deposit or any part thereof be applied in payment of past due accounts, service may
not be reestablished until the deposit is restored in the appropriate current amount.
(4) During normal working business hours no fee for instituting service shall be charged. However,
if service is requested after normal working business hours or on weekends or on prescribed
holidays of the city, then a connect fee of $50.00 shall be collected.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-125; Ordinance adopted 12/9/52, sec. 2; Ordinance 646, sec. 6, adopted 9/24/59;
Ordinance 1080, sec. 1, adopted 2/19/85; Ordinance 1301, sec. I, adopted 2/25/97; Ordinance 1449, sec. 4,
adopted 9/27/05; Ordinance 1635, sec. 2, adopted 5/27/14)
Sec. 54-154. Late fee; due and delinquency dates; shut off for nonpayment; disconnect fee; courtesy
billing; failure to receive bill and disputed billing.
(a) The monthly water, sewer and sanitation service charges authorized in this Code include consideration of
a ten-percent late fee charge for late payment. To not be charged the late payment fee, the bill will have to pay
in full within 15 days after the billing date.
(b) All charges for water, sewer and sanitation services furnished or rendered by the city shall be due and
payable 15 days after the billing date. If the bill is not paid in full within 55 days after the billing date, then the
customer may be subject to being disconnected for nonpayment of fees as prescribed by this Code and as
determined by the finance director.
(c) Any customer, who is over 55 days in arrears and have experienced an extensive water leak, or sickness
within the immediate household or other extenuating circumstances as in the opinion of the finance director,
may be offered a payout agreement. If the customer misses any payments during the terms of the payout
agreement, then the agreement shall be null and void. In the event a customer's payout agreement is rendered
null and void, the customer shall be required to pay a deposit equivalent to 3/12 of the estimated annual billing.
(d) If disconnected, no connection shall thereafter be made with the city system until such party shall have
paid all amounts due and all costs of disconnecting and reconnecting with such system.
(e) A reconnect fee of $25.00 for non-payment of the balance due of the customer's bill after 55 days of the
billing date, shall be collected during normal working business hours and week days. If service is restored after
normal working business hours or on weekends or on prescribed holidays of the city, then a reconnect fee of
$50.00 shall be collected.
(f) A courtesy past due reminder bill with the disconnect date shall be mailed to each customer that have not
paid their current bill at least 15 days after the billing date.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/283
(g) Failure of any customer to receive a bill for water, sewer or sanitation service used shall be no excuse for
nonpayment.
(h) Every customer is entitled to a hearing before the finance director if the customer disputes a billing.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-126; Ordinance adopted 12/9/52, sec. 2; Ordinance 1032, sec. 1, adopted 9/28/83;
Ordinance 1081, sec. 1, adopted 2/19/85; Ordinance 1206, sec. 1, adopted 11/14/90; Ordinance 1249 adopted
2/15/94; Ordinance 1449, sec. 5, adopted 9/27/05)
Sec. 54-155. Meters-Determination upon failure.
If the meter gets out of order and fails to register, the consumer will be charged at the average daily
consumption, as shown by the meter when in order. (1969 Code, sec. 26-127; Ordinance 646, sec. 5, adopted
9/24/59)
Sec. 54-156. Same-Waterworks measurements.
All water furnished to consumers by the city waterworks shall be measured by reliable meters of the approved
types. (1969 Code, sec. 26-128; Ordinance 248, sec. 24A, adopted 11/9/1909; Ordinance 285, sec. 1, adopted
6/11/1912)
Sec. 54-157. Meters-Furnished by city.
All meters whether private or belonging to the waterworks system shall be set by employees of the city, if the
city desires to furnish the meters. (1969 Code, sec. 26-129; Ordinance 248, sec. 26, adopted 11/9/1909;
Ordinance 285, sec. 1, adopted 6/11/1912; Ordinance 646, sec. 5, adopted 9/24/59)
Sec. 54-158. Same-Testing.
Customers feeling aggrieved by the consumption or readings of any water meter may request the city for the
meter to be reread. If the customer is still aggrieved after the reread of the meter, then the customer may
request that the water meter be tested for accuracy. If the water meter is tested for accuracy and is found to be
accurate in accordance to industry standards, then the customer shall be charged a testing fee as follows:
3/4-inch tap $20.00
1-inch tap $30.00
11/2-inch tap $50.00
2-inch tap $60.00
Larger than 2-inch tap Actual cost, including labor
(1969 Code, sec. 26-130; Ordinance 248, sec. 28, adopted 11/9/1909; Ordinance 1249 adopted 2/15/94;
Ordinance 1366, sec. 3, adopted 3/27/01)
Sec. 54-159. Same-One each premises.
Each meter must be set so as to control the entire supply of the premises. Only one meter shall be used for
each premises and only one premises can be supplied from each meter. The plumbing must be rearranged if
necessary to comply with these rules. (1969 Code, sec. 26-131; Ordinance 248, sec. 29, adopted 11/9/1909)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/283
Sec. 54-160. Shutting off water for violation.
For the violation of any of the rules contained in this article, the city, in addition to any other penalty which may
be provided for by any other ordinance of the city, reserves the right to turn off water without notice and with a
forfeiture of any payments already made. (1969 Code, sec. 26-132; Ordinance 248, sec. 37, adopted
11/9/1909; Ordinance 285, sec. 1, adopted 6/11/1912)
Sec. 54-161. Fire hydrants; contractors; deposits; rates.
(a) Fire hydrants shall be used for furnishing water for the fire department, utilities division or other
authorized city department only.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to open or use water from a fire hydrant or to take off the
cap except as provided in subsection (c) of this section.
(c) The finance director may grant a special permit to contractors, others engaged in street improvements, or
other construction work as approved by the city manager for use of water from fire hydrant openings. All such
water use shall be metered. Monthly billings with meter readings will be sent to each contractor for each meter.
The city will provide fire hydrant meters.
(d) A deposit is required as a guarantee for the payment of water usage or damages to the hydrant or meter
caused through the neglect, abuses or failure of the contractor or his agents to use proper care. The city may
apply the deposit or any part thereof to the payment of any such account when they become past due.
(e) The deposit shall be refunded to the depositor when he discontinues the use of all fire hydrant services.
All bills and accounts due the city for water service must be paid.
(f) Before any contractor may have water service from the city as provided by this Code, a minimum deposit
of $250.00 shall be made for fire hydrant water service.
(g) The rate for fire hydrant water service shall be the same as for all residential and commercial class users
located inside the corporate boundary limits as established by this Code.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-133; Ordinance 1050, secs. 1—6, adopted 2/23/84; Ordinance 1449, sec. 6, adopted
9/27/05)
Sec. 54-162. Consumers located outside city corporate limit.
(a) Water and sewer service will be provided to consumers located outside the city corporate limits upon the
following terms, conditions and rates as may from time to time be prescribed by the city commission and this
Code.
(b) Water and sewer service will be provided to any land use outside the city corporate limits that meets the
minimum standards of development contained in this Code. This section will apply to any existing development
that requests utility service as though it is a new development seeking utility service.
(c) To obtain utility service outside the city corporate limit, the person requesting service must submit a
written request to the utilities director. The request must describe the use, the location of the service, estimate
of volume of water and wastewater, and number and size of taps. A map showing the location of the tap with
roads, streets, or section boundaries is also required. The applicant must also submit a land use plan for the
development, which must be approved prior to approval of utility service.
(d) The utilities director and community development director shall review the request and make
recommendations to the city commission for approval or disapproval based on the requirements of this article.
(e) If the request is approved, the customer must pay actual cost of any right-of-way acquisition, main
extensions, lift stations or pumps, design review, construction inspection, and taps necessary to provide
service.
(f) Any existing structure to be served by the request does not have to meet any current building codes.
However, a backflow prevention device will be installed on any water service connected to an existing structure
that is served by water. New construction must meet with all applicable building codes as prescribed by this
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/283
Code. The customer shall pay the city for any normal inspection fees required for new construction relating to
the building codes.
(g) Customers shall comply with all development policies and procedures, established by this Code,
regarding utility system design, plan approval, construction, testing and acceptance. If annexation occurs, no
reimbursement will be made for the cost of utility mains.
(h) To ensure the orderly growth of areas outside the city, the applicant will prepare a master plan for the
undeveloped property to be served with the utilities. The property must meet all subdivision platting, subdivision
improvement, and building code requirements of the city. This includes dedication of park space if required, all
streets within and adjacent to the development must be paved. All manufactured home parks must meet all city
requirements for manufactured home parks.
(i) No development will be served that fails to meet the requirements of the master plan prepared by the city
or the developer for the area. Any unified development or proposed development that request service must
have a property owners association or group that has received the legal status thereof to guide the
development and continued maintenance of the area.
(j) Any person to be served with utilities outside the city shall sign a document agreeing to be annexed at any
time requested by the city, or after any date stated in the agreement as being the minimum amount of time prior
to annexation. This document shall be filed in the official public records of the county and run with the land.
(k) The city manager shall review any situation not covered by this section. The city manager shall make a
ruling on the resolution of the situation and that ruling shall be final.
(l) Nothing in this article shall be construed to compel the city to furnish customers beyond the corporate limit
or to continue such supply once begun. The city reserves the right to furnish consumers as it deems advisable
and to, at any time, wholly or partially discontinue the supply upon violation of any of the terms of this article as
if the consumer resided in the city.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-134; Ordinance 1449, sec. 7, adopted 9/27/05)
Secs. 54-163—54-192. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. EXTENSION OF MAINS IN CITY
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 54-193—54-222. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. SEWER AND WATER
Sec. 54-223. Existing subdivisions.
The water and sewer departments may extend water and sewer mains in the streets, alleys or easements
within the limits of the city in order to permit connection by persons desiring and seeking water service and
sanitary sewer service, within existing subdivisions as of July 10, 1962, within the corporate limits of the city,
upon terms and conditions as follows:
(1) Water and sewer mains within existing or existing annexed subdivisions shall be extended the
first 100 feet at the city's expense.
(2) When the required extension is greater than 100 feet, the additional footage shall be paid for
by the private owner or participant.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-151; Ordinance 674, sec. 3, adopted 7/10/62)
Sec. 54-224. Maximum extension per person; condition.
No water or sewer main shall be extended more than 100 feet at the city's expense for any one person or
participant during one 12-month period of time; nor shall the 100-foot extension be originally allowed until after
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/283
the participant has been issued a building permit, where applicable, and has made the necessary arrangements
for a tap permit. (1969 Code, sec. 26-152; Ordinance 674, sec. 6, adopted 7/10/62)
Sec. 54-225. Footage measurement.
Measurement for sewer main extensions shall be the actual footage required to properly serve the participant,
and shall not be measured only to the nearest existing main. (1969 Code, sec. 26-153; Ordinance 674, sec. 7,
adopted 7/10/62)
Secs. 54-226—54-243. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. PRIVATE WATER WELLS
Sec. 54-244. Regulation.
(a) Permit requirement. It shall be unlawful to drill a private well within the city limits before first obtaining a
permit from said city. There shall be no charge for obtaining the permit.
(b) Interconnection prohibited. No private water supply shall be interconnected with any public water supply.
(c) Use of city's water system required; drilling. After the passage of the ordinance from which this section is
derived, all persons utilizing water for human consumption in the city limits, shall connect onto and utilize water
only from the water distribution system of the city, unless health standards of Texas Department of State Health
Services and other state agencies are met with respect to private water wells. The drilling of private water wells
for human consumption in the city limits is prohibited. The drilling of private water wells for consumption and
utilization other than by humans shall be unlawful unless specifically permitted.
(d) Closing of abandoned water wells. Each property owner shall be responsible for the proper plugging or
capping of all water wells on their property. Each property owner shall comply with the minimum standards of
the International Building Code, to ensure lack of contamination from any water well to the subterranean water
supply.
(1969 Code, sec. 26-181; Ordinance 1153, sec. 1, adopted 9/8/87)
APPENDIX A
ZONING*
ARTICLE I. TITLE; INTERPRETATION AND PURPOSES; SCOPE
Sec. 101.1. Short title.
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning Regulations” of the City of Vernon, Texas.
Sec. 101.2. Interpretation and purposes.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare. The zoning regulations and
districts as herein established, have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan, for the purpose of
promoting health, safety, moral responsibility, and the general welfare of the city; they have been designed,
among other things:
To lessen congestion on streets;
To secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers;
To promote health and the general welfare;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/283
To provide adequate light and air;
To prevent the overcrowding of land;
To avoid undue concentration of population;
To facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewers, schools, parks, and other
public requirements; and
To conserve the value of property and encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the
community.
Sec. 101.3. Scope.
It is not intended by these regulations to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing
provisions of other laws or ordinances, or with private restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed,
easement, or other private agreement. Where other ordinances impose a greater restriction than is imposed
herein, the provisions of such other ordinances shall govern.
ARTICLE II. SUPPLEMENTAL DEFINITIONS
Sec. 201.1. General rules.
For the purposes of these regulations, certain terms or words found herein shall be interpreted and defined as
follows:
Words used in the present tense include the future tense;
The singular includes plural;
The word “person” shall include a corporation as well as an individual;
The word “used” or “occupied” as applied to any land or buildings shall be construed to include
the words “intended,” “arranged,” or “designed to be used or occupied.”
Words and phrases not defined in this article shall have their ordinarily accepted meaning or such meaning as
the context may apply, or as defined in the basic regulations of this Development Code.
Sec. 201.2. Supplemental definitions.
Adult arcade: A business which offers its customers in one (1) or more viewing booths motion or still pictures
characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas. (Ordinance 1362)
Adult bookstore/film store: A business in which a substantial portion of its stock in trade consists of books,
videos, tapes, cassettes, photographs, slides, magazines, and other periodicals which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or both. (Ordinance
1362)
Adult business: Any business activity, which offers the opportunity to view, specified sexual activity or view, or
touch, for entertainment, specified anatomical areas. Such definition further includes but is not limited to adult
arcade, adult bookstore/film store, adult cabaret, adult lounge, adult motel or hotel, adult retail store, and an
adult theater. (Ordinance 1362)
Adult cabaret: A business, which offers to customers live performances characterized by exposure of specified
anatomical areas. (Ordinance 1362)
Adult lounge: An adult cabaret, which serves alcoholic beverages. (Ordinance 1362)
Adult motel or hotel: A business, which offers its customers a sleeping room or sitting room for a period of time
less than ten (10) hours and provides motion picture or still picture entertainment characterized by exposure of
specified anatomical areas. (Ordinance 1362)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/283
Adult retail store: A business in which a substantial portion of the stock in trade consists of items or products
other than printed matter characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, or both. (Ordinance 1362)
Adult theater: A business with a capacity or more than five (5) persons which offers customers motion of still
picture or live entertainment or performances characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas.
(Ordinance 1362)
Board: The Board of Adjustment of the City of Vernon.
Criminal justice halfway house: A residential facility operated to house individuals who have been in
confinement for a criminal conviction or are placed in a regulated living environment as part of the disposition of
a criminal allegation on the condition that the individuals must live within such facility for a specified period of
time as a requirement of parole or probation from a county, state or federal judicial system. (Ordinance 1362)
Halfway house: A residential facility for persons who are receiving therapy and counseling from support staff
who are present at all times the residents are present, for one (1) or more of the following purposes:
a. To help residents recuperate from the effects of drugs or alcohol addiction;
b. To help homeless persons or families achieve independence and obtain permanent housing;
c. To help persons with family or school adjustment problems that require specialized attention
and care in order to achieve personal independence; or
d. To provide temporary shelter for persons who are victims of domestic abuse. (Ordinance 1362)
Hospital: A medical facility or institution for diagnosing, treating, caring for persons or for medical and surgical
treatment to persons, including acute medical care, chronic medical care on a prolonged or permanent basis,
mental health center, and resident or outpatient treatment to alcoholic, narcotic or psychiatric patients.
(Ordinance 1362)
Inoperable motor vehicle: A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public streets for reason including but not
limited to being wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its own power,
or not having a valid registration and/or inspection attached thereto. (Ordinance 1520)
Interpretation: A determination of the meaning of the zoning regulations or their application, or a determination
of the correct location of the zoning district boundaries based upon an appeal from the decision of the enforcing
officer and expressed as a board of adjustment ruling which becomes a permanent guide in the enforcement of
the zoning regulations.
Mini-storage warehouse: A unified development of leasable self-storage units built on the site, each unit not to
exceed four hundred (400) square feet in floor area. No outside storage, no storage of explosives, flammable
materials or materials emitting noxious odors shall be allowed. (Ordinance 1362)
Motor vehicle salvage yard: Any outdoor storage yard used for the deposit of dismantled or junked motor
vehicles or any outdoor storage yard used for the deposit of any discarded material which has been a part of or
is intended to be a part of any motor vehicle. (Ordinance 1520)
Outside storage: Any material, vehicle or equipment that has been used, damaged or partially dismantled and
is: (1) stored outside indefinitely, or (2) held outside as inventory for future sale, processing or use. Articles
include but are not limited to inoperable motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts, appliances, boxes, crates, pipe
or pipe fittings, paper, metal, tires, toys, concrete blocks, bricks, furniture, fixtures, machinery, motors, lumber,
buildings or portions of buildings, building materials, barrels, or clothing. (Ordinance 1520)
Outdoor storage yard: Any parcel or part of land, not within a building, upon which outdoor storage is located.
(Ordinance 1520)
Playfield or stadium (public): An athletic field or stadium owned or operated by a public agency for the general
public, including a baseball field, gold course, football field or stadium. (Ordinance 1362)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/283
Public right-of-way: A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription or condemnation and used
or is intended to be used as a public roadway or alley. (Ordinance 1520)
Special exception: A privileged use or development of property which would not be appropriate generally or
without restriction throughout a specified zoning district but which, if controlled as to number, size, location, or
relation to the neighborhood, would promote the public health, safety, order, comfort, convenience, or general
welfare of the community.
Specified anatomical areas: Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock;
human genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or any combination of the
aforementioned. (Ordinance 1362)
Specified sexual activities: Depiction of male genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; female genitals;
acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy, bestiality; touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttock, anus; or any combination of the aforementioned. (Ordinance 1362)
Structure: Any composition of physical parts for the creation of a whole, which is, affixed either directly or
indirectly to the ground. (Ordinance 1362)
Through street: Every street or highway or portion thereof at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from
intersecting streets or highways is required by law to stop before entering or crossing the same and when stop
signs are erected as provided by the City of Vernon Code of Ordinances. (Ordinance 1409)
Variance: A privileged relaxation of these regulations where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and
not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary
and undue hardship and would prevent the substantial enjoyment of property rights as shared by nearby
properties which do conform to the development control provisions.
Viewing booth: An enclosure or partial enclosure which contains any electrical or mechanical device, which
displays or projects any film, video tape or photographic reproduction into the viewing area of motion or still
pictures characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas, and which enclosure or partial enclosure is
authorized for occupancy by current adopted building code standards by no more than five (5) persons.
(Ordinance 1362)
(Ordinance 1362; Ordinance 1409; Ordinance 1520, sec. 1.A, adopted 8/25/09)
ARTICLE III. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 301.1. Building permits.
Every application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a drawing or plot plan in duplicate together with
such other copies as the enforcing officer may require for city review, showing the lot lines, subdivision name
and the lot and block numbers, the location of the building in the lot, accurate dimensions of building and lot,
and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of the zoning regulations. A
record of the original copy of such application and plans shall be kept in the office of the enforcing officer and a
duplicate copy of the approved plan shall be a the building at all times during construction.
Sec. 302.1. Enforcement and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of these regulations shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction in the municipal court shall be subject to a fine of not less than $5.00 nor
more than $200.00 for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.
Sec. 303.1. Severability clause.
If any section, provision, or part thereof in these regulations shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the regulations as a whole or any
section; provision or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
Sec. 303.2. Publication and effective date.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/283
These regulations shall take effect when approved and published as prescribed by law. (Passed)
ARTICLE IV. CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
Sec. 401.1. Declaration of policy.
The city commission declares the enactment of these regulations governing the use and development of land,
buildings and structures as a measure necessary to the orderly development of the community. Therefore, no
change shall be made in these regulations or in the boundaries of the zoning districts, except:
A. To correct a manifest error in the regulations or map; or
B. To recognize changed or changing conditions or circumstances in a particular locality; or
C. To recognize changes in technology, the style of living, or manner of doing business.
Every proposal to amend these regulations shall be considered in light of the above declaration of policy and by
the purposes enumerated in section 101.2 of these regulations.
Sec. 402.1. Authority to amend ordinance.
The city commission may from time to time, after public hearings required by law, amend, supplement or
change the regulations. any amendment, supplement or change may be ordered for consideration by the city
commission, be initiated by the planning and zoning commission, or be requested by proposal of the owner of
the property or by a person holding a lease on the property with the consent of its owner. The planning and
zoning commission on its own motion, or on request of the city commission, may initiate consideration of a
change in any district boundary or zoning regulation whenever it finds that public benefit will derive from
consideration of such matter. final approval rests with the city commission.
Sec. 403.1. Procedure.
A. Proposal required.
Every proposal to amend these regulations shall be considered in light of the above declaration of policy and by
the purposes enumerated in Section 101.2, Interpretations and Purposes.
B. Public hearing and notice.
Prior to making its report to the city commission, the planning and zoning commission shall hold at least one
public hearing thereon. Written notice of all public hearings on proposed changes in district boundaries shall be
sent to all owners of property, or to the person rendering the same for city taxes, located within two hundred
(200) feet of any property affected thereby, within not less than ten (10) days before such hearing is held. Such
notice may be served by using the last known address as listed on the city tax roll and depositing the notice,
postage paid, in the United States Mail. Notice of hearing on proposed changes in zoning regulations shall be
accomplished by one publication not less than fifteen (15) days prior thereto in the official paper of the city.
C. Planning and zoning commission report.
The planning and zoning commission, after the public hearing is closed, shall prepare its report and
recommendations on the proposed change stating its findings, its evaluation of the request and of the
relationship of the request to the comprehensive plan at such time as the comprehensive plan has been
adopted by the city commission. The planning and zoning commission may defer its report for not more than
ninety (90) days until it has had opportunity to consider other proposed changes, which may have a direct
bearing thereon. in making its determination, the planning and zoning commission shall consider the following
factors:
1. Whether the uses permitted by the proposed change would be appropriate in the area
concerned;
2. Whether adequate public school facilities and other public services exist or can be provided to
serve the needs of additional residences likely to be constructed as a result of such change, and the
consequences of such change;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/283
3. Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or proposed plans for providing
public water supply and sanitary sewers to the area;
4. The amount of vacant land currently classified for similar development in the vicinity and
elsewhere in the city, and any special circumstances, which may make a substantial part of such
vacant land unavailable for development;
5. The recent rate at which land is being developed in the proposed zoning district, particularly in
the vicinity of the proposed change;
6. How other areas designated for similar development will be, or are likely to be, affected if the
proposed amendment is approved, and whether such designation for other areas should be modified
also.
D. City commission consideration.
1. Proposal recommended for approval.
Every proposal which is recommended favorably by the planning and zoning commission shall be
forwarded to the city commission for setting and holding of public hearings thereon. No change,
however, shall become effective until after the adoption of an ordinance for same and its publication
as required by law.
2. Proposal recommended for denial.
When the planning and zoning commission determines that a proposal should be denied, it shall
so report and recommend to the city commission. No public hearings shall be set on the proposal
until and unless the city commission has reviewed the recommendations of the planning and zoning
commission, has considered any appeal, as provided below, and has adopted a motion setting the
matter for hearing.
3. Appeal procedure.
An appeal from the decision of the planning and zoning commission may be taken whenever any
interested party is aggrieved by the action of the planning and zoning commission on a specific
proposal. Such appeal shall show that the planning and zoning commission either 1) has been
prejudice in its deliberation, or 2) has not been given the opportunity to consider certain information
because it could not have been made available to the planning and zoning commission at the time of
its public hearing. The following procedure shall be required.
a. The aggrieved party shall reduce his appeal to writing stating specifically how, in his
opinion, the planning and zoning commission committed error. He shall file his appeal with the
cit[y] secretary and the planning and zoning commission within thirty (30) days following the
planning and zoning commission action. The city secretary shall forward the appeal to the city
commission with the regular report of planning and zoning commission action on the subject
proposal.
b. Upon receipt of written appeal, the city commission shall determine whether or not the
planning and zoning commission committed error. If the city commission concludes that certain
previously unavailable information should be considered by the planning and zoning
commission, it may refer the original proposal and the appeal for a new hearing, new report
and recommendation. if the city commission concludes that planning and zoning commission
prejudice prevents a fair hearing or recommendation, the city commission may schedule its
own hearing on the original proposal and recommendation.
E. City commission hearing and notice.
The city commission may from time to time amend, supplement, or change by ordinance the boundaries of the
districts or the regulations herein established. Public hearings on such amendment, supplement, or change
shall be held by the city commission. notice of city commission public hearings shall be given by publication one
time in the official paper of the city, stating the time and place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier
than fifteen (15) days from the date publication.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/283
F. Negative recommendations: written protest.
An amendment, supplement, or change shall not become effective, except by favorable vote of three-fourths of
the members of the city commission:
1. If the planning and zoning commission recommends disapproval of the proposed change; or
2. If written protest is filed by owner either:
a. Of the area of the lots or land included in such proposed change; or
b. Of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area of such proposed change and
extending two hundred (200) feet there from.
Protests signed by property owners may be filed prior to or at one of the public hearings conducted by either
the planning and zoning commission or the city commission. Written protests filed with the planning and zoning
commission shall be forwarded to the city commission with the planning and zoning commission's
recommendation on the request.
Sec. 404.1. Limitation on re-applications.
When the city commission has denied a proposal, or when the applicant has withdrawn his proposal at the
planning and zoning commission meeting thereon, no new application of like nature shall be accepted by the
city or scheduled for hearing by the planning and zoning commission within a period of twelve (12) months of
the date of city commission denial or applicant's withdrawal. Provided, however, on receipt of written request by
the original applicant stating how conditions have changed substantially in the community since prior
consideration of his proposal so as to justify an earlier review of this matter, the city commission may waive the
mandatory delay period and authorize the acceptance of a new application.
ARTICLE V. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
Sec. 501.1. Organization.
A. Creation.
There is hereby created a board of adjustment to be composed of five (5) regular members and two (2)
alternate members who shall be qualified electors of the city. It is the declared policy of the city commission that
it will consider and appoint only those persons who have demonstrated their civic interest, general knowledge
of the community, independent judgment, and availability to prepare for and attend meetings.
B. Terms of office.
The terms of three (3) regular and of one (1) of the alternate members shall expire in each odd numbered year
and the terms of two (2) regular and one (1) of the alternate members shall expire in each even numbered year.
The regular members of the board shall be identified by place numbers one (1) through five (5). The odd
numbered places shall expire in the odd numbered years and the even numbered places shall expire in the
even numbered years. board members may be reappointed by the city commission.
C. Vacancy.
Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms; no member shall be appointed for a term in excess of two (2)
years. A vacancy in a term of office shall occur whenever a member resigns or has been removed by the city
commission for the following reasons:
1. Has repeatedly failed to attend properly called meetings of the board of adjustment without just
cause; or
2. Has been guilty of malfeasance or misconduct in office, and based upon such finding has
removed the member from office;
3. Whenever the city commission finds that a member is not adhering to established policy of the
city commission for any cause.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/283
D. Organization.
The board of adjustment shall hold an annual organizational meeting and shall elect a chairperson and vicechairperson
from among its members before proceeding to any other matters of business. The enforcing officer
shall be the secretary of the board. The board shall meet at the call of the chairperson and shall designate the
time and place of its meetings. The board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of its
proceedings in accordance with the state statutes and these regulations. Newly appointed members shall be
installed at the first regular meeting after their appointment.
E. Meetings and quorum.
Four (4) members of the board of adjustment shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. The
members of the board shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the board and shall serve without
compensation, except for reimbursement for authorized expenses attendant to the performance of their duties.
Sec. 501.2. Duties and powers.
The board of adjustment shall have the powers and exercise the duties of a board in accordance with article
1011g, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas. Board members are representatives of the city and shall have the right
to inspect premises at reasonable times unless prior written notice is given where required in the discharge of
their responsibilities under the laws of the State of Texas and the ordinances of this city. The board's jurisdiction
shall extend to and include the hearing and deciding of the following types of appeals and applications and to
that end shall have the necessary authority to ensure continuing compliance with its decision:
A. Interpretation.
To render an interpretation of the zoning regulations or the manner of their application where it is alleged that
there is error in any order, requirement, or determination made by the enforcing officer in the administration of
such provisions. In reaching its decision, the board shall establish firm guidelines for future administrative
actions on like matters.
B. Variance.
To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the development controls set forth in these
regulations as will not be contrary to public interest. In reaching it's decision, the board shall not grant the
variance appeal if it finds:
1. That literal enforcement of the controls will not create an unnecessary hardship or practical
difficulty in the development of the affected property, or
2. That the situation causing the hardship or difficulty is either self-imposed or generally affecting
all or most properties in the same zoning district; or
3. That the relief sought will injure the permitted use of adjacent conforming property; or
4. That the granting of the variance will not be in harmony with the spirit and purposes of these
regulations.
Any variance granted by the board of adjustment shall terminate automatically 1) when the specified period of
use has expired, or 2) when the use ceases to be in full compliance with any condition imposed by the board, or
3) when the use has been abandoned for six (6) months.
Sec. 501.3. Procedure.
A. Interpretation request; variance appeal.
A request for interpretation of regulations or an appeal for variance from development controls may be taken by
any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, or board of the city affected by the decision of the enforcing
officer. Such appeal shall be taken within fifteen (15) days time after the decision has been rendered, by filing
with both the enforcing officer and the board of adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof.
The enforcing officer shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the
action appealed from was taken and will notify city manager and city attorney.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/283
B. Stay of proceedings.
An appeal shall stay all proceedings of the action appealed from unless the enforcing officer, after the notice of
appeal has been filed with him, certifies to the board that, by reason of facts stated in his certificate, a stay
would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. in such case proceedings shall not be stayed
except by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by court of record on
application and notice to the enforcing officer from who the appeal is taken.
C. For of appeal or application
The appeal or application shall be in such form and shall contain such information as the board of adjustment
may require under its Rules of Procedure. It shall be accompanied by the required minimum fee. An incomplete
appeal or application shall be deemed only to give notice of intent to appeal or apply to the board and shall not
be reviewed or scheduled for hearings until brought to completion.
E. Notice of hearing.
Official written notice of public hearings on every application for a variance or special exception or for an
interpretation of regulations applying solely to an individual property shall be sent to all owners of property, or
the person rendering the same for taxes, affected by such application, located within two hundred (200) feet of
any property affected thereby, within not less than ten (10) days before such hearing is held. Such notice shall
be served by using the last known address as listed on the city tax roll and depositing the notice, postage paid,
in the United States mail. Notice of hearing on requests for interpretation of regulations applying to more than
one property and ownership shall be given by means of a general notice as provided in section 501.4.
Sec. 501.4. Hearing and decision.
A. General.
1. The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time to hear an appeal, give public notice and
render a decision within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by
represented attorney or agent. Evidence supporting the approval or denial of an appeal shall be
submitted through the enforcing officer or to the board of adjustment in a public meeting.
2. Any appeal or application may be withdrawn upon written notice to the enforcing officer but no
appeal shall be withdrawn after posting of public hearing notice and prior to board action without
formal consent of the board.
B. Decision and voting.
1. Every decision of the board of adjustment shall be based upon findings of fact and every finding
of fact shall be supported in the record of proceedings. The enumerated conditions required to exist
on any matter upon which the board is authorized to pass under these regulations shall be
construed as limitations on the power of the board to act.
2. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to empower the board of adjustment to change the
terms of these regulations, or to effect changes in the zoning districts. The powers of the board shall
be so applied that the terms of these regulations will be strictly enforced.
3. In exercising its powers, the board of adjustment, in conformity with the provisions of article
1011a through 1011j of the Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, may modify in whole or in part any order,
requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made and shall have all the powers of the
officer from whom the appeal is taken.
4. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to
reverse, on appeal, any order, requirement, decision or determination of the enforcing officer, or to
approve any application upon which it is required to pass under these regulations or to effect any
variance in said regulations.
5. a. A member shall disqualify himself from voting whenever he has a personal or
monetary interest in the property under appeal, or will be directly affected by the decision of the
board.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/283
b. A member may disqualify himself from voting whenever any applicant, or his agent, has
sought to influence the member's vote on the appeal, other than in the public hearing.
C. Approval of request.
1. In approving any request, the board of adjustment may designate such conditions in order to
substantially secure the objectives of the regulations or provision to which such variance is granted
and to provide adequately for the maintenance of the integrity and character of the zone in which
such permit is granted.
2. The board of adjustment may require guarantees, to ensure that conditions designated are
being or will be complied with. Where any condition under which a request has been granted
appears to have been violated, the board of adjustment may hold public hearings to determine
whether the permit shall be terminated.
3. When an application is approved for a variance appeal, the applicant shall apply for occupancy
or construction permits within sixty (60) days unless a greater time is authorized by the board. An
emergency extension of sixty (60) days may be granted on written request filed with the Board
before expiration of the original approval. Failure to do so shall void the right to secure such permits
except upon the filing of a new application or appeal.
D. Denial of request.
No appeal or application that has been denied shall be further considered by the board of adjustment under a
subsequent request unless:
1. The new plans materially change the nature of the request; or
2. The permitted development of other nearby property in the same zone has been substantially
altered or changed by a ruling of the board so as to support an allegation of change conditions.
E. Appeal of board of adjustment action.
Any person or persons, jointly or separately, aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment or any
taxpayer, or any officer, department, or board of the city, may present to a court of record, a petition, duly
verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of such illegality.
Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten (10) days after the filing of the decision complained of in
the offices of the board of adjustment and not thereafter.
ARTICLE VI. [NON-]CONFORMING LOTS, STRUCTURES, AND USES
Sec. 601.1. Purpose.
The general public, the planning and zoning commission and the board of adjustment are directed to take note
that non-conformities in the use and development of land and buildings are to be avoided, or eliminated where
now existing, wherever and whenever possible, except when necessary to preserve property rights established
prior to the date these regulations became effective, and when necessary to promote the general welfare, and
to protect the character of surrounding property. It shall be the responsibility of the planning and zoning
commission and the board of adjustment to assist the city commission in achieving this goal by submitting
recommendations to the city commission. The city commission shall on its own motion or upon cause
presented by interested property owners inquire into the existence, continuation or maintenance of any nonconforming
use within the city.
Sec. 601.2. Non-conforming lots.
A. Continuance of non-conforming lots.
Subject to limitations set forth, any non-conforming lot may continue without change in boundaries and may be
utilized or developed provided that the uses and development are otherwise authorized by these regulations.
No new construction shall be placed except in conformity with the applicable controls in which the lot is located.
B. Discontinuance of non-conforming lots.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/283
Any lot which is made conforming by combining with other lots for purposes of sale or development, or by
subdividing or re-subdividing, thereafter shall be recognized as a conforming lot and shall comply in full with the
provision of these regulations.
Sec. 601.3. Non-conforming structures.
A. Limitation on regulations.
No structure, otherwise in accordance with the provisions of these regulations or an amendment hereto, shall
be rendered or be deemed a non-conforming structure solely for a failure to comply with provisions relating to
signs, or provisions of section 101.2 of this zoning ordinance.
B. Continuance of non-conforming structures.
Subject to all limitations herein set forth, any non-conforming structure may be occupied and operated and
maintained in a state of good repair, but no non-conforming structure shall be enlarged or extended unless the
enlargement or extension can be, and is, in compliance with all of the provisions herein established for
structures in the district in which the non-conforming structure is located.
C. Accidental damage to building.
If a building occupied by non-conforming uses is destroyed by fire or the elements, it may not be reconstructed
or rebuilt except to conform with the provisions herein. In the case of partial destruction by fire or other causes,
not exceeding fifty (50) percent of its replacement cost, the enforcing officer may issue a permit for
reconstruction. If greater than fifty (50) percent and less than total, the board of adjustment may grant a permit
for repair but not for enlargement or reconstruction of the building. Provided, notwithstanding any other
provision, any person may continue a non-conforming use if it is greater than 50% destroyed if that person shall
notify in writing, the city within 6 months and apply for a building permit to rebuild and continue such nonconforming
use. The city shall notify such owner of the rights granted under this paragraph.
D. Repairs and alterations.
Repairs and alterations may be made to a non-conforming building or structure; provided however, no structural
alterations shall be made except those required by law or ordinance, unless the building is changed to a
conforming use; and provided that no additional dwelling units shall be added where the non-conforming use
results from there being more dwelling units on the lot than is permissible in the district in which the building is
located. The board of adjustment may grant as a special exception, an application to extend or enlarge a
building occupied by a non-conforming use of the lot occupied by such building, provided such grant does not
serve to prevent the return of such property to a conforming use.
Sec. 601.4. Non-conforming uses.
A. Continuance of non-conforming use.
Any non-conforming use may be continued in operation on the same land area and on the same floor area in a
structure or structures which were occupied by the non-conforming use on the effective date of these
regulations as amended, but such land area or floor area shall not be increased. Any non-conforming use which
discontinues and which remains unused as the use that made the premises a non-conforming use for a period
of six (6) consecutive months shall be terminated, except that such These limitations shall not apply to farming
uses. (Ordinance 1481 adopted 5/26/07)
B. Registration of non-conforming use.
It shall be the right of the joint tenants and owners of a non-conforming use to register same by securing a
certificate of occupancy.
C. Changing a non-conforming use.
To a conforming use:
Any non-conforming use may be changed to a use conforming with the regulations of the district; provided that
a non-conforming use so changed shall not be changed back.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/283
To another non-conforming use:
A non-conforming use may be changed to an upgraded non-conforming use approved by the board of
adjustment; provided, that a non-conforming use changed to an upgraded non-conforming use, shall not be
changed back.
(Ordinance 1481 adopted 5/26/07)
ARTICLE VII. SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
The regulations and development controls of the various districts shall be modified by and be subject to the
following provisions and limitations.
Sec. 701.1. Buildings and structures.
A. Lot requirements.
1. Lot required: Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a lot of record, and in no case
shall there be more than one main building on such lot, except as provided.
2. Multiple structures on lot: In any district, more than one structure for permitted Principal uses
other than a single-family dwelling, may be erected on a lot of record, provided that yard and other
requirements of these regulations shall be met for each structure as though it were on an individual
lot of record.
3. Deficient lot area: When a non-conforming lot exists prior to the time of the passage of these
regulations, said lot may be occupied by a dwelling for not more than one family.
4. Frontage on street: Every building erected or moved shall be on a lot abutting a public street or
have access to an improved private street, and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide
safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required off-street parking.
B. Height limitations.
1. General exceptions: The height regulations contained in the district regulations shall not apply
to spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys, or other appurtenances
usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy.
2. Visibility at intersections.
(A) Maximum height; pruned trees excepted. On no corner lot which abuts an open
intersection or intersection controlled by yield signs and which is required by this ordinance to
have a front an side yard, within a triangular area described by the intersection of the adjacent
curb lines, or, if none exists, the normal curb lines, and a point on each curb line 45 feet from
the intersection, shall there be erected or maintained any wall, fence, except for chain link
fencing, or other structure or any hedge, shrub, or other growth higher than two and one-half
feet from the top of the normal curb line, except trees which are pruned to a height of eight
feet; provided, however, this provision shall not apply at intersections controlled by stop signs
or by official traffic-control signals. (Ordinance 1409)
(B) Through streets: On no corner lot required by this ordinance to have a front and side
yard, and which abuts an intersection of a through street and intersecting streets, as defined in
section 201.2, shall there be erected or maintained any obstruction described in subparagraph
(A) above, within a triangular area described by the intersection of the adjacent curb lines, or, if
none exists, the normal curb lines, and a point ten feet from the intersection on the intersecting
street and 100 feet from the intersection on the through street, provided, however, this
provision shall not apply at intersections controlled by official traffic-control signals. (Ordinance
1409)
C. Temporary and accessory uses and buildings.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/283
1. Construction buildings and security fences: Nothing shall prohibit the placement of temporary
portable buildings providing office space, sanitary facilities or storage of supplies or materials, or the
erection of security fences on the site during the period of any construction project. No
manufacturing operation shall be conducted within a temporary or portable building when the
product of such operation is to be transported off the site for use in construction at another location.
2. Mechanical equipment: Air conditioning and similar mechanical equipment shall not be
mounted in minimum yard spaces. Equipment shall be so placed as to direct motor and fan noise
away from the nearest property line.
(Ordinance 1409)
Sec. 702.1. Day care centers, kindergartens and private elementary schools.
Day care centers, kindergartens and private elementary schools are recognized 1) as potential noise
generators which may adversely affect livability of nearby residences, and 2) as short term uses to house
young children whose safety must be given special consideration.
A. Permits.
No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the sanitary facilities and water supply
comply with applicable local laws and state health department regulations.
B. Requirements.
An on-site outdoor play area of not less than one hundred (100) square feet per authorized child shall be
furnished. Such play area may be located anywhere on the lot except in a front yard.
Sec. 703.1. Yard provisions.
A. Front yards.
1. Front yard depth: Depth of front yards shall be measured at right angles to a straight line joining
the foremost points of the side lot lines. The foremost point of the side lot line, in the case of rounded
property corners at street intersection, shall be assumed to be the point at which the side and front
lot lines would have met without such rounding.
2. Exterior yards-All lots.
a. At least one exterior yard shall have the full depth as required by the district regulations.
b. No other exterior yard shall have less than one half the full depth as required by the
district regulations, except as provided below.
3. Exterior yards-Through lots.
Exterior yards shall be provided on all street frontages of through lots subject to the following
special provisions: Where the enforcing officer finds that one of the two exterior yards that would
normally be required along opposite non-intersecting streets is not in keeping with the prevailing
yard depth pattern, the enforcing officer shall approve a special minimum depth of yard which shall
be equal to the average of the yards actually provided or required on adjoining lots. When the city
has approve a subdivision plat filed in the maps and plats records of the county and showing a
building set back line along one of the two streets at less than the normal depth required, such line
shall be the minimum yard depth for the lot.
B. Other yard provisions.
1. Interior yard required.
An interior yard shall be provided in the minimum width prescribed in the district regulations. The
width shall be measured perpendicular to each interior lot line.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/283
2. Yards-Accessory buildings.
a. No accessory building, except for carports as provided for below, shall be located in a
minimum required front yard. An accessory building may be located along an interior lot line, if
it is at least not closer than five (5) feet to the interior lot line. (Ordinance 1432)
b. Carports may be allowed within the minimum required front yard with a special use permit
only when reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and authorized by the city
commission after public hearings provided that all of the following conditions are met:
(1) Vehicular access to the rear yard is not reasonably available.
(2) There is insufficient space for placement of carport in side yard.
(3) The carport shall be attached to the structure, compatible with the neighborhood
and does not negatively affect other nearby properties. A detailed drawing and material
list must accompany the request for a special use permit.
(4) If the carport is to be located on a corner lot, then no portion of the carport may
extend into the area required to meet visibility standards as set out in this ordinance.
(5) The carport shall have no more than six (6) supporting columns and they shall not
exceed eight (8) feet in height from grade level. The roof height shall not exceed the
height of the primary structure. The vertical plane from the ground to seven (7) feet
above grade on the street facing end/side and its two adjacent ends/sides shall be left
clear of any walls or sheathing.
(6) This subsection does not allow portable carports. (Ordinance 1432)
3. Other yard uses.
Fences, walls, poles, posts, customary fixed yard accessories and ornaments, and roof
overhangs projecting not more than thirty-six (36) inches, may be permitted in any minimum interior
required yard subject to height limitations and requirements limiting obstruction of visibility.
4. Setback along alley.
In lieu of interior yards along public alleys, buildings shall be setback from the center of the alley
right-of-way as follows:
a. Ten (10) feet for a residential use.
b. Twelve (12) feet for a non-residential use.
(Ordinance 1432)
Sec. 705.1. Sign regulations.
Signs shall be permitted in each district in accordance with any permitted principal use or authorized special
exception complying with the standards set forth in section 705.2, and subject to the additional regulations set
forth in sections 705.3 and 705.4.
Sec. 705.2. Uniform sign regulations.
Type of Sign &
Standards
Principal Use of Property
Non-Residential Residential
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/283
Business Identification Sign
Permitted locations Within buildable area or mounted flat on face
of building: may project 24 inches from face of
building.
Not permitted
Directional Sign
Size limits 4 sq. ft./sign 4 sq. ft./sign
Facility Identification Sign
Combined allowable
sign area in sq. ft.
per lineal feet of
street frontage
1 sq. ft./3 lin. ft 1 sq.ft./10 lin ft
Minimum sign area 12 square feet 12 square feet
Subdivision Identification Sign
Combined allowable
sign area in sq. ft.
per lineal feet of
street frontage
1 sq. ft./3 lin. ft. 1 sq. ft./10 lin. ft.
Sec. 705.3. Sign placement and measurement.
A. Location.
All signs shall be placed within the buildable area of a lot except that directional signs, facility identification
signs and subdivision identification signs may be place in any yard, but not closer than ten (10) feet horizontally
to any street line which is the curb line.
B. Height.
The height of signs located in required yards shall not exceed the height limits for walls or fences in these same
yards. Signs located in the buildable area of a lot shall not exceed a height of fifty (50) feet above grade level
measured at the nearest point on the nearest property line; provided that any sign on top of a building may
have a height of ten (10) feet above the top of such building. Provided this provision does not apply to C/AR
districts.
C. Sign area measurement.
The allowable sign area shall be the combined area of exposure of all sign message faces.
D. Real estate sales sign.
Temporary signs announcing the sale or rental of the real estate on which placed shall be permitted in any
district and may be placed in any yard. Such sign shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area and shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/283
removed within one week following the close of the sale or lease.
E. Political and miscellaneous sign.
Political and miscellaneous signs of any characteristic whatsoever will not be permitted on utility and other
poles existing in the street right-of-way.
Sec. 705.4. Sign lighting and symbols.
A. Symbols.
Symbols which are designed as an integral part of the building structure, and symbols and signs which are not
visible or readable from the public street shall not be limited by the sign regulations of the zoning district.
B. Traffic control conflicts.
No sign or lighting permitted under these regulations shall be erected, placed or allowed to remain if such sign
creates confusion, impairs hearing or vision, or distracts the automotive driver using any public street.
Specifically prohibited are:
1. High intensity bare bulb lighting or any lighting which creates a glare or any sign so placed as
to make traffic signs or signals unreadable by a driver on the public street at the normal viewing
range;
2. Sign duplicating colors of traffic signs or signals which distract or cause confusion in reading
such traffic signs or signals at normal viewing range; and
3. Signs or equipment which produce noises simulating sirens, bells, or whistles which may be
confuse with the warning devices of emergency vehicles.
C. Residential area nuisance.
No sign or lighting permitted under these regulations shall be authorized if such sign or lighting by reason of
placement, because of shielding, noise generation or character of operation would be adverse to the normal
sensibilities of an adjacent residence or would interfere with the reasonable use, enjoyment, or right of privacy
on one's property. Specifically,
1. The source of lighting shall not be directly visible from the adjacent residential property and
light shall be shielded to prevent such exposure;
2. The noise level of signs and lighting fixtures, when measured within the adjacent dwelling unit,
shall not be greater than the noise levels of equipment customarily in operation in the home
including air conditioning and kitchen refrigerators; and
3. Flashing signs and intermittent lighting of signs or areas shall not be permitted where they are
located within 200 feet of and/or are directly visible from residential property.
Sec. 706.1. Special use requirements.
Sec. 706.2. Uses in newly annexed areas: interim controls.
Uses in all territory hereafter annexed to the city shall be subjected to the regulations of the most restrictive
district until the original zoning districts of such territory are established by the city commission. The planning
and zoning commission shall, as soon as practicable after annexation of any territory, institute proceeding on its
own motion to establish original zoning districts throughout the newly annexed territory, and the procedure to be
followed shall be the same as is provided by law for the adoption of original zoning districts governing other
parts of the municipality. No territory shall be annexed unless a district has been established which conforms to
the comprehensive plan.
Sec. 706.3. Completion of existing buildings.
Nothing herein shall require any change in plan, construction, or designated use of a building for which a
building permit has been issued and which shall be completed within a reasonable period of time from the date
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/283
of passage of this ordinance.
Sec. 706.4. Home occupations.
Home occupations are permitted in residential dwellings subject to the following conditions:
A. It is operated entirely within the domicile and by a person or persons living therein.
B. Does not have a separate entrance from outside the building.
C. Does not display or create outside the building any external evidence of the operation of the
home occupation except for one (1) unanimated, non-illuminated, flat or window sign having an area
of not more than one hundred forty-four (144) square inches facing on each street adjoining the lot in
which the building is located.
D. Does not utilize more than twenty percent (20%) of the gross floor area, nor more than three
hundred (300) square feet in a dwelling unit.
E. Does not have any employee or regular assistant residing in the dwelling unit in which the
home occupation is operated or maintained.
Sec. 706.5. Sale of household effects and personal belongings.
Residents of a dwelling, may offer their personal belongings and household effects for sale to the general public
in a garage or other accessory building; provided, the interval between such sales is at least three (3) months,
and no sale period shall extend for more than three (3) consecutive calendar days.
Sec. 707.1. Walls, fences, safety and height.
Walls and fences constructed on residential property shall be no greater than eight (8) feet in height subject to
the following limitations:
A. The height of a wall or fence shall be the vertical distance between the ground and the top of
the fence.
B. No wall or fence located in the one required full depth front yard, according to the provisions of
section 703.1, A, shall have a height of more than four (4) feet.
C. No wall or fence located on a corner lot shall have a height in conflict with the regulations
governing visibility at intersections as prescribed in section 701.1, B.
Sec. 707.2. Street right-of-way.
No wall or fence shall be constructed in a public street right-of-way. Provided, however, that where the city's
comprehensive plan map, or circulation and land use map, or major thoroughfare plan map, depicts streets in
accordance with the principals and standards for major street development, a fence may be constructed in the
right-of-way after review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and the signing of an agreement
to remove such wall or fence from the right-of-way at the owners expense should such be the case, as follows:
Type of Street Right-of-Way Width Setback Requirement from Curb
Expressway 300-400 feet 13 feet
Arterial A 100-150 feet 13 feet
Arterial B 70-100 feet 13 feet
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/283
Sec. 708.1. Off-street parking and off-street loading.
The off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall meet the requirements as follows:
A. All buildings and structures erected, and all uses of land established, shall provide off-street
parking and loading as applicable to the use, in the zoning district where located.
B. When any building, structure, or premises is increased in size, required parking and loading
facilities shall be provided for such increases.
C. When the existing use of a building or structure is changed or structure is changed, parking or
loading facilities shall be provided as required. If the building or structure was erected prior to the
effective date of this Code, additional parking or loading facilities are mandatory only to the extent
that the new requirements exceed those of the existing use.
D. Accessory off-street parking and loading facilities located on the same lot as the building or use
served shall not be further reduced below the requirements for a similar new building or use under
the provisions of this Code.
Sec. 708.2. General requirements.
A. Off-street parking and loading facilities shall not occupy required livability space. Space allocated to any
required off-street loading berth shall not be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking
facilities and vice versa.
B. Within the front and exterior side yard in the RS-1, RS-2 and RG districts, not more than one vehicle shall
be parked for each 600 square feet of area contained in the front or exterior side yards.
C. Required off-street parking spaces and loading berths shall not be used for other than their designated
purposes.
D. Required off-street parking spaces and off-street lading berths shall be located on the lot containing the
facility for which the required spaces or berths are provided.
E. Required enclosed off-street parking and loading areas shall meet the bulk and area requirements of the
use district, except the enclosed off-street parking and loading areas which are required, shall not be included
in the computation of permitted floor area.
F. The capacity of an off-street parking area shall be the number of parking spaces having minimum
dimensions of 9 feet by 20 feet so that each space can be entered without passing through another space,
except in residential districts, where access may be obtained through another parking space.
G. Required off-street parking surfacing shall be completed prior to use.
Sec. 708.3. Setbacks.
A. Off-street loading areas shall not be located within 50 feet of any abutting property which is within a
residential district unless it is wholly within an enclosed building or screened on all sides abutting the residential
district by a screening wall or fence.
B. Unenclosed off-street parking and loading areas shall be set back from abutting streets as set forth below:
Parking Area
1 to 5
spaces
Parking Area 6
or more spaces
Loading Area
In Residential District
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/283
Accessory to a dwelling 28 ft. 35 ft. N/A
Accessory to another use 40 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft.
Not in an “R” District
But within 50 ft of an “R” district 40 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft.
Sec. 708.4. Design standards for off-street parking areas.
A. A required off-street parking space shall be a least 9 feet in width and at least 20 feet in length exclusive of
access drives or aisles. Such space shall have a vertical clearance of at least 7 feet.
B. Each required parking space shall be accessible from a public street without passing through another
required space, except in residential districts.
C. Lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall direct the light away from properties within an
“R” district hot having use of the parking area.
D. Unenclosed off-street parking areas shall be surfaced with an all-weather material.
E. Unenclosed off-street parking areas which, are principal uses, shall have a screening wall or fence on the
lot in common with a residential district. Unenclosed off-street parking areas, containing 6 or more spaces, shall
be screened by the erection of a screening wall or fence on the lot line common with an “R” district; if the
parking area is located more than 50 feet from the residential lot line, the screening requirement shall not apply.
Sec. 708.5. Design standards for off-street loading areas.
A. Unless specified otherwise, a required off-street loading berth shall be at least 10 feet in width, 30 feet in
length, (exclusive of aisles), and shall have a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet.
B. Required off-street loading berths shall have access to and from a public street or alley via an access
drive of at least 10 feet in width designed to permit easy access by semi-trailer trucks.
C. Unenclosed off-street loading areas shall be surfaced with an all-weather material.
D. Unenclosed off-street loading berths shall not be located within 50 feet of any property in an “R” district
unless it is screened on all sides abutting the “R” district by a screening wall or fence.
E. Lighting used to illuminate an off-street loading area shall be arranged to direct the light away from the
properties within an “R” district.
Sec. 708.6. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
(Non-Applicable to “CG” district)
Parking Spaces Loading Berths
Juvenile Delinquency Center 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor
area
1 per 10,000 to 100,000 sq.
ft. plus 1 per each additional
100,000 sq. ft. of floor area.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/283
Other uses As may be required by the city commission in granting the
special exception use
General Agricultural District None
Community Services, Cultural & Recreational Facilities (Special exception)
Aquarium, art gallery,
museum planetarium, and
cultural facility
1 per 800 sq. ft. of floor
area
1 per 10,000 to 200,000 sq.
ft. plus 1 per each additional
200,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Care home 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor
area
1 per 10,000 to 100,000 sq.
ft. plus 1 per each additional
100,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Children[‘s] nursery/day care 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor
area
NA
Church 1 per 40 sq. ft. of chapel or
sanctuary floor area
1 per 10,000 to 200,000 sq.
ft. plus 1 per each additional
200,000 sq. ft. of floor area
College, university 1 per 600 sq. ft. of
classroom floor area plus 1
per 4 dorm beds, plus 1
per 4 stadium seats
1 per 10,000 to 200,000 sq.
ft. plus 1 per each additional
200,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Community center 1 per 500 sq. ft. of floor
area
1 per 10,000 to 100,000 sq.
ft. plus 1 per each additional
100,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Convent, monastery, novitiate 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor
area
1 per 10,000 to 100,000 sq.
ft. plus 1 per each sq. ft. plus
1 per each additional
200,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Foster home 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor
area
N/A
Halfway house 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor
area
N/A
Hospital 1 per bed 1 per 10,000 to 100,000 sq.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/283
ft. plus 1 per each additional
100,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Library 1 per 500 sq. ft. of floor
area
1 per 10,000 to 100,000 sq.
ft. plus 1 per each additional
100,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Private club 1 per 500 sq. ft. of floor
area
1 per 10,000 to 100,000 sq.
ft. plus 1 per each additional
200,000 sq. ft. of floor area.
Private club 1 per 4 stadium seats plus
1 per 500 sq. ft. of
community center or
recreation building plus 1
per 300 sq. ft. of pool area
1 per 10,000 to 100,000 sq.
ft. plus 1 per each additional
100,000 sq. ft. of floor area
SCHOOLS
Elementary & junior high 1 per 1,200 sq. ft. of floor
area
1 per 10,000 to 200,000 sq.
ft. plus q per each additional
200,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Senior high 1 per 800 sq. ft. of floor
area plus 1 per 4 stadium
seats
1 per 10,000 to 200,000 sq.
ft. plus 1 per each additional
200,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Tennis courts 2 per court, plus 1 per 400
sq. ft. of clubhouse area
NA
Single-family detached
dwelling
2 per dwelling unit
Duplex dwelling 2 per dwelling unit NA
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING AND SIMILAR USES
Fraternity or sorority house 1 per 2 beds 1 per 10,000 to 200,000 sq.
ft. plus 1 per each additional
200,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Multifamily dwelling 1.5 per efficiency or 1
bedroom dwelling unit 2
None
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/283
per 2 or more bedroom
dwelling unit
Rooming/boarding house 1 per 2 beds
Townhouses 1.5 per efficiency or 1
bedroom dwelling unit 2
per 2 or more bedroom
dwelling unit
None
Mobile home 2 per each mobile home
dwelling unit
None
Funeral home 1 per 40 sq. ft. of assembly
floor area plus 1 per 300
sq. ft. of non-assembly
floor area
1 per 10,000 to 100,000 sq.
ft. plus 1 per each additional
100,000 sq. ft. of floor area
OTHER SIMILAR USES TO
ABOVE
1 per 400 sq. ft of floor
area
1 per 10,000 to 100,000 sq.
ft. plus 1 per each additional
100,000 sq. ft. of floor area.
Medical & dental offices,
clinics & laboratories
1 per 250 sq. ft. of floor
area
Same as above
Eating places other than driveins
1 per 250 sq. ft. of floor
area
1 per 5,000 to 10,000 sq. ft.
plus 1 per each additional
25,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Retail trade & service
establishments
1 per 250 sq. ft. of floor
area
Same as above
Antique & furniture store 1 per 250 sq. ft. of floor
area
1 per 5,000 to 25,000 sq. ft.
plus 1 per each additional
25,000 sq. ft. of floor area.
Trade establishments
including fabricating,
processing, installation &
repair
1 per 400 sq. ft. of floor
area
Same as above
GASOLINE SERVICE Not applicable
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/283
STATIONS
Agriculture implements,
automotive, camper, mobile
home, motorcycle & truck
sales
1 per 600 sq. ft. of floor
area plus 1 per 1,000 sq.
ft. of open air display
storage, or service area
1 per 5,000 to 10,000 sq. ft.
plus 1 per each additional
15,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Automobile rental, vehicle
repair, auto wash
1 per 600 sq. ft. of floor
area except for auto wash
NA
Drive-in restaurant NA 1 per 5,000 to 25,000 Sq. ft.
of floor area plus 1 per each
additional 25,000 sq. ft. of
floor area
Hotel, motel 1 per sleeping room plus 1
per 225 sq. ft. of accessory
facilities[,] such as[,]
restaurants, taverns
1 per 40,000 to 150,000 sq.
ft. plus 1 per each additional
150,000 sq. ft. of floor area
plus 1 per 5,000 to 25,000
sq. ft. plus 1 per each
additional 25,000 sq. ft. of
accessory facilities such as
taverns, restaurants
Uses providing spectator
seating such as stadium,
arenas, rodeo grounds
1 per 4 seats 1 per 5,000 to 25,000 sq. ft.
plus 1 per each additional
25,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Warehousing & wholesaling 1 per 5,000 sq. ft. of floor
area
Same as above
Mineral and mineral
processing
1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor
area
NA
Light moderate and heavy
manufacturing
1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor
area
1 per 2,000 to 40,000 sq. ft.
of floor area, plus 1 per
40,000 to 1,000,000 sq. ft.,
plus 1 per each additional
100,000 sq. ft. of floor area
Sec. 709.1. Adult business (Ordinance [No.] 1362).
A. Location requirements for adult business.
1. A structure housing an adult business shall be located at least one thousand (1,000) feet from
any residential PD, RS-1, RS-2 and RG zoning district boundary line, mobile home park, or from any
structure used as a residence, from a church, public or denominational schools, hospitals, licensed
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/283
child care facility, hotel or motel, parks or playgrounds (public), playfields or stadiums (public),
institutions of religious, charitable, or philanthropic nature, and from any other structure housing an
adult business.
2. Distance requirements are to be measured in a straight line in all directions from the structure
housing the adult business to any residentially zoned district boundary line; to any structure used for
a residence, church, school or hospital; any lot used for a park; and from structure to structure of
those facilities housing adult businesses.
3. The measurements to a structure shall be taken from the farthest point that a structure extends
in the direction of the measurement, including overhanging roofs and all other projections or portions
of said structure.
4. Should an adult business be located in conjunction with other buildings in a manner where said
adult business is clearly separated from other portions of the structure (for example, an adult
business in a shopping center), measurements shall be taken from the boundaries of the space
occupied by the adult business.
5. Should an adult business be located in a manner where said adult business is situated above
the ground level of a multistory structure and is clearly separate from other activities within the
structure, the adult business measurements shall be taken from the boundaries of the space
occupied by the adult business, thence to the nearest point of egress (elevator or stairs), thence to
the nearest ground floor exit, thence in a straight line in all directions to any residentially zoned
district boundary line; to any structure used for a residence, church, school, or hospital; any lot used
for a park; and from structure to structure of those facilities housing adult business.
B. Viewing booth requirements for adult business.
1. Viewing booths in an adult business shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed and unobstructable view of the interior area of the viewing booth from outside the
entrance to the viewing booth at all times.
2. Wall or partitions of viewing booths between two (2) feet and six (6) feet above floor level shall
have no holes or voids in such walls or partitions.
3. A viewing booth shall at all times be illuminated with not less than that amount of light provided
by a twenty-watt bulb.
4. It shall be the duty of the person accepting payment from customers of an adult business to
ensure that the viewing booth requirements in this section are in compliance at all times.
ARTICLE VIII. USE DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
Sec. 800.1. Purpose.
The purpose of the use districts is to group together uses that are reasonably compatible according to their
normal characteristics of operation; to permit in connection with these uses those customary and necessary
accessory activities which are incidental to the principal use; and to permit special uses which will be
compatible with the sues allowed as a matter of right.
Sec. 800.2. Accessory uses-Standard conditions.
Any use may be established as an accessory use to any permitted principal use in any district provided that
such accessory use:
A. Is customarily incidental to and is maintained and operated as a part of the principal use;
B. Is not hazardous to and does not impair the use or enjoyment of nearby property in greater
degree than the principal use;
C. Does not create levels of noise, odors, vibrations and lighting, or degrees of traffic congestion,
dust or other pollutants, in a greater amount than that customarily created by the principal use; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/283
D. Is not located in a minimum exterior yard.
Sec. 800.3. District regulations.
All property within the city shall be located within one of the use districts described in the following sections.
Except where indicated, the uses in each district shall be limited to those specifically enumerated.
Sec. 800.4. Newly annexed land.
Newly annexed areas shall be permanently zoned at the time of annexation.
Sec. 800.5. Establishment of districts.
The zoning districts set forth below are hereby established. The district symbol is in the column to the left.
AG-General Agricultural District
RS-1-Single-Family Residential District
RS-2-Single-Family Residential District
RG-General Residential District
C-C-Convenience Commercial District
C-A/R-Automotive Commercial and Commercial Recreational District
C-G-General Commercial District
I-L-Light Industrial District
I-H-Heavy Industrial District
C-F-Community Facilities
P-D-Planned Development District
F-D-Floodway Supplemental District
C-B-Central Business District
C-O-Corridor Overlay District
N-O-Neighborhood Office District
(Ordinance 1519, sec. 1.A, adopted 8/25/09; Ordinance 1520, sec. 1.B, adopted 8/25/09; Ordinance 1646, sec.
1, adopted 8/26/14)
Sec. 800.6. Establishment of district boundaries-Map.
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts shall be established by ordinance and shall be delineate and
shown on a map entitled “Zoning Map of the City of Vernon, Texas.” The zoning map is hereby incorporated as
a part of this ordinance.
The original map shall bear the same date as this ordinance; shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the
city secretary, under the seal of the city, and shall be kept in the office of the city secretary in the city hall; a
replica shall be reproduced at such scale as will permit its being attached to these regulations.
Sec. 800.7. Determination of boundaries.
In determining the location of zoning district boundaries on the map accompanying and made a part of these
regulations, the following rule shall apply:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/283
A. Where boundaries are shown to follow streets or alleys, the centerlines of such streets or
alleys, as they exist at the time of adoption of these regulations shall be the zoning boundary; or
B. Where boundaries are shown to enter or cross platted blocks, property lines of lots, as they
exist at the time of adoption of these regulations, shall be the zoning boundary; or
C. Where boundaries are shown on unsubdivided property, the location shall be determined by
scale shown on the map unless dimensions are given on the map.
D. In the event of uncertainty in the exact boundaries of any district as shown on the zoning map
of City of Vernon, Texas, the planning and zoning commission, upon written application or upon its
own motion, shall recommend the location of such boundaries to the city commission, and the city
commission shall make the final determination.
Sec. 800.8. Maintenance of Official Zoning Map of Vernon, Texas.
It shall be the duty of the planning and code enforcement [community development] department to maintain an
up to date official zoning map of the City of Vernon, Texas[,] including all amendments directly adopted by the
city commission.
ARTICLE IX. USE DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Sec. 900.1. General agricultural district-Purpose.
The “AG” General Agricultural District is designed to permit sparsely settled residential development in
combination with traditional farming activities. Division of land ordinarily occurs in order to accommodate
agricultural needs. Urban-type public improvements normally are not required in this district.
Sec. 900.2. Principal uses.
In this district no building or land shall be used and no building shall be thereafter erected, reconstructed or
structurally altered or enlarged except for one or more of the following principal uses:
A. Single-family residence.
B. City-owned buildings and uses.
C. Agricultural uses: livestock ranges, animal husbandry, field crops, tree crops, nurseries and
greenhouses.
D. Public-owned utility buildings and structures.
E. Public parks and recreation areas.
F. Religious institutions, churches and facilities for worship, fellowship and education when
located on a site of three (3) acres or more.
Sec. 900.3. Accessory uses.
Any use may be established as an accessory use to any permitted principal use when it complies with the
standard conditions for accessory uses as set forth in section 800.2. In addition, the following accessory use is
permitted.
A. Roadside stand not exceeding four hundred (400) square feet in floor area, for the sale of
agricultural products frown on the premises.
Sec. 900.4. Special exception uses.
The following uses may be established only when reviewed by the planning and zoning commission and
authorized by the city commission after a public hearing:
A. Shooting range: big bore and small bore rifle, pistol, trap and skeet.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/283
Conditions: The entire range shall be posted and fenced securely to prevent the accidental entry
of persons or chattel onto the premises.
B. Radio, television, microwave broadcast, relay, receiving towers and transmission and
retransmission facilities.
Conditions: The tower shall be set back from all property lines a distance equal to three fourths of
the height of the tower.
C. Boarding of horses, riding stable, riding hall, horse track.
Conditions: Barns and animal enclosures shall be set back to comply with applicable state and
local laws and provisions shall have been made for an operating and maintenance program to
minimize the adverse affects of adjacent properties caused by odors and the breeding of flies.
D. Day care center.
Conditions: The outdoor play area shall be screened along all abutting properties used for
dwelling purposes by a solid wall or fence or by a dense evergreen hedge, and such wall, fence or
hedge shall have a height of not less than six (6) feet or more than eight (8).
Sec. 901.1. RS-1, Single-Family Residential District.
The RS-1, Single-Family Residential District is established as a district in which the use of land is for singlefamily
dwellings except as noted. It is the purpose and intent of this district to promote the development of and
the continued use of the land for single-family dwellings and to prohibit commercial and industrial use or any
other use, which would substantially interfere with the development or continuation of single-family dwellings in
this district. The intent is to further discourage any use, which would generate other than the normal traffic
which serves residents in the area. This district further encourages only those uses, which, because of
character or size, would not create additional requirements and costs for public services in excess of
requirements and costs for single-family dwellings.
Sec. 901.2. Uses permitted.
In this district no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally
altered or enlarged except for one or more of the following principal uses:
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Public schools and private schools where the curriculum is similar in nature and preparation of
course work to the public schools, and which satisfies the requirement of the state public school
laws and the regulations of the state department of education.
C. Public park or playground.
D. Agricultural uses of the small non-commercial garden type.
Sec. 901.3. Special exception uses.
The following uses may be established only when authorized by the planning and zoning commission and city
commission after a public hearing provided they meet the requirements noted for each use in addition to
applicable area regulations:
A. Churches, a minimum lot size of one (1) acre and arterial street frontage as shown on the
comprehensive plan map.
B. Library, provided it has arterial street frontage as shown on the comprehensive plan map.
C. Home occupation, provided that it is in keeping with the meaning of “home occupation” as
defined in this ordinance. (See section 706.4, page 24)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/283
D. Plant nursery, provided that no building or structure is maintained in connection therewith and
no retailing or any material is carried on upon the premises.
E. Junior high or senior high schools, provided that they have arterial street frontage as shown on
the comprehensive plan map or the thoroughfare plan.
Sec. 901.4. Accessory uses (see section 800.2).
Sec. 901.5. District regulations.
[The following district regulations exist within the RS-1, Single-Family Residential District:]
Minimum Lot
Area Frontage
Minimum Lot
Coverage
Maximum Lot
Setback
Minimum Front
Yard Setback
Minimum Side
Yard Setback
8,000 sq. ft. 70 feet 50 percent 30 feet 5' interior lots
10' street side of
corner lots.
All lots and improvements within the RS-1 District shall meet the following requirements:
A. All lots shall have not less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet of lot area, and not more
than one (1) principal building shall be placed on any one (1) lot.
B. Each lot shall have a front of not less than seventy (70) feet. The frontage of any wedge
shaped lot, which meets the requirements of minimum lot size may be a minimum of forty (40) feet;
however, the front building line on the lot shall be a minimum of seventy (70) linear feet measured at
an equal distance parallel to and from the front lot line.
C. The maximum dwelling on any lot in the RS-1 District shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of
the lot area for interior lots nor sixty percent (60%) of the lot area for corner lots. Paved areas are
not considered improvements within the meaning of this provision.
D. All structures shall have not less than a thirty (30) foot front yard setback.
E. For a single-family dwelling of one story, the minimum width of the side yard shall be five (5)
feet from the interior lot lines and ten (10) feet for the side yard abutting the side street on a corner
lot. For buildings of more than one story, the minimum width of the side yard on the interior lot lines
shall be not less than ten (10) feet. For a principal building other than a single-family dwelling, the
minimum width of the side yard shall be not less than the height of the building, but in no case less
than fifteen (15) feet.
F. A rear yard of twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot shall be provided for the principal
building. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main building;
provided, however that no accessory building shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to the rear lot
line, unless there is an alley adjacent and contiguous to the back lot line in which event building may
be placed on lot line.
G. Height Limit-No dwelling in the RS-1 District shall be constructed with a height in excess of
thirty-five (35) feet from the mean lot elevation nor will it exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories.
H. Bulk Limitations (floor area ratio)-Bulk limitations are governed by maximum coverage, yard
requirements and height limitations.
Sec. 902.1. RS-2, Single-Family Residential District.
The “RS-2” Single-Family Residential District is designed specifically to provide an area for single family
housing at a higher density than permitted in the “RS-1” District. The development and continued use of this
land for single-family dwellings is encouraged and the encroachment of commercial and industrial use or any
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/283
other use which would substantially interfere with the development of or continuation of this district as singlefamily
dwellings is prohibited. This district also discourages any use, which would generate other than normal
traffic which serves the residences on the street. It encourages only those uses, which because of character or
size would not create additional requirements and costs for public services which are in excess of such
requirements and costs if the district were developed solely for single-family dwellings.
Sec. 902.2. Permitted uses.
Permitted uses in the RS-2 Residential District are the same as those in section 901.2 for the RS-1 District.
Sec. 902.3. Special exception uses.
Duplexes.
HUD-code manufactured homes without the towing hitch, axles, brakes, wheels, and other parts of the chassis
that operate only during transportation may be placed on conforming lots if installed in accordance with
applicable state laws and standards. All other mobile or movable homes shall be placed in a mobile home park.
(Ordinance 1645, sec. 1, adopted 8/26/14)
Sec. 902.4. Accessory uses (see section 800.2).
Sec. 902.5. District regulations.
[The following district regulations exist within the RS-2 Single-Family Residential District:]
Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet
Minimum lot frontage: 50 feet
Maximum lot coverage: 40 percent (40%)
Minimum front yard setback: 25 feet
Minimum side yard setback: 5 ft. interior lots; 10 ft. street side of corner lots.
Minimum rear yard setback: 20% of depth of lot.
All lots and improvements within the “RS-2” District shall meet the following requirements:
A. All lots shall have not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet of lot area, and not more than
one (1) principal building shall be placed on any one (1) lot, except that not less than twelve
thousand (12,000) square feet shall be required for uses other than single-family residences.
B. Each lot shall have a front of not less than fifty (50) feet. The frontage of any wedge-shaped lot
which meets the requirements of minimum lot size may be a minimum of thirty (30) feet; however,
the front building line on the lot shall be a minimum of fifty (50) linear feet measured at an equal
distance to and from the front lot line.
C. Not more than forty percent (40%) of the lot area shall be covered with improvements. Paved
areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of this provision.
D. All structures shall have not less than a twenty-five (25) foot front yard setback.
E. For a single-family dwelling of one story, the minimum width of the side yard shall be five (5)
feet for interior lot lines and ten (10) feet for the side yard abutting the side street on a corner lot. For
buildings of more than one story, the minimum width of the side yard on interior lot lines shall be not
less than ten (10) feet. For a principal building other than a single-family dwelling, the minimum
width of the side yard shall be not less than the height of the building, but in no case less than fifteen
(15) feet.
F. A rear yard of twenty percent (20%) of the depth of the lot shall be provided for the principal
building. Unattached buildings of accessory use may be located in the rear yard of a main building;
provided however, that no accessory building shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to the rear lot
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/283
line, unless there is an alley adjacent and contiguous to the back lot line in which case it may go to
the lot line.
G. Height limit-No dwelling shall be constructed with a height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet from
the mean lot elevation nor will it exceed two and one-half (21/2) stories.
H. Bulk limitations-(Floor area ratio) are governed by maximum coverage, yard requirements and
height limitations.
Sec. 903.1. RG, General Residential District purpose.
The “RG,” General Residential District is intended to provide for both low and high-population density. It is
established as a district in which the principal uses of the land are for multi-family dwellings and similar highdensity
residential development. The intent is to encourage the development and continued use of land for
multi-family dwellings and to prohibit commercial and industrial uses or any other use, which would substantially
interfere with the development or continuation of multi-family dwellings in this district. It is further intended to
discourage any use which would generate additional traffic, and discourage any use which, because of its
character or size, would create additional requirements and costs for public services which would be in excess
of such requirements and costs if the district were developed solely for multi-family or other similar residential
uses.
Sec. 903.2. Uses permitted.
Within the “RG,” General Residential District, the following uses are permitted:
A. Any use permitted in section 902.2 for the RS-2 Single-Family Residential District.
B. Duplex.
C. Multi-family dwelling.
D. Rooming or boarding house.
E. HUD-code manufactured home which complies with section 902.
Sec. 903.3. Special exception uses.
The following uses may be established only when authorized by the planning and zoning commission and city
commission after a public hearing provided they meet the requirement noted for each use in addition to
applicable area regulations:
A. Convalescent home, rest home, nursing home, and hospitals, public and private, provided they
have frontage on a arterial street as shown on the comprehensive plan map or the thoroughfare plan
map.
B. Community services, cultural, and utility facilities, provided they are located on a lot of not less
than one (1) acre and have frontage on an arterial street as shown on the comprehensive plan or
thoroughfare plan maps.
C. Licensed child care centers or day nurseries, provided they are located on a lot not less than
ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area and have principal access on an arterial street as shown
on the thoroughfare plan or comprehensive plan maps.
D. Any uses permitted subject to additional requirements in section 901.3 for the RS-1, Single-
Family Residential District.
E. Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses when located on the
same lot.
F. Mobil home parks in compliance with the following requirements:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/283
1. The applicant, upon making application for a zoning clearance permit, must submit a
detailed site plan locating all mobile home stands, screening or fencing, and plans and
specifications for the proposed park in a form suitable for making the determination required
herein. Livability space shall be provided in common areas of not less than 7,500 sq. ft.,
located so as to be conveniently accessible to the mobile homes it is intended to serve.
2. The proposed site shall provide for a minimum of ten (10) mobile home spaces of five
thousand four hundred forty-five (5,445) square feet per dwelling unit. Any mobile park of
twenty (20) or more sites shall have a minimum frontage of one hundred (100) feet on a street
designated as an arterial or collector street on the comprehensive plan or thoroughfare plan.
All ingress or egress by automobile shall be on such streets.
3. The mobile home park shall accommodate primarily permanent occupants, with no more
than forty (40) percent of the mobile home stands devoted to solely transient purposes. These
solely transient stands are to be located in one area of the park so they will in no way interfere
with the permanent residents.
4. Front yards of not less than twenty (20) feet and side and rear yards of not less than ten
(10) feet shall be provided on mobile home park sites. The setback from adjacent line shall be
ten (10) foot minimum. The setback from adjacent buildings shall be thirty-five (35) foot
minimum.
5. The site shall provide one (1) off-street parking space for each mobile home stand, plus
one (1) additional off-street parking space for each four (4) mobile home stands.
6. The site shall provide connections for each mobile home stand to all public utilities.
7. The mobile home park shall at all times be constructed, operated and maintained in
compliance with the health regulations, chapter [28] and mobile home park regulations,
chapter 171/2 [34] of the City of Vernon, Texas.
8. Tie-down and ground anchors shall be provided in accordance with regulations of the City
of Vernon, Texas which are designed to withstand minimum gale force winds.
9. Minimum all weather internal street surfacing width shall be 24 feet.
Sec. 903.4. Mobile home subdivisions.
A mobile home park development may be subdivided to permit individual ownership of mobile home spaces,
provided the resulting lots shall comply with the bulk and area requirements set out below and a subdivision
plat incorporating the bulk and area requirements is submitted to and approved by the planning and zoning
commission and filed of record in the office of the Wilbarger County clerk.
Land area per dwelling unit (min.): 6,000 square feet
Livability space for dwelling unit (min.): 1,000 square feet
Height (max.): one story
Front yard and any yard abutting a public street:
(Measured from centerline: add to the distance designated in the in the column to the right1/2 of
the right-of-way width designated on the land use and circulation plan, or 25 feet if not designated on
the LU & C plan.) (min. [feet])
Abutting an arterial: 35 feet
Not abutting an arterial: 25 feet
Side yards:
-One side: 10 feet
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/283
-Other side: 5 feet
-Rear yard (min.): 10 feet
Sec. 903.5. Duplex.
Use shall comply with the height and yard requirements for single-family use and in addition shall comply with
the following requirements:
A. Minimum lot area of 10,000 square feet;
B. Minimum frontage of 75 feet.
Sec. 903.6. Multifamily development standards.
A. Lot width (min.)[:] 100 feet
B. Lot area (min.): 10,000 square feet
C. Structure height (max. feet)[:] 26 feet
D. Front yard and any yard abutting a public street:
(Measured from the centerline of abutting street; add 1/2 of the right-of-way designated on the land use and
circulation plan or 25 feet if not designated on the LU & C plan.) (min. feet)
-Arterial[:] 35 feet
-Not an arterial[:] 25 feet
E. Rear yards (min. feet)[:] 15 feet
F. Side yards (min. feet)[:] One side yard 15 feet
Other side yard[:] 15 feet
G. Off-street parking (See section[s] 708.1 through 708.6)
Sec. 903.7. Site plan required.
A site plan shall be submitted as required under the “PD” Planned Development District, section 910.4 and
section 910.5. A site plan shall be submitted and approved prior to construction of C, D and E of section 903.2.
A. Traffic and project access.
The design of each project shall provide adequately for the safe movement of traffic flowing to and from the
project site. Particular attention shall be given to the locations at which traffic enters or leaves streets adjoining
the project site, and to the requirements for pedestrian movements to and from the site.
B. Drainage.
The design of each project shall provide adequately for the drainage of storm waters falling on or crossing the
site. The design of local drainage on hard-surfaced areas shall take into account the flow patterns inherent in
the design of the total project, and shall cause minimum interference with pedestrian movements during periods
of heavy runoff of storm waters. Where necessary, underground drains may be required o eliminate such
interference.
C. Off-street parking and loading.
Off-street parking and loading shall be mandatory for all apartment projects developed under these provisions.
No off-street parking area shall be located in any minimum required exterior yard. Parking spaces shall be
located no more than 200 feet pedestrian travel distance from the entrance to the dwelling for which it is
intended to serve and shall meet requirements set forth in section 708.5. Additional guest parking spaces equal
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/283
to ten percent (10%) of the required spaces will be provided. Guest parking spaces shall be permanently
marked.
D. Refuse facilities.
Every dwelling unit shall be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a refuse facility. Refuse containers
shall be provided and maintained in a manner to satisfy the city's public health and sanitary regulations. Each
refuse facility shall be located so as to provide safe and convenient pick-up by refuse collection agencies.
E. Recreation space.
On site recreation activities shall be provided at the rate of not less than two hundred (200) square feet for each
required off-street parking space, and shall have an area of not less than five percent (5%) of the total area of
the site.
F. Emergency access easement.
Where a building is located more than one-hundred (100) feet from a dedicated public street, there shall be
provided an emergency access easement situated not further than thirty (30) feet from such building. Each
emergency access easement shall allow for the rapid and safe movement of vehicles used for purposes of
providing emergency health or public safety services. Such easements shall have a clear unobstructed width of
twenty-four (24) feet, shall connect at each end to a dedicated public street or shall have a turn-around of eighty
(80) feet in diameter; corners of emergency access easements and their intersections with public streets shall
have a sufficient turning area to permit the free movement of emergency vehicles. Emergency access
easements shall be marked by permanent signs as required for designation of visitor parking spaces, and such
signs shall have dimensions of not less than two (2) square feet nor greater than four (4) square feet in the face
area. Emergency access easements shall be clearly posted to prohibit parking or standing of vehicles except
for emergency purposes.
G. Lighting.
Lighting within the apartment project shall be provided along all driveways and emergency access easements,
and at parking areas, except closed door parking. The height and spacing of light fixtures shall be such as to
produce an average illumination level of not less than 0.2 foot candles on all such driveways, access
easements and parking areas.
Sec. 903.8. Single-family dwelling regulations: same as [section] 902.5.
Sec. 904.1. C-C, Convenience Commercial District-Purpose.
The C-C, Convenience Commercial District is intended for a unified grouping in one or more buildings of retail
shops and stores and personal services that provide for the regular needs and are for the convenience of the
people residing in the adjacent residential neighborhoods. It is intended that the convenience center be
developed as a unit with adequate off-street parking space for customers and employees, and with appropriate
landscaping and screening.
Sec. 904.2. Uses permitted.
Within the C-C district, the following uses are permitted:
Artist's supplies and hobby shop
Ambulance service offices or garage
Automobile service station
Bakery shop
Barber and beauty shops
Boat sales
Book store
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/283
Bowling alleys
Bus terminal
Clothing or wearing apparel shops
Dairy products store
Delicatessen
Drive-in restaurant
Drugstore
Financial institutions
Florist shop
Funeral parlor
Garden stores
Gift shop
Grocery store
Hardware store
Heating and plumbing sales and service
New and used automobile sales and services and public garages
Hospital for small animals
Hotel
Ice plant
Jewelry shop
Kennel
Key shop
Laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations, laundromat
Laundry
Lumberyard
Medical facility
Mini storage warehouse
Office, professional and/or general
Pawnshop
Pet shop
Pharmacy
Printing plant
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/283
Restaurants
Retail leather shop
Roller skating rink
Self-service laundries
Service station
Shoe repair shop
Sign painting shop
Sporting goods store
Storage warehouse
Tailor shop
Theater
Toy shop
Variety store
Wholesale distributing center
Any use permitted in section 903.2 item E. except HUD-code manufactured homes.
Any other commercial use deemed by the planning and zoning commission to be of a similar nature to those
listed above.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses, provided that there shall be no
manufacturing of products other than such as are, customarily incidental to retail establishments.
(Ordinance 1644, sec. 1, adopted 8/26/14)
Sec. 904.3. Special exception uses.
The following uses may be established only when authorized by the planning and zoning commission and city
commission after a public hearing by each body:
Any of the uses permitted in section 901.3.
Sec. 904.4. District regulations.
[The following district regulations exist within the C-C, Convenience Commercial District:]
Minimum lot area: 12,000 square feet
Minimum lot frontage: 100 feet
Maximum percentage coverage: 50% (Ordinance [No.] 1480)
Maximum height: 50 feet
Minimum front yard setback: 10 feet (Ordinance [No.] 1480)
Minimum side yard setback: 20 [feet] adjacent to residential district
Minimum side yard corner lot: 20 feet
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/283
Minimum rear yard setback: 10 feet
A. The parcel of land on which a convenience commercial center is located shall not be less than
twelve thousand (12,000) square feet.
B. Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than one hundred (100) feet.
C. No more than fifty (50) percent of the lot area shall be covered with improvements. Paved
areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of this provision.
D. No improvement or structure shall exceed fifty (50) feet in height above the mean elevation of
the lot.
E. It is intended that the grouping of buildings and parking areas be designed to protect, insofar as
possible, adjacent residential areas. In no case shall the design of the shopping center provide less
than the following standards:
1. On the side of a lot adjoining a residential district, there shall be a side yard setback of
twenty (20) feet. (Ordinance [No.] 1284)
2. All buildings shall be set back from the rear lot line not less than ten (10) feet.
F. Outdoor storage material must be located in such a manner that it is neat, orderly,
systematically stacked and not randomly placed upon the property. Similar type material must be
stored together. Outdoor storage must not encourage the harboring of rats, mice, snakes, insects,
mosquitoes, and/or other pests. The outdoor storage must also be free of any high grass and/or
weeds.
G. All vehicles must be parked on an all-weather surface.
H. Petroleum products must be located on an all-weather, City of Vernon Code Enforcement
approved surface and free of all vegetation.
I. All dead trees and/or shrubs are prohibited and must be removed immediately.
(Ordinance 1480; Ordinance 1521, secs. 1.A—D, adopted 9/22/09)
Sec. 905.1. C-A/R, Automobile Commercial and Commercial Recreation District-Purpose.
The C-A/R, Automobile Commercial and Commercial Recreation District is established as a district in which the
principal use of land is for establishments offering accommodations, supplies of services of motorists, and for
certain specialized uses such as retail outlets, extensive commercial amusement and service establishments
which serve the entire community but do not and should not necessarily locate in the central business district or
the convenience commercial district.
Sec. 905.2. Uses permitted.
Within the C-A/R, Automobile Commercial and Commercial Recreation District, the following uses are
permitted:
A. Any use permitted in the C-C, Convenience Commercial District.
B. Other uses, including:
Amusement enterprises
New and used automobile sales and service, new and used machinery sales and service, and
public garages.
Automobile service station
Billboards with compliance to the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/283
Boat sales
Bowling alleys
Bus terminal
Dancehall
Drive-in theater or restaurant
Electric transmission station
Feed and fuel store
Garden stores
Golf course, miniature or practice range
Heating and plumbing sales and service
Hospital for small animals
Ice plant
Key shop
Kennel
Laundry
Motels
Nightclub
Novelty
Pawnshop
Pet shop
Printing plant
Public uses
Recreation center, private
Roller skating rink
Sign painting shop
Tavern (only if not in conflict with other city ordinances)
Mobile home sales
Travel trailer park and sales
Wholesale distributing center
C. Buildings, structures and accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses,
provided that there shall be no manufacturing of products other than such as are customarily
incidental to retail establishments.
Sec. 905.3. Special exception uses.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/283
The following uses may be permitted by the planning and zoning commission and city commission after a public
hearing, provided they meet the requirement noted for each use in addition to all other regulations applicable:
A. Wholesale businesses if no outdoor storage is located on the property in this district.
Sec. 905.4. District regulations.
[The following district regulations exist within the C-A/R, Automobile Commercial and Commercial Recreation
District:]
Minimum lot area: 12,000 square feet
Minimum lot frontage: 100 feet
Maximum percentage coverage: 50% (Ordinance [No.] 1480)
Maximum height: 35 feet
Minimum front yard setback: 10 feet (Ordinance [No.] 1480)
Minimum side yard setback: 2'/1' adjacent to residential district.
Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet
A. The parcel of land on which any commercial use is located shall not be less than twelve
thousand (12,000) square feet.
B. Each lot shall have a frontage of not less than one hundred (100) feet.
C. Not more than fifty (50) percent of the lot area shall be covered with improvements. Paved
areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of this provision.
D. No improvement or structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height above the mean
elevation of the lot.
E. It is intended that the grouping of buildings and parking areas be designed to protect, insofar as
possible, adjacent residential areas. In no case shall the design of the shopping center provide less
than the following standards:
1. All buildings shall be set back form all street right-of-way lines not less than ten (10) feet.
2. On the side of a lot adjoining a residential district, there shall be a side yard setback of
two (2) feet for each one (1) feet of height.
3. All buildings shall be set back from the rear lot line not less than twenty (20) feet.
F. Outdoor storage material must be located in such a manner that it is neat, orderly,
systematically stacked and not randomly placed upon the property. Similar type material must be
stored together. Outdoor storage must not encourage the harboring of rats, mice, snakes, insects,
mosquitoes, and/or other pests. The outdoor storage must also be free of any high grass and/or
weeds.
G. All vehicles must be parked on an all-weather surface.
H. Petroleum products must be located on an all-weather, City of Vernon Code Enforcement
approved surface and free of all vegetation.
I. All dead trees and/or shrubs are prohibited and must be removed immediately.
(Ordinance 1480; Ordinance 1521, secs. 1.E-H, adopted 9/22/09)
Sec. 905.5. Signs-Must conform to the provisions of the city ordinance pertaining to signs.
Sec. 906.1. C-G, General Commercial District-Purpose.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/283
The C-G, General Commercial District is designed for the conduct of personal and business services and the
general retail trade of the community. It is designed to accommodate a wide variety of commercial uses in the
central business district or areas of mixed business enterprises. It will not normally be applied in the case of
new commercial areas.
Sec. 906.2. Uses permitted.
Within the C-G, General Commercial District, the following uses are permitted:
A. Any use permitted in a C-C district.
B. Other retail, personal service, business service, or professional use other than uses listed in
the C-A/R district regulations.
C. Any public or quasi-public buildings or uses.
D. Buildings, structures, and accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses,
provided that there shall be no manufacturing or products other than such as are customarily
incidental to retail establishments.
Sec. 906.3. Special exception uses.
Special exception uses are the same as in section 905.3.
Sec. 906.4. District regulations.
[The following district regulations exist within the C-G, General Commercial District:]
Minimum lot area: None
Minimum lot frontage: None
Maximum percentage coverage: None
Maximum height: None
Minimum front yard setback: None
Minimum side yard setback: None
Minimum rear yard setback: None
There are no area or height regulations in the C-G District.
Sec. 907.1. I-l, Light Industrial District-Purpose.
The purpose of the I-L, Light Industrial District is to provide a location for industries, which do not by nature
create nuisances. The intent is to preserve this land for industry in a location beneficial to industries and to
prohibit non-industrial uses. Because of the traffic generated and other potentially objectionable influences
created in this district, a buffer or setback area between this district and any other zoning district except I-H is
required.
Sec. 907.2. District standards.
Any use constructed, established, altered, or enlarged in the I-L, Light Industrial District, after the effective date
of this ordinance shall be so operated as to comply with the following standards:
A. No building shall be used for residential purposes except that a watchman may reside on the
premises or as authorized by special exception use. (Ordinance 1362)
B. No retail sales or services shall be permitted except as incidental to or accessory to a permitted
use. Taverns are hereby expressly excluded in the I-L District.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/283
C. No operation or activity shall cause or create noise in excess of the sound levels prescribed
below.
In the I-L District, at no point on or beyond the boundary of any lot shall the sound pressure level
resulting from any use, operation, or activity exceed the maximum permitted decibel levels for the
designated octave bands as set forth in Tables I and II below:
TABLE I. PREFERRED FREQUENCIES
Center Frequency, Cycles Per Second Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level
Decibels
31.5 76
63 74
125 68
250 63
500 57
1,000 52
2,000 45
4,000 38
8,000 32
TABLE II. OCTAVE BANDS
Octave Bands, Cycles per Second Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level
Decibels
20-75 75
75-150 70
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/283
150-300 64
300-600 59
600-1,200 53
1,200-2,400 47
2,400-4,800 40
4,800-10 KC 34
Method of measurement: For the purpose of measure intensity and frequency of sound, the
sound level meter, the octave band analyzer, and the impact noise analyzer shall be employed. The
flat network and the fast meter response of the sound level meter shall be used. Sounds of short
duration as from forge hammers, punch presses, and metal shears, which cannot be measured
accurately with the sound level meter, shall be measured with the impact noise analyzer.
Octave band analyzers calibrated in the preferred frequencies (American Standards Association
S1.6-1960, Preferred Frequencies for Acoustical Measurements) shall be used with the Table I.
Octave band analyzers calibrated with pre-1960 octave band (American Standards Association
Z24.10-1954, Octave band Filter Set) shall use Table II.
For impact sounds measured with the impact noise analyzer, the sound pressure levels set forth
in Tables I and II may be increased by six (6) decibels in each octave band.
Exemptions: The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise level regulations:
1. Noises not directly under the control of the property user.
2. Noises emanating from construction and maintenance activities between 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m.
3. The noises of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure relief valves.
4. Transient noises of moving sources such as automobiles, trucks, airplanes and railroads.
D. No toxic matter, noxious matter, smoke, gas, or odorous or particulate matter shall be emitted
that is detectable beyond the lot lines of the lot on which the use is located.
E. Earth carried vibration shall be limited so that detection by seismograph at any property line of
an industrial establishment shall not exceed a value measured and computed as follows:
Method of measurement: measurement shall be made at the property line; vibration
displacements shall be measured with an instrument capable of measuring in three mutually
perpendicular directions.
Maximum permissible displacements: The following formula shall be used in computing the
maximum displacements permitted in the I-L District:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/283
D = K/F
Where:
D = displacement in inches
K = [0].01
F = the frequency of the vibration transmitted through the ground in cycles per second
F. Exterior lighting fixtures, wherever necessary, shall be shaded to avoid casting direct light upon
property located in any residential district.
G. The manufacture of flammable materials which produce explosive vapors or gases is
prohibited.
H. Outdoor storage material must be located in such a manner that it is neat, orderly,
systematically stacked and not randomly placed upon the property. Similar type material must be
stored together. Outdoor storage must not encourage the harboring of rats, mice, snakes, insects,
mosquitoes, and/or other pests. The outdoor storage must also be free of any high grass and/or
weeds.
I. Any operation that produces intense glare or heat shall be adequately shielded or be performed
within a completely enclosed building, and exposed sources of light shall be screened so as not to
be detectable beyond the lot lines.
J. All vehicles must be parked on an all-weather surface.
K. Petroleum products must be located on an all-weather, City of Vernon Code Enforcement
approved surface and free of all vegetation.
L. All dead trees and/or shrubs are prohibited and must be removed immediately.
(Ordinance 1362; Ordinance 1521, secs. 1.I-K, adopted 9/22/09)
Sec. 907.3. Uses permitted.
Within the I-L, Light Industrial District, the following uses are permitted:
A. Building material sales.
B. Commercial radio and television transmitting antenna towers and other electronic equipment
requiring outdoor towers, including antenna towers for the dispatching of private messages.
C. Compounding, processing and blending of chemical products, but not including any materials
which decompose by detonation or pollute the area.
D. General and administrative offices.
E. Machine shops and metal products manufacture and tool and die shops.
F. Wholesale mail-order houses.
G. Manufacturing and assembling (or any combinations of such processes) of products from
wood, cork, glass, leather, fur, plastic, felt, and other textiles, but not including as a principal
operation the processing of any raw materials.
H. Manufacturing and assembling of electrical and electronic products and equipment.
I. Printing and binding plants.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/283
J. Research laboratories.
K. Warehouse and storage facilities.
L. Accessory uses incidental to and on the same zoning lot as a principal use.
M. Any use permitted in a C-A/R, Automobile Commercial and Commercial Recreation District, or
a C-G, General Commercial District except for any type of residential uses, i.e., mobile home,
manufactured housing, single-family dwelling, duplex dwelling or multifamily dwelling, unless
provided for elsewhere in the I-L or I-H district regulations.
Sec. 907.4. Special exception use.
The following may be established only when authorized by the planning and zoning commission and city
commission, after a public hearing:
A. Any use similar to those listed above and which is not listed in the section “Uses Permitted” in
the Heavy Industrial District (I-H) of this ordinance.
B. Criminal justice halfway house. (Ordinance [No.] 1362)
(Ordinance 1362)
Sec. 907.5. District regulations.
[The following district regulations exist within the I-L, Light Industrial District:]
Minimum lot area: None
Minimum lot frontage: None
Maximum percentage coverage: 40%
Maximum height: None
Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet
Minimum side yard setback: 50 feet*
Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet*
*(Minimum of 2 feet of setback for each 1 foot of height when adjacent to residential district)
A. There are no area requirements in an I-L District.
B. There are no lot frontage requirements in and I-L District.
C. Not more than forty (40) percent of the lot area shall be covered with improvements. Paved
areas are not considered improvements within the meaning of this provision.
D. There are no height requirements in an I-L District.
E. No structure shall be erected, commenced or maintained which has a front yard of less than
fifty (50) feet.
F. When adjacent to a residential district, a side yard of fifty (50) feet or two (2) feet for each one
(1) foot of height, whichever is greater, shall be provided.
G. When adjacent to a residential district, a rear yard of fifty (50) feet or two (2) feet for each one
(1) foot of height, whichever is greater, shall be provided.
Sec. 908.1. I-H, Heavy Industrial District-Purpose.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/283
The purpose of the I-H, Heavy Industrial District, is to provide a location for industries, which may by their
nature create nuisances. The intent is to preserve this land especially for such industry in locations with access
to arterial streets as designated on the comprehensive plan and/or the thoroughfare plan maps of the city, as
well as locations generally accessible to railroad transportation. Because of the nuisances or other
objectionable influences that may be created in this district, a buffer or setback strip between this district and
other zoning districts except I-L is required.
Sec. 908.2. District standards.
Any use constructed, established, altered or enlarged in the I-H, Heavy Industrial District, after the effective
date of this ordinance shall be so operated as to comply with the following standards. No use already
established on the effective date of this ordinance shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further
conflict with, the applicable standards hereinafter for the I-H District.
A. No building shall be used for residential purposes, except that a watchman may reside on the
premises or as allowed by special exception use. (Ordinance [No.] 1362)
B. No retail sales or services shall be permitted except as incidental to or accessory to a permitted
use. Taverns are hereby expressly excluded in the I-H District.
C. No storage, manufacture, or assembly of goods shall be conducted out of a building unless the
nearest point of said activity is more than one hundred (100) feet from the boundary of any zoning
district.
D. Exterior lighting fixtures shall be shaded wherever necessary to avoid casting direct light upon
property located in any residential district.
E. All manufacturing, fabricating, assembly, disassembly, repairing, storing cleaning, servicing and
testing of goods, water and merchandise shall be carried on in such a manner as not to be injurious
or offensive by reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other
particulate matter, toxic or noxious matter, odors, glare, heat, fire or explosive hazards.
F. No activities involving storage, utilization, or manufacture or use of explosive materials shall be
permitted.
G. Outdoor storage material must be located in such a manner that it is neat, orderly,
systematically stacked and not randomly placed upon the property. The outdoor storage must not
encourage the harboring of rats, mice, snakes, insects, mosquitoes, and/or other pests. The outdoor
storage must also be free of any high grass and/or weeds.
H. All vehicles must be parked on an all-weather surface.
I. Petroleum products must be located on an all-weather, City of Vernon Code Enforcement
approved surface and free of all vegetation.
J. All dead trees and/or shrubs are prohibited and must be removed immediately.
(Ordinance 1362; Ordinance 1521, secs. 1.M-P, adopted 9/22/09)
Sec. 908.3. Uses permitted.
Within the I-H, Heavy Industrial District, the following uses are permitted:
A. Any use permitted in the I-L District.
B. Automobile wrecking and junkyards, provided they are enclosed throughout the entire
perimeter by a solid fence not less than eight (8) feet in height.
C. Other uses:
Blacksmith, tinsmiths and sheet metal shops
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/283
Bottling works
Bulk fuel sales and service
Canning or preserving factories
Cold storage plant
Ice cream production and distribution
Laundry and dry-cleaning plants
Machinery rental, sales and service
Machine shops
Manufacturing, fabricating, assembling, repairing, storing and cleaning. Servicing, or testing of
any of the following materials, goods or merchandise:
Apparel
Beverages (non-alcoholic), processing and bottling
Building materials specialties
Clothing
Compounding and packaging of chemicals
Cosmetics and toiletries
Dairy products
Drugs and pharmaceutical products
Electrical and acoustical products and components
Food products (except fish, sauerkraut, vinegar and yeast)
Furniture
Glass products
Ice, dry and natural
Jewelry
Medical laboratory supplies, equipment and specialties
Musical instruments
Metal products and utensils
Optical goods
Paper products, including boxes and containers, radios, phonographs, records and
television sets and parts
Textiles
Toys and children's vehicles
Trailers and carts
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/283
Wood products, including wooden boxes and containers
Milk, bottling and distribution
Monumental stone cutting
Motor freight terminals
Pattern shops
Printing plants
Railroad yards and switching areas, including lodging and sleeping facilities for transient
railroad labor
Sign painting
Soldering and welding shops
Spar painting and mixing
D. Adult business (Ordinance 1362).
(Ordinance 1362)
Sec. 908.4. Special exception uses.
The following may be established only when authorized by the planning and zoning commission and city
commission, and after public hearing:
A. Asphaltic or concrete batching plant, for a period of not more than two (2) years, subject to
renewal.
B. Automobile or livestock auction house.
C. Extractive industries including sand and gravel mining and processing.
D. Open storage of products and commodities.
E. Slaughter house or packing plant for meat and poultry products.
F. Animal pound, clinic, or hospital with outside runs.
G. Facilities for outdoor amusements and sports, including fairgrounds, rodeo grounds, circus and
tracks for road racing and automobile testing.
H. Electric energy generating plant.
I. Sewage treatment plant.
J. Manufacture or storage of explosives and flammable liquids or gases.
K. Manufacturing, processing or storage for resale in bulk of insecticides or fertilizers.
L. Manufacturing, processing and/or fabrication when conducted partially or completely outside an
enclosed building.
M. Criminal justice halfway house. (Ordinance 1362)
(Ordinance 1362)
Sec. 908.5. District regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/283
A. There are no requirements for minimum lot area or frontage in the I-H District.
B. Front, rear and side yard requirements in the I-H District are the same as those set forth in section 907.5
for the I-L District.
C. Buildings shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of the site on which the use is located.
Sec. 909.1. C-F, Community Facilities District-Purpose.
The C-F, Community Facilities District is designed to permit those institutional and, related uses, which are
established in response to the educational, safety and welfare needs of the community.
Sec. 909.2. Principal uses.
In this district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected, reconstructed or
structurally altered or enlarged except for one or more of the following principal uses:
A. Public kindergartens, elementary and secondary schools, and private kindergartens,
elementary and secondary schools whose curricula satisfy the requirements of the state public
school laws and the regulations of the State department of education.
B. Higher education institutions: junior and senior colleges, universities, conservatories and
seminaries, offering curricula recognized by collegiate, academic and professional organization
accrediting boards.
C. Museums, libraries, fine arts centers, and similar cultural facilities sponsored, operated or
maintained for the benefit of the general public.
D. Golf courses (except commercially operated miniature golf courses and commercially operated
golf driving ranges) on a site containing a total area of not less than forty (40) acres; parks,
playgrounds, community center and country clubs.
E. Institutions, rehabilitation and training centers offering non-academic programs, when operated
or sponsored by chartered educational, religious or philanthropic organizations, but excluding uses
such as trade schools, which are operated primarily on a commercial basis.
F. Public safety facilities: Civil defense operational centers, police and fire stations and training
facilities.
G. Religious institutions: Churches and facilities for worship, fellowship and education.
Sec. 909.3. Accessory uses.
Any use may be established as an accessory use to any permitted principal use when it complies with the
standard conditions for accessory uses as previously set forth in section 800.2.
Sec. 909.4. Special exception uses.
The following uses may be established only when authorized by the planning and zoning commission and city
commission. Any use accessory to the following may be permitted without specific board approval provided it
complies with the limitations of section 909.3. Other special exceptions shall be permitted by the board after
public hearing together with such other conditions as the board may impose.
A. Utility buildings and structures: power sub-stations, water tanks and reservoirs.
B. Crematory for the disposal of human dead or of domestic pets.
C. Radio, television, micro-wave broadcast, relay, receiving towers and transmission and
retransmission facilities.
Conditions: The tower shall be set back from all property lines a distance equal to three fourths of
the height of the tower.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/283
D. Day care center.
Conditions: The outdoor play area shall be screened along all abutting properties used for
dwelling purposes by a solid wall or fence or by a dense evergreen hedge, and such wall, fence or
hedge shall have a height of not less than six (6) feet.
E. Medical care facilities: Nursing and care homes; hospitals with their related facilities and
supportive retail and personal services used, operated by or under the control of the hospital
primarily for the convenience of patients, staff and visitors.
F. Helistop area for loading and unloading of passengers and air express.
Sec. 909.5. Rezoning after discontinuance of use.
Areas indicated on the zoning map as C-F, Community Facilities District shall not be used for any purpose other
than that designated; when this use is discontinued, it shall automatically be zoned to the most restricted
adjoining district until such time as the city commission, acting on the recommendation of the planning and
zoning commission and in accordance with procedures set out in article IV of this ordinance, shall approve
inclusion of such property in another district or districts.
Sec. 909.6. District regulations.
[The following district regulations exist within the C-F, Community Facilities District:]
Lot Area Lot Width Buildable
Area
Front Yard Interior
Yard
Extra Yard
per ft. of
Bldg. over
40' high
Floor Area
Ratio
32,000 160 40% 30' 10' 2 ft. for
each ft. of
height
15%
16,000 100 40% 30' 10'
20%
8,000 60 40% 30' 10'
25%
4,000 50 40% 25' 10'*
30%
No maximum height requirement.
*In lieu of the normal yard width, the structure housing a non-residential use may be
placed not less than one foot from the property line if the adjoining property is vacant or
in non-residential use.
Sec. 910.1. P-D, Planned Development-Purpose (Ordinance [No.] 1488).
The P-D, Planned Development District is designed to encourage a create flexibility and the opportunity for a
higher standard of land development than is permitted under conventional regulations. The tract must be under
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/283
common ownership or control and a detailed plan (an outlined development plan) must be submitted for
commission review. A planned development district must be approved by the city commission as a prerequisite
to development. As such it makes feasible the application of planning concepts dealing with the planned
development of areas such as residential areas, planned shopping centers, planned industrial parks, mixed-use
developments, medical centers, community recreation centers, office complexes, and development or
redevelopment of areas of historical significance as defined by the comprehensive plan. Improvements in a “PD”
district are subject to conformance with a site plan approved by the city commission on the planning and
zoning commission's recommendation and after public hearing thereon.
Sec. 910.2. Effects of “P-D” classification.
When property is rezoned as P-D, Planned Development District so designated by the letters “P-D,” it contains
its own set of regulations and displaces the underlying zone.
Sec. 910.3. Special regulations.
A. When the “P-D” District is to be used for a nonresidential purpose, the tract shall have a gross area of at
least two (2) acres. In addition to the development controls for non-residential uses, special attention shall be
given to the potentially adverse effects of the proposed development on adjacent residential properties. The
planning and zoning commission shall not recommend for city commission approval any site plan which it finds
will create unnecessary traffic congestion on local streets in such residential area, will create a potential hazard
to such properties by reason of water ponding or by intensifying water flows, or will other wise be operated in
such manner as to be detrimental to the health or safety of occupants of adjacent land.
B. When the “P-D” classification is to be used for a residential purpose, the tract shall have a gross area of at
least five (5) acres. The yard requirements for residential uses shall apply only to the total site and to individual
blocks within the site; in lieu of the minimum lot area-lot width requirements and the bulk controls of the district
in which the property, or part thereof, is located shall apply.
C. When the “P-D” classification is to be used for mixed (residential and commercial) development purposes,
the tract shall have a gross area of at least two (2) acres. Special attention should be given to the potentially
adverse effects of the proposed development on adjacent residential properties. Proposed development
controls must be included for review in the outlined development plan/site plan.
Sec. 910.4. Site plan approval required.
A site plan approved by the city commission shall be prerequisite to issuance of building permits and
certificates of occupancy for any property in the district other than those that are entitled to same by reason of
other provisions of this ordinance.
Sec. 910.5. Information to be shown on site plan and application.
The site plan shall show all pertinent information as necessary to accompany an application for building permit
and such other information pertinent to the site and surrounding area, including a schedule of proposed
improvements both on-site and off-site.
An application for a planned development shall be filed with the planning and zoning commission. The
application shall be accompanied by a fee in accordance with the established fee schedule. The application
shall be in such form and content as the planning and zoning commission may by resolution establish, provided
that (3) copies of an outline development plan shall accompany the filing of the application. The outline
development shall consist of maps and text which contain:
A. A site plan reflecting:
1. The legal description of the land included in the site plan and the lot, with the name of the
owner/s, developer, and designer;
2. The boundary lines of the area included in the site plan, a north arrow, scale and the lot
area of the land included in the site plan;
3. Utility location, easements, and drainage;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/283
4. Proposed location of uses, including off-street parking, open spaces and public uses;
5. Development standards for location, height, setbacks, lot coverage, and size of lots,
buildings and other structures;
6. Public and private vehicular and pedestrian circulation;
7. The approximate intensity of residential uses expressed in number of dwelling units and
the approximate intensity of non-residential uses expressed in floor area, allocated to each
identifiable segment of the planned Unit development;
8. Proposed location, height, and size of proposed screening, lighting, fencing, ground
signs, and landscaping;
9. Sufficient surrounding area to demonstrate the relationship of the P-D to adjoining uses,
both existing and proposed;
10. Each individual lot or parcel shall have direct vehicular access to a public street or alley
or to a community drive to be provided and maintained within a community open space and
thereby connect with a public street. Where access to lots or parcels is to be provided by
community open space rather than public streets or alleys, adequate provisions shall be made
for emergency and other service vehicles.
B. Existing topographic character of the land including identification of floodplain areas, treed
areas, slope analysis at one-foot contour intervals, and soil analysis.
C. An explanation of the proposed uses of the P-D.
D. The expected schedule of development.
E. In addition to the above requirements, the planning and zoning commission and city
commission may also require the following:
1. Architectural drawings detailing the design and materials, shape, height, size and floor
area of all proposed structures.
2. Other development and protective requirements considered necessary to create a
reasonable transition to and protection for adjacent property.
Sec. 910.6. Public hearing and planning and zoning commission action.
A request for site plan approval shall be processed in accordance with the same review and hearing procedure
as a proposal for zoning district change. A site plan approval request may be heard concurrent with or
subsequent to a zoning change request, but not before. The planning and zoning commission, upon the filing of
an application for the “P-D” district designation, shall set the matter for public hearing and give 15 days' notice
thereof by publication in a newspaper of general circulation. Within 60 days after the filing of an application, the
planning and zoning commission shall conduct public hearing and shall determine:
A. Whether the P-D is consistent with the comprehensive plan.
B. Whether the P-D harmonizes with the existing and expected development of surrounding
areas.
C. Whether the P-D is a unified treatment of the development possibilities of the project site.
D. Whether the P-D is consistent with the stated purposes and standards of this section. (910.1)
The planning and zoning commission shall forward its recommendation, the application, and the outline
development plan to the city commission for further hearing s provided in section 910.7.
Sec. 910.7. City commission action.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/283
Upon receipt of the application, outline development plan, and planning and zoning commission
recommendation, the city commission shall hold hearings, review the outline development plan and approve,
disapprove, modify, or return the outline development plan to the planning and zoning commission for further
consideration. Upon approval, the zoning shall be amended to reflect the “P-D” designation, and the applicant
shall be authorized to process a subdivision plat (if required) incorporating the provisions of the outline
development plan.
Sec. 910.8. Planned development subdivision plat.
A planned development (P-D) subdivision plat shall be filed with the planning and zoning commission and shall
be processed in accordance with the subdivision regulations, and, in addition to the requirements of the
subdivision regulations shall include:
A. Details as to the location of uses and street arrangement.
B. Provisions for the ownership and maintenance of the common open space as will reasonably
insure its continuity and conservation. Open space may be dedicated to a private association or to
the public, provided that a dedication to the public shall not be accepted without the approval of the
city commission.
C. Such covenants as will reasonably insure the continued compliance with the approved outline
development plan. The planning and zoning commission may require covenants which provide for
detailed site plan review and approval by said commission prior to the issuance of any building
permits within the P-D. In order that the public interest may be protected, the City of Vernon shall be
made beneficiary of covenants pertaining to such matters as location of uses, height of structures,
setbacks, screening, and access. Such covenants shall provide that the City of Vernon may enforce
compliance therewith, and shall further provide that amendment of such covenants shall require the
approval of the planning and zoning commission and the filing of record of a written amendment to
the covenants, endorsed by the planning and zoning commission.
Sec. 910.9. Issuance of building permits (P-D subdivision plat).
After the filing of an approved P-D subdivision plat and notice thereof to the building inspector, no building
permits shall be issued on lands within the P-D except in accordance with the approved plat.
Sec. 910.10. Amendments.
Minor changes in the P-D may be authorized by the planning and zoning commission, which may direct the
processing of an amended subdivision plat, incorporating such changes, so long as substantial compliance is
maintained with the outline development plan and the purposes and standards of the P-D provisions hereof.
Changes which would represent a significant departure from the outline development plan shall require
compliance with the notice and procedural requirements of an original planned development.
Sec. 910.11. Abandonment.
Abandonment of a planned development shall occur when (1) the developer/owner voluntarily abandons the
project and signs an affidavit confirming its abandonment; or (2) the project is not completed within four years
from the city commission's final approval of the planned development site plan. In both instances, the special
services director [community development director] shall
file a signed affidavit in the official public record at the Wilbarger County Clerks' Office verifying
the abandonment of the planned development. Upon official abandonment of a planned
development site the zoning designation shall automatically revert to the property's previous zoning
designation. Upon final action authorizing the abandonment of the planned development, no building
permit shall be issued except in accordance with the restrictions and limitations of the property's
zoning classification prior to “P-D” designation.
Sec. 910.12. Waiver of area regulations.
The city commission, after recommendation by the planning and zoning commission, may grant a waiver to the
minimum requirements such as minimum acreage, lot area, lot width, lot depth, lot coverage, and front, side,
and rear yards when the overall development is in keeping within the requirements of the zoning regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/283
Sec. 910.13. Numbering of districts; register and file; inclusion on zoning map.
Planned development (P-D) districts shall be sequentially numbered. The special services director [community
development director] shall maintain a register and file of all P-D districts which shall contain a site plan, a copy
of the ordinance creating the P-D district, and all other information concerning the P-D districts as set forth on
the zoning map.
Sec. 911.1. FD, Floodway Supplemental District.
An FD, Floodway Supplemental District set forth below is hereby established.
Sec. 911.2. Flood hazard area maps adopted.
In addition to the establishment of the FD, Floodway Supplemental District, the City of Vernon adopts the flood
hazard area maps prepared by HUD, dated January 16, 1976. The adoption of the flood hazard area maps is
essential for the protection of health, safety, and general welfare of the public. Such flood hazard area maps
shall be made available for public inspection in the offices of the Vernon Planning and Zoning Commission, city
engineer and building inspections. The following requirements shall be met before a building permit is issued
within a flood hazard area, as depicted on said flood hazard area maps:
No building permit may be granted in a FD Floodway Supplemental District until the planning and
zoning commission has recommended approval of the permit and the city commission has reviewed
and approved the same.
Sec. 912.1. C-B, Central Business District-Purpose.
The purpose of the Central Business District (C-B) is to encourage and protect the development,
redevelopment, and clustering of light office and retail business to promote tourism, downtown revitalization,
and beautification. The Central Business District is intended to maintain and encourage pedestrian-friendly
development and redevelopment within the central business section of the city. This district establishes the
character of the city by serving tourists as well as residents of the city. (Ordinance 1519, sec. 1.B, adopted
8/25/09)
Sec. 912.2. Uses permitted.
Within the C-B district, the following uses are permitted:
Offices of a professional or administrative nature which provide services only, such as doctors,
architects, engineers, real estate, banks and similar offices.
Studios of artists, photographers, musicians, and radio or television stations.
Bakery and confectionery (retail only).
Cafeteria or restaurant (no drive-ins).
Cleaning pickup station and pressing shop.
Bowling alley, billiard hall, indoor theater, game room.
Personal services such as barbershop or beauty shop, tailor, shoe repair, travel agent, or health
studio.
Drugstore.
Gasoline service stations, not including major automobile repair garage.
Florist or garden shop.
Automatic laundry.
Custom shops for the making and selling of articles on the premises, such as handicraft or
drapery shops.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/283
Grocery stores.
Hotels, motels, and bed & breakfast establishments.
Retail stores offering consumer goods for sale and displaying these goods within the building
itself. Those uses specifically listed in, L-I, H-I, shall not be included in the Central Business District
(CBD).
Advertising signs for the purpose of advertising goods or services offered within the building. The
sign may be attached to the building or similar fixed type.
Photo developing.
Automobile sales, not including wrecking and salvage.
Job and newspaper printing.
Furniture and appliance storage and repair (inside a building only).
Wholesale office and sample room.
Small appliance repair shops.
Government offices.
Civic and fraternal organizations.
Museums.
Residential uses.
Any other light commercial use deemed by the planning and zoning commission to be of a similar nature to
those listed above and congruent with the intent and purpose of the Central Business District.
(Ordinance 1519, sec. 1.C, adopted 8/25/09)
Sec. 912.3. District regulations.
District regulations are the same as in section 906.4. (Ordinance 1519, sec. 1.D, adopted 8/25/09)
Sec. 913.1. C-O, Corridor Overlay District-Purpose.
The purpose of the Corridor Overlay District (C-O) is to improve the visual appearance of entryways and major
thoroughfares to promote development and redevelopment and to maintain and improve property values within
the city. Subsequently, the intention of the Corridor Overlay District is to promote tourism, revitalization, and
beautification. This district establishes rules, such as the regulation of outdoor storage and landscaping
provisions, to help enhance the attractiveness along street and highway corridors within the city. (Ordinance
1520, sec. 1.C, adopted 8/25/09)
Sec. 913.2. District regulations.
A. Landscaping requirements. Dead trees and/or shrubs are prohibited within the Corridor Overlay District
and must be removed in their entirety.
B. Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage, as defined in section 201.2, is prohibited within the Corridor Overlay
District unless properly screened according to subsection 913.2 B.3.
1. Removal of vegetation: Areas around or under outdoor storage and outside display materials or
buildings shall be kept free and clear of accumulations of grass, brush or other uncultivated
vegetation.
2. Front/side/rear yards: Outdoor storage shall not be stored in front of buildings so as to be open
to public view; except that the incidental outdoor display of commodities for retail sale is permitted.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/283
Outdoor storage yards located in side and rear yards must comply with subsection 913.2 B.3.
3. Screening/fencing: Every outdoor storage yard located in the side or rear yard within the
Corridor Overlay District shall have a fence or other approved screening as herein defined installed
and maintained to obscure the view of the outdoor storage from any adjacent land or right-of-way.
Fences, as required, shall comply with the following requirements:
(a) Fences shall be sheathed with boards, slats, metal, or other approved materials,
securely nailed or attached to supports, which will provide an effective visual screen.
Transparent or translucent sheathing materials shall not be permitted.
(b) Sheathing materials for screening shall extend up at least six feet tall.
(c) A building permit shall be obtained from the City of Vernon prior to construction.
(d) Earthen berms, evergreen vegetation, trees, and shrubbery may be used to meet the
screening requirement provided that such material meets the intent of this article an such
material is approved by the community development director or his/her designee.
(e) Sheathing materials, posts, rails or any other fencing construction materials shall be
naturally weather resistant or shall be painted or finished to resist decay or rust. Materials
and/or paint shall be of uniform color and pattern. Fences or acceptable alternatives, shall be
maintained by repair, painting, or replacement as necessary to maintain stability, screening and
weather resistance and decay resistance. The use of used salvage materials shall be
prohibited unless specifically noted on plans and approved by the community development
director or designee.
(f) Chain-link fences modified by the insertion of slats made of solid and durable materials
into all spaces may be permitted is such system meets the intent of this ordinance. Such
acceptable materials shall be uniform in strength, material and color.
(g) Gates, normally used for access to the outdoor storage yard, are not required to provide
a solid screen. The outdoor storage yard immediately behind and perpendicular to such gate,
to a distance of at least 30 feet, shall be kept clear of all storage materials. Unscreened gates
shall be no wider than 20 feet.
4. Areas not required to fence. Outdoor areas of land used for the storage or display of materials
or vehicles incidental to the principal activity of a business shall not be required to comply with this
section if such areas are included as one of the following uses:
(a) New or used automobile and related vehicle sales lots, authorized by a state motor
vehicle dealer license.
(b) Storage yards incidental to the on-site sale of new building materials, new heavy
machinery, new farm equipment, new nursery products, new mobile homes, new boats or new
trailers.
(c) Storage yards for supplies and/or raw materials necessary to the on-site manufacturing,
fabrication or assembly of finished products, if kept in a neat and orderly fashion.
(d) Parking areas for operable equipment, vehicles and trailers incidental to a rental or
construction business.
(e) Parking areas for vehicles incidental to transportation and hauling activities of
commercial businesses and governmental entities.
(f) Parking areas for operable motor vehicles awaiting service at auto repair or auto body
shops.
(g) Used merchandise, that is associated with a retail business, displayed during normal
business hours (8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/283
5. Where it has been determined that site constraints exist that may limit the ability of a particular
site to conform to the requirements herein, the community development director or designee shall
evaluate the ability of a proposal to come into conformance with requirements herein by considering
constraints to that ability. If the proposal will not entirely fulfill the requirements herein, the
community development director or designee may instruct that a proposal be presented which
strives to maintain the intent of this section to the best of its ability. Such alternate proposal shall be
approved by the planning and zoning commission. An appeal to the planning and zoning
commission's decision may be made to the city commission as set out in subsection 403.1.D of the
City of Vernon Zoning Ordinance.
(Ordinance 1520, sec. 1.D, adopted 8/25/09)
Sec. 913.3. N-O, Neighborhood Office District-Purpose.
The purpose of the Neighborhood Office District (N-O) is to provide a transitional area between more intense
commercial districts and residential districts. It is a flexible district created for low intensity office and
professional uses. Buildings located within Neighborhood Office Districts should be compatible and in similar
scale with residential uses. Neighborhood Office Districts act as a buffer between heavier commercial
zones/business corridors and quieter residential districts. They are designed to preserve and be compatible
with existing residential neighborhoods. (Ordinance 1646, sec. 1, adopted 8/26/14)
Editor's note- Ordinance 1646, sec. 1, adopted August 26, 2014, set out provisions intended as sec. 913.1. For
purposes of preventing duplication of section numbers, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have
been included as sec. 913.3.
Sec. 913.4. Uses permitted.
Within the N-O district, the following uses are permitted:
Offices of a professional or administrative nature which provide services only, such as, but not
limited to, doctors, architects, engineers, real estate, financial services and similar offices.
Residential uses limited to single-family homes or duplexes.
Bed and Breakfast.
Any other light commercial or office-type use deemed by the planning and zoning commission to
be of a similar nature to those listed above and congruent with the intent and purpose of the
Neighborhood Office District.
(Ordinance 1646, sec. 1, adopted 8/26/14)
Editor's note- Ordinance 1646, sec. 1, adopted August 26, 2014, set out provisions intended as sec. 913.2. For
purposes of preventing duplication of section numbers, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have
been included as sec. 913.4.
Sec. 913.5. Special exception uses.
The following uses may be permitted by the planning and zoning commission and city commission after a public
hearing, provided they meet the requirements noted for each use in addition to all other regulations applicable:
Church;
Government offices and infrastructure;
Civic and fraternal organizations;
Museum;
Art gallery;
Library;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/283
Park;
Clinic.
(Ordinance 1646, sec. 1, adopted 8/26/14)
Editor's note- Ordinance 1646, sec. 1, adopted August 26, 2014, set out provisions intended as sec. 913.2. For
purposes of preventing duplication of section numbers, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have
been included as sec. 913.5.
Sec. 913.6. District regulations.
(a) District regulations are the same as in section 901.5 except the minimum front yard setback in the
Neighborhood Office District shall be 20 feet.
(b) Outdoor storage material must be located in such a manner that it is neat, orderly, systematically stacked
and not randomly placed upon the property. Similar type material must be stored together. Outdoor storage
must not encourage the harboring of rats, mice, snakes, insects, mosquitoes, and/or other pests. The outdoor
storage must also be free of any high grass and/or weeds (or no outdoor storage allowed).
(c) All vehicles must be parked on an all-weather surface.
(d) Petroleum products must be located on an all-weather, City Code enforcement-approved surface and free
of all vegetation.
(e) All dead trees and/or shrubs are prohibited and must be removed immediately.
(f) Non-residential uses must be screened by a City Code enforcement-approved, six- to eight-foot privacy
fence where adjacent to a residential lot.
(Ordinance 1646, sec. 1, adopted 8/26/14)
Editor's note- Ordinance 1646, sec. 1, adopted August 26, 2014, set out provisions intended as sec. 913.3. For
purposes of preventing duplication of section numbers, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have
been included as sec. 913.6.
APPENDIX B
SUBDIVISIONS*
ARTICLE I. INTERPRETATION AND PURPOSE
In the interpretation and application of the provisions of these regulations, it is the intention of the city council
that the principles, standards and requirements provided for herein shall be minimum requirements for the
platting and developing of subdivisions in the City of Vernon, and, where other ordinances of the city are more
restrictive in their requirements, such other ordinances shall control.
The procedure and standards for the development, layout and design of subdivisions of land within the
corporate limits of the City of Vernon, Texas, and for such other areas as may be authorized by art. 974a of
Texas Revised Civil Statutes [Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 974a] are intended to:
1. Promote and develop the utilization of land to assure the best possible community environment
in accordance with the master plan of the City of Vernon.
2. Guide and assist and expedite the developers in correct procedures to be followed and to
inform them of the standards which shall be required.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/283
3. Protect the public interest by controlling the location, design, class and type of streets,
sidewalks, utilities and essential areas and services required.
4. Protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare.
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this ordinance the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the plural number include the singular
number and words in the singular number include the plural number. Definitions not expressly prescribed herein
are to be determined in accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices. The
word “shall” is always mandatory, while the word “may” is merely directory.
A. Subdivision. The term “subdivision” means a division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or tracts for
the purpose of transfer of ownership, dedication of streets, alleys or easements, or for use for building
development; provided that a division of land for agricultural purposes into lots or tracts of five acres or more
and not involving a new street or alley shall not be deemed a subdivision. The term includes re-subdivision and,
when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. The terms
“subdivider” and “developer” are synonymous and used interchangeable, and shall include any person,
partnership, firm association, corporation and/or officer, agent, employee, servant and trustee thereof who does
or participates in the doing of any act toward the subdivision of land within the intent, scope and purview of this
ordinance.
B. (1) Lot. Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings and
including such open spaces as are required by ordinances of the city and having its principal
frontage upon a public street or officially approved place.
(2) Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the
office of the County Clerk of Wilbarger County, or parcel of land, the deed for which was recorded in
the office of the County Clerk of Wilbarger County prior to the passage of this ordinance.
C. Street and alleys. The term “street” means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated a street,
highway thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or otherwise.
(1) Arterial streets and highways are those which are used primarily for fast or heavy traffic and
which are designated in the master plan as a primary street, expressway or freeway.
(2) Collector streets are those which carry traffic from minor streets to major systems of arterial
streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and
streets for circulation within such a development and which are designated in the master plan as
secondary streets.
(3) Minor streets are those which are used primarily for access to abutting properties.
(4) Marginal access streets are minor streets which are parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets
and highways and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
(5) Alleys are minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the
side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
(6) Cul-de-sac is a short minor street having but one vehicular access to another street and
terminated by a vehicular turn-around.
(7) Dead-end street is a street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet.
D. Easement is a right granted for the purpose of limited public or semi-public use across, over or under
private land.
E. Council is the City Council of the City of Vernon, Texas.
F. Commission is the Planning Commission of the City of Vernon, Texas.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/283
G. (1) Plat is a complete and exact subdivision plan submitted to the commission for final
approval and which, if approved, will be submitted to the County Clerk of Wilbarger County, Texas,
for recording.
(2) Approved plat is a plat of a subdivision which has been approved in accordance with the
requirements of these regulations and which has been filed for record with the County Clerk of
Wilbarger County, Texas.
H. Standards shall mean the official maps, master plans, ordinances and specifications of the City of Vernon,
Texas.
ARTICLE III. PROCEDURE
A. Pre-application. The subdivider shall avail himself of the advice and assistance of the city officials and
consult early and informally with the city's chief administrative officer or other persons designated by the city
council before preparing the preliminary plat and before formal application for its approval, in order to save time
and money and to make the most of his opportunities.
B. Procedure for conditional approval of preliminary plat.
(1) On reaching conclusions, informally as recommended above, regarding his general program
and objectives, the subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat, together with improvement plans and
other supplementary material as applicable in other sections of these regulations.
(2) Five (5) copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary material specified shall be submitted
to the City of Vernon with the filing fee as provided herein and written application for conditional
approval at least ten (10) days prior to the commission meeting at which it is to be considered.
Copies or prints of the proposed subdivision drawn on sheets a maximum size of 24 inches by 36
inches and drawn to a scale of 100 feet to the inch (1 inch equals 100 feet) shall be submitted in the
number specified hereinabove. In cases of large developments which would exceed the dimensions
of the sheet of 100 foot scale, preliminary plats may be 200 feet to the inch (1 inch equals 200 feet).
The five (5) copies or prints of the proposed subdivision shall show the following:
a. Boundary lines, bearing and distance sufficient to locate the exact area proposed for the
subdivision.
b. The name and location of all adjoining subdivisions shall be drawn to the same scale and
shown in dotted lines adjacent to the tract proposed for subdivision in sufficient detail to show
accurately the existing street and alleys and other features that may influence the layout of
development of the proposed subdivision. Adjacent unplatted land shall show property lines
and owners of record.
c. The location and widths of all streets, alleys and ways existing or proposed within the
subdivision limits. In the case of easements, a written statement as to the easement use shall
be included with the plat.
d. The location of all existing property lines, buildings, sewer or water mains, gas mains or
other underground structures, easements or other existing features within the area proposed
for subdivision.
e. Proposed arrangement of lots and proposed use of same however approval of a
preliminary plat or final plat with uses so indicated does not constitute approval of such uses.
f. The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded, the name and address of
the owner with the name of the land planner, licensed land surveyor or registered professional
engineer platting the tract.
g. Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds or other public uses.
h. Scale, north arrow, date and other pertinent data.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/283
i. Contours with intervals of five feet or less shall be shown for the area. All elevations on the
contour map shall be referenced to the latest USC and GS data.
j. All physical features of the property to be subdivided, including location and size of all
water courses, ravines bridges, culverts, existing structures, drainage area in acres or areas
draining into subdivision, and other features pertinent to subdivision. The outline of wooded
areas or the location of important individual trees may be required.
(3) The following notice shall be placed on the face of each preliminary plat by the developer:
“Preliminary plat.”
(4) The city's chief administrative officer, or other person designated by the city council, shall
make a study of the plat and give a written report to the commission before its final action on the
preliminary plat.
(5) Following (a) review of the preliminary plat and other material submitted for conformity thereof
to these regulations, and (b) negotiations with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the
kind and extent of improvements to be made by him, the commission shall, within thirty (30) days
after the filing of such preliminary plat, act thereon as submitted, or modified, and if approved, the
commission shall express its approval as conditional approval and state the conditions of such
approval, if any, or if disapproved, shall express its disapproval and its reasons therefor.
(6) The action of the commission shall be noticed on two (2) copies of the preliminary plat,
referenced and attached to any conditions required by the commission. Action of the commission
shall be certified by the city's chief administrative officer. one (1) copy shall be returned to the
subdivider and the other retained in the files of the City of Vernon.
(7) Conditional approval of a preliminary plat by the commission shall be deemed an expression
of approval to the layouts submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the installation of streets,
water, sewer and other required improvements and utilities and to the preparation of the final or
record plat. Except as provided for herein, approval of the preliminary plat shall constitute conditional
approval of the final plat when all conditions of approval noted as provided in paragraph (5) of this
section have been met.
(8) Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for one (1) year unless reviewed by
the commission in the light of new or significant information, which would necessitate the revision of
the preliminary plat. If no development or change in requirements has occurred which would affect
the proposed plat at the end of the year of an effective approval, the commission may extend its
approval another year without the submission of a new preliminary plat by reapproving the original
preliminary plat. No filing fee is required for such reapproval.
C. Procedure for approval of final plat.
(1) The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved and, incorporating all changes,
directions and additions imposed by the commission. The final plat shall not be released for filing
until detailed engineering plans have been approved by the City of Vernon.
(2) If so desired by the developer, the final plat may constitute only that portion of the approved
preliminary plat which he proposes to record and then develop, provided, however, that such portion
conforms to all the requirements of these regulations.
(3) Upon receipt of the final plat, accompanied by the final filing fee as prescribed herein, the city's
chief administrative officer shall check the plat to ascertain its compliance with these regulations and
the action of the commission. When the copy of the final plat has been checked and found to meet
all general requirements and design standards, the developer or his engineers shall submit six (6)
copies of the final plat to the city's chief administrative officer and he shall stamp on each of the six
(6) copies the certificate of approval of the planning commission attested by the chairman or
secretary of the planning commission when such final plat has been approved. The developer or his
authorized agent will secure the required number of plats and record them with the County Clerk,
Wilbarger County, Texas, within thirty (30) days of the date of the final approval, otherwise the
approval of the commission becomes invalid. Two (2) copies of the recorded final plat shall be
returned immediately to the city's chief administrative officer.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/283
(4) Engineering plan showing details of streets, alleys, culverts, bridges, storm sewers, water
mains, sanitary sewers and other engineering details of the proposed subdivision shall be submitted
to the city's chief administrative officer along with the final plat of the subdivision. Such plans shall be
prepared by a registered professional engineer and shall conform to the design standards
established by the City of Vernon. The final plat will not be released for filing until detailed
engineering plans have been approved by the city's chief administrative officer.
ARTICLE IV. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS
A. Streets.
(1) The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to
the City of Vernon master thoroughfare plan and shall be considered in the relation to existing and
planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public safety and in their appropriate relation to the
proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.
(2) When such street is not on the master thoroughfare plan, the arrangement of streets in a
subdivision shall either:
a. Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets in surrounding
areas; or
b. Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the commission to meet
a particular situation where a topographical or other condition made continuance or conformity
to existing streets impracticable.
(3) Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
(4) Where a subdivision abuts or contain an existing or proposed arterial street, the commission
may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such
treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection to residential properties and to afford
separation of through and local traffic.
(5) Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their control is
definitely placed in the city under conditions approved by the commission.
(6) Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred and twenty-five (125) feet shall be
avoided.
(7) Arterial street intersections shall be at 90-degree angles. Other street intersections shall be
laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no street shall intersect at less
than 60 degrees.
(8) Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown on the major thoroughfare plan of the City of
Vernon, Texas and where not shown therein shall be in accordance with the developed standards
adopted for the various types of streets, major thoroughfare, secondary thoroughfare, minor
residential streets, and minor street in apartment, commercial, or industrial areas. Street right-of-way
widths shall be as shown on the major thoroughfare plan and where not shown therein shall be not
less than as follows:
a. Major thoroughfares: 80 feet.
b. Secondary thoroughfares: 60 feet.
c. Minor residential street: 50 feet.
d. Access or service road: 40 feet.
e. Minor street in apartment, commercial or industrial area: 60 feet.
(9) Half streets shall be prohibited, except when essential to the reasonable development of the
subdivision in conforming with the other requirements of these regulations, and where the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/283
commission finds it will be practical to require the dedication of the other one-half when the adjoining
property is subdivided. Whenever a partial street exists along a common property line, the other
portion of the street shall be dedicated. Where part of a street is being dedicated along a common
property line and the ultimate planned width is fifty (50) feet, the first dedication will be thirty (30)
feet; where the ultimate planned width is sixty (60) feet, the first dedication will be thirty-five (35) feet.
(10) A cul-de-sac shall not be longer than six hundred (600) feet and at the closed end shall have
a turn-around provided for, having an outside roadway diameter of a least eighty (80) feet and a
street property line diameter of at least one hundred (100) feet.
(11) New streets of like alignment shall bear the names of existing streets and shall be dedicated
at equal or greater widths than the existing streets. No street names shall be used which will
duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to the
approval of the commission.
(12) All new streets dedicated within a subdivision shall be improved in accordance with
specifications of the City of Vernon.
(13) It is the policy of the City of Vernon that the subdivider and/or developer of a subdivision
which either requires the dedication of a new street or which subdivision will have lots fronting on an
unimproved dedicated street, will at their own expense pay for and install all weather, hard surface
streets with curb and gutter to city specifications.
In the event, an existing hard surface street is damaged whether for the purpose of making sewer, water or
other utility connection or for any other reason the subdivider and/or developer shall be responsible for repairing
the existing hard surface street until dedication and/or acceptance of plat.
Any variation from the above policy, recommended by the planning and zoning commission, shall require city
commission approval. it shall be the responsibility of the city manager prior to acceptance of legal title to any
dedicated street and prior to the filing of any plat to determine if there is a variation from the above policy. If
there is a variation, he shall place it on the City of Vernon City Commission agenda for review by the city
commission. (Amended by Ord. [No.] 1079, 2-19-1985)
B. Alleys.
(1) Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that the commission may
waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such
as off-street loading, unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the use proposed.
Service alleys in commercial and industrial districts shall be a minimum twenty-five (25) feet in width.
(2) In residential districts, alleys shall be provided parallel, or approximately parallel, to the
frontage of the street. Alleys in residential districts shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in width.
(3) Alleys shall be required in all new developments and replatting of old additions unless
expressly waived by the commission because of drainage or topographical features or existing
conditions which may preclude the use of an alley in a particular location.
(4) Where the deflection of alley alignment exceeds 30 degrees, a cutback of a minimum fifteen
(15) feet or of such greater distance to provide safe vehicular movement shall be established on the
inside property line and the paving of the alley shall be cut back in the same manner.
(5) Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with
adequate turn-around facilities at the dead-end as determined by the commission.
C. Easements.
(1) Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where
necessary and shall be of such widths as may be reasonably necessary for the utility or utilities
using same.
(2) Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, channel or street, there
shall be provided a storm easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with such
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/283
course and of such additional width as may be designated by the city's chief administrative officer,
that will be reasonably adequate for the purpose. Parallel streets or parkways may be required in
connection with this.
(3) The lot area shall be computed exclusive of all easements, alleys and streets.
D. Blocks.
(1) The length, width and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to:
a. Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use
contemplated.
b. Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions.
c. Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic.
(2) In general, intersecting streets, determining the blocks, lengths and widths shall be provided at
such intervals as to serve cross traffic adequately, and to meet existing streets or customary
subdivision practices. Where no existing subdivision controls, the block lengths shall not exceed one
thousand six hundred (1,600) feet and shall generally be one thousand (1,000) feet to one thousand
two hundred (1,200) feet in length. Where no existing subdivision controls, the block lengths shall
not be less than five hundred (500) feet; however, in cases where physical barriers or property
ownership creates conditions where it is appropriate that these standards be varied, the length may
be increased or decreased to meet the existing conditions having due regard for connecting streets,
circulation of traffic and public safety.
(3) Where blocks in the vicinity of a school, park or shopping center are platted one thousand
(1,000) feet or longer, the commission may require a walkway near the middle of the block or at a
street that terminates between the streets at the ends of the block. The walkway shall not be less
than four (4) feet or more than eight (8) feet in width, shall have a four (4) foot concrete walk through
the block from sidewalk to sidewalk, or to rear property line if no street. Where no existing
subdivision controls, the block width or depth shall be platted to give lots with a depth to width ratio
of generally not more than two and one-half (21/2) to one (1) and in no case more than four (4) to
one (1), and the platting shall be such that the block width or depth generally shall not exceed three
hundred fifty (350) feet nor be less than two hundred fifteen (215) feet. When possible, the block
width and length shall be such to allow two tiers of lots back to back to an alley.
(4) Pedestrian walks not less than four (4) feet wide shall be provided around the perimeter of all
blocks.
E. Lots.
(1) Lots shall conform to the minimum requirements of the established zoning district.
(2) Each lot shall face on a public street.
(3) Where corner lots are key lots, that is where lots face the frontage street and also other lots
face the side street, the corner lot shall have a front building line on both streets.
(4) Key lots or irregular shaped lots shall have sufficient width at the building line to meet frontage
requirements of the appropriate zoning district. Also, the rear width shall be sufficient to provide
access for all utilities including garbage collection, but not less than ten (10) feet.
(5) No lot shall be platted less than one hundred (100) feet in depth except in cases where an
irregular shaped tract is platted into lots and a remnant piece of property is of sufficient area to plat
one or more lots, the commission may waive the depth requirement to prevent a hardship on the
developer or subdivider.
(6) Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/283
(7) Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to
provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific
disadvantage of topography and orientation. Where lots have double frontage, a front building line
shall be established for each street.
(8) It shall be lawful to increase the size of lots from that originally platted, provided, however, that
there is no remaining portion of a lot or lots smaller than the original lot and provided further that final
plat is submitted in accordance with the requirements of a final plat as contained hereinabove;
provided that Art. 974a of Texas Revised Civil Statutes [Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 974a] is complied
with.
(9) In areas where city sewer is not immediately available, a lot shall be platted of such area as to
meet the minimum requirements of the City of Vernon pertaining to septic tank operation.
(10) No lot shall be replatted to reduce the size of the lots originally platted by a common
dedicator, unless the consent of all the property owners in the same addition has been obtained.
Such required consent may be implied where another lot or lots in the addition as recorded have
already been subdivided and built upon in the manner prescribed above.
(11) When an applicant exhibits a duly executed and recorded deed covering a lot having
dimensions of fifty (50) feet by one hundred twenty (120) feet or more which has been sold by metes
and bounds prior to the passage of the zoning ordinance, and such lot is being assessed for city
taxes and conforms to the established lot pattern and zoning classification in the block where
located, then a building permit may be issued provided the requested use of such property conforms
to the permanent zoning of the property covered by the application.
(12) Subdivision plats for housing projects, apartment areas, shopping centers and industrial
districts will not be required except in cases where dedications for streets, street widening, alleys or
easements are required. Site plans shall be filed with the City of Vernon for approval by the
commission as required by the zoning ordinance.
F. Building lines.
Building lines shall be shown on the final plat on all lots intended for business and residential use and shall
provide the minimum setback as required by the zoning ordinance.
(Ordinance 1079 adopted 2/19/85)
ARTICLE V. PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES
1. The subdivider may give consideration to suitable sites for schools, parks, playgrounds and other area for
public use so as to conform with the recommendations of the commission. Any provision for schools, parks, etc.
may be indicated on the preliminary plat.
2. No individual, partnership, firm or corporation shall deepen, widen, fill, re-route or change the course or
location of any existing ditch, channel, stream or drainage way, without first obtaining written permission of the
City of Vernon or other agency having jurisdiction.
3. In cases where a subdivision contains or abuts a school, park or playground, the subdivider shall dedicate
one-half (1/2) a normal residential street, and provide for one-half (1/2) the cost of paving and the full cost of all
the utilities necessary. The interested agency shall provide the necessary right-of-way to make the street sixty
(60) feed in width, and provide one-half (1/2) the cost of paving.
ARTICLE VI. UTILITIES
The sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains, street improvements, with all appurtenances pertaining to the
above and facilities of other agencies as may be required, shall be constructed and installed in each new
subdivision in accordance with current official standards of the City of Vernon.
ARTICLE VII. PLATS AND DATA
A. Preliminary plats.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/283
(1) The preliminary plats shall be prepared on sheets a maximum size of 24 inches by 36 inches,
regardless of the size of the subdivision.
(2) The scale should be one hundred (100) feet to the inch (one inch equals one hundred feet) but
may be two hundred (200) feet to the inch (one inch equals to two hundred feet) in cases of large
developments which would exceed the dimensions of a sheet at one hundred (100) foot scale.
(3) Each subdivision consisting of three (3) acres or more shall be prepared on a topographic
base map showing contours at intervals not greater than five (50 feet. Any subdivision smaller than
three acres which, in the opinion of the city's chief administrative officer, would be affected by the
topographical features of the terrain shall also show contours at two (2) foot intervals. All
topographical maps shall be based on sea level data.
(4) The following data will be shown on the preliminary plat:
a. Record lot lines, survey abstract lines, corporation lines and the location of existing utility
easements, streets, highways, expressways and freeways traversing, abutting or within a
reasonable distance.
b. The proposed locations and widths of streets, alleys easements, walkways, open
channels and lots.
c. The title of subdivision or addition, name of subdividers and engineer, surveyor or planner,
platting the tract.
d. The names and areas of large tracts and/or lot dimensions and addition names of all
property abutting or adjoining the subdivision and across the street.
e. The north point, scale and data.
f. Lot or tract numbers and/or city block numbers, addition names, dates recorded.
(5) All preliminary and final plats shall be printed on good grade processed paper blue line or
district black and white.
(6) All plats shall be drawn with north direction to the top or left side of the map.
(7) The proposed building lines shall be shown in conformance with the zoning ordinance or
provisions herein.
B. Final plats.
(1) All final plats shall be submitted on sheets 24 inches by 36 inches and to a scale of not less
than one hundred (100) feet to the inch or larger. Where more than one sheet is required to
encompass the subdivision, an index sheet, 24 inches by 36 inches, shall be filed showing the entire
subdivision together with the complete dedication, attests, dates, titles and seals, on one (1) sheet.
(2) The exterior boundary of the subdivision shall be indicated by the distinct dash line and corner
markers by individual symbols.
(3) The length and bearing of all straight lines, radii, arc lengths, tangent length and central angles
of all curves shall be indicated along the boundary line of the subdivision and each block. All
dimensions along the lines of each lot shall be shown. The curve data pertaining to block or lot
boundary may be placed in a curve table at the base of the plat and prepared in the following
manner:
CURVE TABLE
Curve
Number
Description Elements Outer
Property Line
Center Line Inner
Property Line
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/283
(4) The names of all adjoining subdivision, the dimensions of all abutting lots, lot and block
numbers and accurate reference ties to courses and distances of at least two (2) recognized land
corners shall be shown.
(5) The names and accurate location of all streets adjoining, abutting or within not more than five
hundred (500) feet of the subdivision shall be shown.
(6) The location and dimension of any utility easement adjoining or abutting the subdivision or
proposed within the subdivision shall be shown.
(7) The description and location of all survey monuments placed in the addition or subdivision
shall be shown. In all subdivisions and additions corners shall be established at the corner of each
block in the subdivision consisting of an iron rod or pipe not less than three-quarter (3/4) inches in
diameter and twenty-four (24) inches deep flush with the top of the sidewalk. Lot corners, consisting
of iron rods or pipes of a diameter of not less than one-half (1/2) inch and eighteen (18) inches deep
set flush with the top of the sidewalk. In addition, curve point markers shall be established of the
same specifications as lot corners.
(8) The final plat shall show a title including the names of the addition or subdivision, the names of
the owner and engineer or surveyor, scale and location of subdivision with reference to original land
grant or survey and abstract number and north point with true or magnetic north.
(9) A certificate of ownership giving a metes and bounds description of the property, dedication of
all streets, alleys, parkways and parks where donated to the city and dedication or reservation of all
easements and drainage ways to the public use, signed and acknowledged before a notary public by
the owner of the land, shall appear on the face of the plat or index sheet of the plats where two or
more sheets are required.
(10) The certificate of the licensed professional engineer or licensed public surveyor who
surveyed, mapped and monumented the land, which certificates shall be attested before a notary
public, shall be placed on the face of the plat on index sheets or the plats together with the seals of
the engineer or surveyor and notary public. Printed seals and signatures are prohibited except for
extra prints that the owner or developer may need certified for other purposes. The certificate of the
engineer or surveyor to be placed on the plat shall be as follows:
Know all men by these presents:
That I, ____________ , do hereby certify that I prepared this plat from an actual and accurate
survey of the land and that the corner monuments shown thereon were properly placed, under my
personal supervision, in accordance with the subdivision regulations of the City of Vernon, Texas.
(11) At the time the developer files the final plat with the city's chief administrative officer, he shall
also file a certificate showing that all taxes have been paid on the tract to be subdivided and that no
delinquent taxes exist against the property.
C. [Improvements required.] Improvements required prior to acceptance of the subdivision by the city.
(1) Monuments.
a. Monuments as prescribed hereinabove shall be placed at all corners as required
hereinabove.
(2) Street and alley improvements.
a. Before approval and acceptance of any final plat, the developer shall prepare, or have
prepared, and submit three (3) copies of the complete engineering plans of streets, alleys, curb
and gutters, storm sewers and drainage structures, and water and sanitary sewer
improvements for the area covered by the final plat. The developer shall have these plans
prepared by his own engineers subject to approval of the plans by the City of Vernon. The
city's chief administrative officer shall review the plans and specifications and, if approved shall
mark them approved and return one (1) set to the developer. If not approved, two (2) sets shall
be marked with the objections noted and returned to the developer for correction. After
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/283
approval of the plat and of the plans and specification, the developer shall cause his contractor
to construct the said improvements in accordance with these regulations The city will inspect
the installation of the improvements. When found to be installed in accordance with the plans
and specifications, and after the improvements have been completed and upon receipt by the
City of Vernon of a one (1) year maintenance bond from each separate contractor in the
amount of ten (10) per cent of the contract price, along with three (3) sets of “as built” plans
and one (1) set of “as built” sepias, the plans and sepias to be “as built” and upon receipt of a
letter of the contractor's compliance with these regulations, then the city's chief administrative
officer shall receive and approve for the City of Vernon the title, use and maintenance of the
improvements.
All street improvements shall be installed in accordance with the specifications and requirements
of the City of Vernon.
(3) Storm drainage.
a. An adequate storm sewer system consisting of inlets, pipes and other underground
drainage structures with approved outlets shall be constructed where runoff of storm water and
the prevention of erosion cannot be accomplished satisfactorily by surface drainage facilities.
Areas subject to flood conditions as established by the city will not be considered for
development until adequate drainage has been provided.
(4) Water.
a. All subdivisions shall be provided with an approved water system. In the corporate limits
of the city, all subdivisions shall be connected with and supplied from the city water supply
distribution system. Without cost to the city, the subdivider shall install all water lines. The
engineer representing the subdivider shall prepare the plans and specifications for the water
lines and present them to the city for approval before beginning construction. All construction
shall be paid for by the subdivider. Meters will be installed by the water department of the city.
(Amended by Ord. [No.] 793, 11-18-1968)
(5) Sanitary sewers.
a. All subdivisions shall be provided with an approved sewage disposal system and where
the subdivision is inside the city limits of the City of Vernon shall be connected to the City of
Vernon sanitary sewer system.
b. The developer shall furnish and install the complete sewage system, including the mains,
manholes, cleanouts, Y-branches and service laterals for all lots, lift stations and
appurtenances. The sewage system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
master plan and standard specifications of the City of Vernon.
c. In locations where sanitary sewers are not available and where there is no immediate
prospect for installation of sanitary sewers, then septic tanks of approved type may be installed
in conformity with the rules, regulations and ordinances of the City of Vernon pertaining to
public health, provided however that in no case shall septic tanks be installed without the
express approval and inspection of the City of Vernon. (Amended by Ord. [No.] 793, 11-18-
1968)
(6) As built plans.
a. The developer or his engineer shall present the city with a reproducible (sepia) complete
“as built” set of plans and three (3) sets of blue line or black line prints on paper of as built
plans for all paving, drainage structures, water mains and sewer mains within sixty (60) days
after completion of each contract.
D. Withholding improvements until approved.
(1) The city hereby defines its policy to be that the city will withhold all city improvements of
whatsoever nature, including the maintenance of streets and the furnishing of sewage facilities and
water service from all additions, the platting of which has not been approved by the commission.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/283
(2) The City of Vernon may withhold the issuing of a street number or building permit for the
erection of any building in the City of Vernon on a newly subdivided parcel of land until all the
requirements of these subdivision regulations have been complied with including installation of and
acceptance by the city of all water works, sewage and paving improvements for the area designated.
(3) No construction work shall begin on the proposed improvements in any proposed subdivision
prior to approval of the final plat by the City of Vernon and the filing of such plat with the County
Clerk of Wilbarger County.
(Ordinance 793 adopted 11/18/68)
ARTICLE VIII. FILING FEES
The following schedule of fees and charges shall be collected by the City of Vernon when any preliminary map
or plat is tendered to the city planning commission, and each of the fees and charges provided for herein shall
be paid in advance, and no action of the commission or any other board or agency shall be valid until the fee
shall have been paid the City of Vernon:
(1) Preliminary plats: Preliminary plans shall require a fee of $10.00 per lot.
(2) Final plats: Applicant shall file a fee of $15.00 per lot for final approval, together with an
additional fee of $12.00 per lot for reproduction of plans.
(3) For approval of multiple dwelling areas not subdivided into lots, both the preliminary and final
plat shall carry a fee of $5.00 per acre per plat.
(4) These fees shall be charged on all plats, regardless of the action taken by the city planning
commission whether the plat is approved or denied.
The money collected shall defray the cost of administrative, clerical and inspection services necessary to
properly investigate the plats, replats and subdivision.
ARTICLE IX. ENFORCEMENT
Any subdivision of land being developed in violation of the terms and provisions of these regulations is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and the appropriate officers of the city are hereby authorized to institute any
action which may be necessary to restrain or abate such violations.
ARTICLE X. OTHER REQUIREMENTS
A. Street signs.
Within the corporate limits of the City of Vernon, street signs will be installed by the city at each intersection and
the subdivider shall pay to the City of Vernon the sum of $15.00 per street sign toward the cost of installation of
each street sign. In subdivisions lying beyond the corporate limits of the said city, street name signs shall be
placed by the subdivider at all intersections within or abutting the subdivision. Such signs shall be of a type
approved by the City of Vernon, [and] shall be installed in accordance with the standards of the City of Vernon.
The developer shall pay such sum as computed by the city's chief administrative officer for street signs as set
out herein at the time at which he submits his final plat for approval, and this sum shall be in addition to the
filing fee set forth hereinabove.
ARTICLE XI. VARIANCES
The commission may authorize a variance from these regulations when in its opinion undue hardship will result
from requiring strict compliance. In granting a variance, the commission shall prescribe only conditions that it
deems necessary or desirable to the public interest and making the findings hereinbelow required. The
commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land involved and existing uses of the
land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable
effect of such variance upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience and welfare in
the vicinity. No variance will be granted unless the commission find:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/283
a. That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the
strict application of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of the reasonable
use of his land.
b. That the variances are necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property
right of the applicant, that the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety or welfare or injurious to other property in the area.
c. That the granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of
other lands in the area in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. Such findings of the
commission together with the specific facts on which such findings are based shall be incorporated
under the official minutes of the commission meeting at which such variance is granted. Variances
may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this ordinance so that
the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. Pecuniary
hardship to the subdivider, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship.
d. The commission may not authorize a variance that would constitute a violation of any other
valid ordinance of the City of Vernon.
ARTICLE XII. CONFLICTS
All ordinances or parts of ordinances, with the exception of the building code and comprehensive zoning
ordinance of the City of Vernon, which are inconsistent or in conflict with any of the provisions of this ordinance
be, and the same are, hereby repealed. Where the building code of the City of Vernon or zoning ordinance of
the City of Vernon contain regulations which are more restrictive than the regulations contained herein, the
ordinance which is more restrictive shall control.
ARTICLE XIII. EXCEPTIONS
Plats or subdivisions which have received preliminary approval by the commission within one year prior to the
effective date of this ordinance shall be excepted from the requirements of this ordinance, provided that the
final plat of such subdivision is approved and filed for record within one (1) year after the effective date of this
ordinance.
Sec. 2. [Severability.]
That should any word, phrase, sentence, paragraph or section of this ordinance be held to be void and
unconstitutional, the remaining provisions of this ordinance shall remain in full force and effect the same as if no
portion of this ordinance had been held to be void and unenforceable.