CODE OF ORDINANCES - CITY OF WILLS POINT, TEXAS 
____________ 
Adopted: September 8, 2009 
Effective: September 8, 2009 
____________ 
Published in 2009 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
WILLS POINT, TEXAS 
____________ 
Mark Turner 
Mayor 
Mike Jones 
Mayor Pro-Tem 
____________ 
Wade Emerson 
Kyle Anderson 
Lance Lybrand 
Oscar Rogers 
City Council 
____________ 
Pam Pearson 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Carla Oldacre 
City Secretary 
____________ 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
WILLS POINT, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Scott McGriff 
Mayor 
____________ 
Deby Frye 
Oscar Rogers 
Paul Addison 
John D. Pope 
Herbert Dunn 
City Council 
____________ 
Jim Stephens 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Carla Oldacre 
City Secretary 
____________ 
T. Shaina Primeaux 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Scott Drake 
Director of Public Works 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Wills Point, Texas. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1981 Code, as supplemented, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1981 Code, as supplemented, and any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Bill Carroll, Senior Code Attorney, and Lisa Stevens, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Carla Oldacre, City Secretary, and Shaina Primeaux, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Wills Point, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Wills Point, Texas. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Wills Point, Texas. 2009. 
ORDINANCE NO. 09-04 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF WILLS POINT, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
WHEREAS , pursuant to Texas Local Government Code section 51.032, the City Council may adopt an ordinance, not inconsistent with state law, that the City Council considers proper for the government of the City of Wills Point (the "City"); 
WHEREAS , pursuant to Texas Local Government Code section 51.001, the City Council may adopt an ordinance, rule or police regulation that is for the good government, peace or order of the City or the trade and commerce of the City; 
WHEREAS , the City Council has determined that it is in the best interest of the City and its residents to adopt and enact a new codified Code of Ordinances for the City of Wills Point, Texas. 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WILLS POINT, TEXAS: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Wills Point, Texas," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 48, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before May 12, 2009, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), except for: 
(1)  violations of municipal ordinances that govern fire, safety, zoning, public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, vegetation and litter violations in which the maximum fine shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense; and 
(2)  violations of traffic laws which are punishable as a Class C misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
    However, no penalty shall be greater or lesser than the penalty provided for the same or similar offense under the laws of the state. 
    Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after May 12, 2009, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective from and after the date of its passage by City Council and publication as provided by law, and it is accordingly so ordained. 
DULY PASSED AND APPROVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WILLS POINT, TEXAS ON THE 8TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER, 2009. 
CITY OF WILLS POINT 
_____
Scott McGriff, Mayor 
ATTEST: 
____________ 
Carla Oldacre, City Secretary 
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
____________ 
T. Shaina Primeaux, City Attorney 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 09-03  8-11-2009 Included 1 09-04  9- 8-2009 Included 1 09-05  9- 8-2009 Included 1 09-06 10-13-2009 Included 1 10-01  1-12-2010 Included 1 10-02  1-12-2010 Included 1 10-03  2- 9-2010 Included 1 10-04  3-29-2010 Included 1 10-05  7-13-2010 Included 1 10-07 10-12-2010 Omitted 1 10-08 11- 9-2010 Included 1 11-01 12-11-2010 Included 2 11-02  4-12-2011 Included 2 11-03  6-14-2011 Included 2 11-04  9-27-2011 Omitted 2 11-05 10-11-2011 Included 2 11-07 10-11-2011 Included 2 11-08 12-13-2011 Included 2 11-09 12-13-2011 Included 2 12-01  2-12-2012 Included 3 12-02  3-13-2012 Included 3 12-03  7-10-2012 Included 3 12-04 10- 9-2012 Included 3 12-05 10- 9-2012 Included 3 12-06 11-13-2012 Included 3 13-01  1- 8-2013 Omitted 4 13-02  4- 9-2013 Included 4 13-03  9-10-2013 Included 4 13-04  9-10-2013 Included 4 13-05  9-10-2013 Omitted 4 13-06  9-10-2013 Omitted 4 13-07 10- 8-2013 Included 4 13-08 11-12-2013 Omitted 4 14-04  5-13-2014 Omitted 5 14-07  8-12-2014 Included 5 14-08  8-12-2014 Included 5 15-09 12- 3-2015 Omitted 5 17-02  2-14-2017 Included 5 17-03  2-14-2017 Included 5 17-06  5- 9-2017 Included 5 17-07  5- 9-2017 Included 5 17-11  9-12-2017 Included 5 17-12  9-12-2017 Omitted 5 17-15 12-12-2017 Omitted 5  
CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated. 
(a)  The ordinances in this and the following chapters and sections constitute "The Code of Ordinances, City of Wills Point, Texas," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Wills Point Code." 
(b)  This Code shall not repeal any preamble, recital or finding of fact contained in any ordinance included herein, but all such matters shall be deemed incorporated in the sections herein derived from such respective ordinances. 
(Code 1981, § 1.1) 
State Law reference- Authority of municipality to codify ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 53. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In this Code, and in all ordinances and resolutions passed by the City Council, the following rules contained in this section shall be observed, unless their usage would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council: 
    Generally. Words are construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated. 
    Agencies, officers. Any reference to any federal, state or local agency or officer includes any successor agency or officer. 
    City. The terms "City," "the City" or "this City" means the City of Wills Point, in Van Zandt County, Texas. 
    City Council. The term "the Council," "the City Council" or "governing body" means the mayor and councilmembers acting as the City Council of Wills Point, Texas. 
    City Secretary, chief of police or other City officers or departments. The terms "City Clerk," "chief of police" or terms designating any other City officers or departments are construed to mean the City Clerk, chief of police or such other City officers or departments, respectively, of the City of Wills Point, Texas. 
    Code. The term "the Code" or "this Code" means The Code of Ordinances, City of Wills Point, Texas. 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done in a certain length of time before any proceeding or step in a proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall not be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such preceding or step in a proceeding is to be had shall be counted except as otherwise expressly provided in this Code. 
    County. The term "county" means Van Zandt County, Texas. 
    Delegation of authority. The term "delegation of authority" means a provision that authorizes or requires a City officer or City employee to perform an act or make a decision or authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through authorized subordinates. 
    Gender. A term importing the masculine gender shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Highway or street. The term "highway" or "street," when used in this Code, includes any street, alley, highway, avenue, public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the City dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    May. The term "may" is permissive. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month, except as otherwise specified in this Code. 
    Must and shall. The terms "must" and "shall" are each mandatory. 
    Number. Any term importing the singular number includes the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
    Oath. The term "oath" is construed to include any affirmation required by law. The terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they mean Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Savings Time, whichever is in current use in the City. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of the part of such building or land, except as otherwise defined in this Code. 
    Person. The term "person" extends and is applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships, trustees, receivers, companies, assignees, administrators, executors, guardians, or other representatives, and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property, except real property, as defined in this section. 
    Preceding and following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property, or a mixture of the two, if the sense used so indicates. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Roadway. The term "roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic and that portion of a street used for drainage. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of the street between the curb or the lateral lane of the roadway and the adjacent property line, all or a part of which is intended for use by pedestrians. 
    Sidewalk area. The term "sidewalk" means the space between the lateral lane of the roadway and the boundary separating the public right-of-way and the adjacent private property. 
    Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when a person cannot write. 
    State. The term "the state" or "this state" means the State of Texas. 
    Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    V.T.C.A. Refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Code Annotated, as amended or revised, or any successor statute. 
    Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" is construed to include any representation, other than oral, of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year, except as otherwise provided in this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 1.6) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines and headings; history notes and state law references. 
(a)  The headings of chapters, articles, divisions and subdivisions and catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections, nor as any part of the chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections, including the headings and catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code have no legal effect and only indicate legislative history. State law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections, or that otherwise appear in footnote form, are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(Code 1981, § 1.2) 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts. 
    It is the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section in this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the City Council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1981, § 1.3) 
Sec. 1-5. - Ordinances are cumulative; more stringent shall apply. 
    Each ordinance in this Code is cumulative of and in addition to all other ordinances of the City on the same subject. Where Code provisions or ordinances conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent regulations or penalties, as the case may be, shall prevail. 
Sec. 1-6. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion of any ordinance: 
(1)  Annexing property into the City or describing the corporate limits. 
(2)  Deannexing property or excluding property from the City. 
(3)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(4)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed or agreement. 
(5)  Granting any specific right or franchise, or establishing the procedure for granting a right or franchise. 
(6)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(7)  Providing for the duties of City officers or employees not codified in this Code. 
(8)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits. 
(9)  Adopting or amending a comprehensive plan. 
(10)  Levying or imposing any special assessments. 
(11)  Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley. 
(12)  Establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk. 
(13)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(14)  Not codified in this Code that levies, imposes or otherwise relates to taxes, exemptions from taxes and fees in lieu of taxes. 
(15)  Pertaining to rezoning property. 
(16)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(17)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(18)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(b)  The ordinances or portions of ordinances designated in subsection (a) of this section continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the City relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-8. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any City ordinance on the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Repeal of ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been previously repealed. 
Sec. 1-10. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
    All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereinafter enacted or presented to the City Council for enactment shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or additions to, the Code of Ordinances. Amendments to this Code shall be made by reference to the chapter and section of the Code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter, article, division, subdivision and section; provided, however, the failure so to do shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of such ordinances. 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by City personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the City Council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the City Council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be numbered so they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be removed from the Code. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate divisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines for all divisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other divisions to be inserted in the Code, and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other division numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this section," etc., as the Code may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any changes in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1981, § 1.5) 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty for violations of Code; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the City an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in such Code or ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00, except for: 
(1)  Violations of City ordinances that govern fire, safety, zoning, public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, vegetation and litter violations in which the maximum fine shall be $2,000.00 for each offense; and 
(2)  Violations of traffic laws which are punishable as a Class C misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
However, no penalty shall be greater or lesser than the penalty provided for the same or similar offense under the laws of the state. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. Any violation of any provision of this Code of Ordinances which constitutes an immediate danger to the health, safety, and welfare of the public may be enjoined in a suit brought by the City for such purposes. 
(c)  Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code or of any ordinance set forth herein that is punishable by a fine that does not exceed $500.00 does not require a culpable mental state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. 
(d)  Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code or of any ordinance set forth herein that is punishable by a fine that exceeds $500.00 shall require a culpable mental state of intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence, engaging in the prohibited conduct. 
(Code 1981, § 1.7) 
State Law reference- Limitation on penalties, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001; punishments, V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 12. 
Sec. 1-13. - Liability for penalty. 
    Whenever a corporation or association violates any provisions of this Code or other ordinance of the City, the president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer, manager or any agent or employee of such corporation or association shall be severally liable for the penalty prescribed for such violation. 
(Code 1981, § 1.8) 
Sec. 1-14. - Copies of Code as evidence. 
    In any prosecution for a violation of any provision of this Code, the Code or a copy certified by the City Secretary may be admitted in evidence without further proof and shall be prima facie evidence of the existence and regular enactment of such provision, without the necessity of introducing in evidence the entire Code. 
(Code 1981, § 1.9) 
Sec. 1-15. - Burden of proving exception. 
    In any prosecution for a violation of any provision of this Code, upon proof of the provision of the Code, it shall not be necessary to negate any exception, excuse, proviso or exemption contained in the Code and the burden or proof of any such exception, excuse, proviso or exemption shall be upon the defendant. 
(Code 1981, § 1.10) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Type A general law municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 5.001, 6.001 et seq.; provisions and powers of Type A general law municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 51.011-51.018; Type A municipality may adopt necessary ordinances not inconsistent with state law, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.012. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-19. - Form of government. 
    The government of the City shall consist of a City Council composed of the mayor and five councilmembers, who shall be elected at large by the qualified voters of the City for a two-year term. 
(Code 1981, § 2.1) 
Sec. 2-20. - Date of elections. 
    All elections for City councilmembers shall be held on the first Saturday in May of each year. Such City elections shall be operated in compliance with state law. 
(Code 1981, § 2.2) 
Sec. 2-21. - Location of elections. 
    The mayor shall have the authority to select the place for the City election to be held. 
(Code 1981, § 2.3) 
Sec. 2-22. - Tenure of office. 
    There shall be two-year staggered terms of the offices of mayor and the five councilmembers. The mayor and three councilmembers shall be elected for two-year terms on odd-numbered years. The remaining two councilmembers shall be elected for two-year terms on even-numbered years. 
(Code 1981, § 2.4) 
Sec. 2-23. - Filing for office. 
    All candidates for the office of City Council or mayor shall file their name with the City Secretary at least 30 days prior to election to be held in May, if the candidate's name is to be printed on the election ballot. 
(Code 1981, § 2.5) 
Sec. 2-24. - Compensation for City Council and mayor. 
    All City Council members, including the mayor, shall serve the City at a compensation level to be decided by the City Council during budget preparation. There shall be an allowance to cover travel expenses necessary for the conduction of City business. 
(Code 1981, § 2.6) 
Sec. 2-25. - Regular council meeting day. 
    The City Council shall meet at least once a month on the second Tuesday of each month. 
(Code 1981, § 2.7) 
State Law reference- Meetings, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 22.038. 
Sec. 2-26. - Special meetings. 
    The mayor may call a special meeting on the mayor's own motion or on the application of three councilmembers. Each member of the City Council, the Secretary, and the City Attorney must be notified of the special meeting. The notice may be given personally or left at the person's usual place of residence. 
(Code 1981, § 2.8) 
Sec. 2-27. - Emergency meetings. 
    Emergency meetings of the City Council may be called at any time by the mayor as the mayor shall deem necessary, subject to the same requirements as special meetings, except the requirement for posting notice at least 72 hours in advance of the emergency meeting shall not be required if an urgent public necessity exists because of an imminent threat to public health and safety or a reasonably unforeseeable situation has occurred as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.045. Notice must be posted at least two hours before the meeting is convened. 
(Code 1981, § 2.9) 
Sec. 2-28. - Quorum of council. 
    A quorum of the City Council exists when a majority of the City Council members are present at a regular meeting. A called meeting or a meeting to consider the imposition of taxes requires two-thirds of the City Council members to be present to constitute a quorum. The total needed for a quorum does not include the mayor's position. 
(Code 1981, § 2.10) 
State Law reference- Quorum, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 22.039. 
Secs. 2-29-2-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 22.071 et seq.; matters affecting public officers and employees, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 141 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-60. - Appointment of other City officials. 
    The other officials of the City such as the City Attorney, City Health Officer, fire marshal, assistant fire marshal and emergency management coordinator shall be appointed by the mayor and City Council on an annual basis. 
(Code 1981, § 12.20; Ord. No. 04-02) 
Sec. 2-61. - Appointment of code enforcement officer. 
    The position of code enforcement officer shall be filled by appointment by the City Council for an indefinite period and shall be subject to discharge at the will of the City Council. The code enforcement officer shall receive such compensation as authorized by the City Council as designated during budget hearings. The code enforcement officer shall report to the City Administrator. 
(Code 1981, § 12.21; Ord. No. 04-02) 
Secs. 2-62-2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 2-81. - Creation of office. 
    The office of City Administrator is hereby established. 
(Code 1981, § 2.30; Ord. of 7-13-1981) 
Sec. 2-82. - Appointment and tenure. 
    The City Administrator shall be appointed for an indefinite period of time and shall be subject to discharge at the will of the City Council. Appointment and removal shall require a majority vote of the City Council. The City Administrator shall be responsible to and report directly to the City Council. 
(Code 1981, § 2.31; Ord. of 7-13-1981) 
Sec. 2-83. - Duties and powers. 
    The City Administrator shall promptly and effectively execute or cause to be executed and carried out all duties and responsibilities delegated to the City Administrator by the City Council. Such duties and powers include: 
(1)  To devote all the City Administrator's working time and attention to the affairs of the City and to be responsible to the City Council for efficient administration of the City's affairs. 
(2)  To see that all provisions of federal, state, and local laws, ordinances and resolutions are enforced. 
(3)  To appoint and remove all subordinate employees. To exercise supervision and control over all departments created by the City Council. 
(4)  In regard to administrative and executive duties under the jurisdiction of the City Administrator, the City Council and its members shall deal through the City Administrator, and neither the City Council nor any members thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the City Administrator, either privately or publicly. Any willful violation of this provision by any member of the City Council shall constitute official misconduct. 
(5)  To attend all meetings of the City Council with a right to take part in the discussion, but having no vote, and to be notified of all special meetings of the City Council. 
(6)  To see that all contracts with the City are faithfully kept and performed and, upon knowledge of any violation thereof, to call the same to the attention of the City Council. 
(7)  To act as budget officer and, as such, to prepare and submit to the City Council, prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, a budget of the proposed income and expenditures for the ensuing year, and file the budget as required by state law after approval. 
(8)  To make to the City Council in timely manner all reports, documents, tax rolls, and other written documents of the City's business as required by law and prudent management. 
(Code 1981, § 2.32; Ord. of 7-13-1981) 
State Law reference- Powers and duties of municipal officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 22.072. 
Secs. 2-84-2-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY SECRETARY 

Sec. 2-110. - Appointment by City Council. 
    The office of City Secretary shall be filled by appointment by the City Council. 
(Code 1981, § 12.1; Ord. of 1-10-1977) 
Sec. 2-111. - Duties. 
    The City Secretary shall perform the duties prescribed by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 22.073 and shall perform such other duties as may be required of the City Secretary by law, ordinance, resolution or order of the City Council. 
(Code 1981, § 12.2; Ord. of 1-10-1977) 
Sec. 2-112. - Term of office. 
    The City Secretary shall be appointed for an indefinite period and shall be subject to discharge at the will of the City Council. The City Secretary shall receive such compensation as the City Council shall fix from time to time by ordinance or resolution, and shall furnish such surety bond as may be required by the City Council by ordinance or resolution, the premium to be paid by the City. 
(Code 1981, § 12.3; Ord. of 1-10-1977) 
Secs. 2-113-2-137. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - POLICE CHIEF AND POLICE OFFICERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Law enforcement officers, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1701; municipal law enforcement, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 341; law enforcement services provided through cooperation of local governments, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 362. 

Sec. 2-138. - Creating position of police chief. 
    The office of chief of police is hereby created. This person shall be head of the City Police Department and shall henceforth be known as police chief or chief of police. 
(Code 1981, § 12.10) 
Sec. 2-139. - Method of selection of police chief. 
    The mayor and City Council shall interview all final candidates applying for the position of police chief. After the mayor and City Councils' consideration of the qualification of the selected applicants, the City Administrator shall appoint the chief of police. 
(Code 1981, § 12.11; Ord. No. 14-08, § 1, 8-12-2014) 
Sec. 2-140. - Method of removal of police chief. 
    Removal from office of the police chief shall be performed by the mayor and City Council if such removal is warranted in the mayor's estimation. 
(Code 1981, § 12.12) 
Sec. 2-141. - Duty of police chief. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police to enforce all laws and City ordinances, and the chief of police shall also perform such other duties as may be imposed by law, by the City Council or City Administrator. 
(Code 1981, § 12.13) 
Sec. 2-142. - Method of selection of police officers. 
    The police chief shall interview all applicants for the job of police officer and shall make a selection and present this selection to the City Administrator for approval. 
(Code 1981, § 12.14) 
Sec. 2-143. - Salary of police chief and police officers. 
    The chief of police and all police officers shall receive such salary or compensation as may be fixed by the City Council during budget sessions. 
(Code 1981, § 12.15) 
Sec. 2-144. - Police department rules; rules related to retired police officers. 
(a)  The City Police Chief shall be authorized to establish rules and regulations governing the policies and personnel of the City Police Department. 
(b)  Written procedures; recordkeeping. 
(1)  The City Police Department shall establish written procedures for the issuance or denial of a certificate of weapons proficiency for honorably retired police officers pursuant to V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1701.357(c). The City Police Department shall issue the certificate to an honorably retired police officer who: 
a.  Satisfactorily demonstrates weapons proficiency under V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1701.357(b); 
b.  Provides proof that the retired officer is entitled to receive a pension or annuity for service with a state or local law enforcement agency or is not entitled to receive a pension or annuity only because the law enforcement agency that employed the retired officer does not offer a pension or annuity to its retired employees; and 
c.  Satisfies the written procedures established by the City Police Department. 
(2)  The City Police Department shall maintain records of any retired officer who holds a certificate issued under this section. For purposes of this section, proof may include a retired peace officer identification card issued under V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 614, subch. H. 
(c)  A certificate of weapons proficiency issued under this section expires on the second anniversary of the date the certificate was issued. A retired officer to whom this section applies may request an annual evaluation of weapons proficiency and issuance of a certificate of proficiency as needed to comply with applicable federal or other laws. 
(d)  The City Police Chief may set and collect fees to recover the expenses the City Police Department incurs in performing duties under this section. 
(e)  Identification cards for honorably retired police officers. 
(1)  Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code § 614.122, the City Police Department must issue an identification card to its honorably retired police officers when the City Police Department was the last entity to appoint or employ an honorably retired police officer as a police officer. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, the term "honorably retired police officer" means a former police officer who: 
a.  Previously served but is not currently serving as an elected, appointed, or employed police officer under V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure art. 2.12, or other law; 
b.  Did not retire in lieu of any disciplinary action; 
c.  Was eligible to retire from the City Police Department, or was ineligible to retire only because of an injury received in the course of the officer's employment with the City Police Department; and 
d.  Is entitled to receive a pension or annuity for service with a state or local law enforcement agency or is not entitled to receive a pension or annuity only because the law enforcement agency that employed the retired officer does not offer a pension or annuity to its retired employees. 
(f)  On request of an honorably retired police officer, who holds a certificate of weapons proficiency under this section, the City Police Chief will issue to the honorably retired police officer identification that indicates that the police officer retired from the City Police Department. An identification card under this subsection must include a photograph of the honorably retired police officer. 
(Ord. No. 09-01) 
Secs. 2-145-2-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-170-2-191. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT AND SUPPLEMENTAL DEATH BENEFITS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Texas Municipal Retirement System generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 851 et seq. 

Sec. 2-192. - Participation in state retirement system. 
    The City Council, on behalf of the City, hereby exercises its option and elects to have the City and all of the employees of all departments now existing and those hereafter created participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in the TMRS Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 851 et seq. 
(Code 1981, § 12.35; Ord. of 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 2-193. - Notification. 
    The City Administrator is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the state municipal retirement system that the City has elected to participate and have the employees of the City covered in said system. 
(Code 1981, § 12.36; Ord. of 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 2-194. - Employee eligibility. 
    Each person who becomes an employee of a participating City on or after the effective date of participation of such City whose position shall require more than 1,000 hours per year shall become a member of the state municipal retirement system as a condition of their employment. 
(Code 1981, § 12.37; Ord. of 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 2-195. - Rate of contribution. 
    In accordance with the provisions of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (TMRS) Act, the deposits to be made to the state municipal retirement system on account of current service of the employees of the several participating departments are hereby fixed at the rate of five percent of the full earnings of each employee of said departments. 
(Code 1981, § 12.38; Ord. of 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 2-196. - Prior service credit. 
    Each employee who qualifies for such credit shall be allowed "prior service credit" (as defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.101) at the rate of 100 percent of the "base credit" of such member, calculated in the manner prescribed in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.105. 
(Code 1981, § 12.39; Ord. of 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 2-197. - City contribution at time of employee retirement. 
    For each month of current service rendered to this City by each of its employees who are members of the state municipal retirement system, the City will contribute to the current service annuity reserve of each such member, at the time of such member's retirement, a sum that is 100 percent of such member's accumulated deposits for such month's accumulated deposits for such month employment and said sum shall be contributed from the City's account in the Municipality Accumulation Fund. 
(Code 1981, § 12.40; Ord. of 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 2-198. - Remittance of retirement contributions; certifications. 
    The City Secretary is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the state municipal retirement system, at its office in Austin, Texas, the City contributions to the system and the board under the provisions of the TMRS Act, and the said official is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of this City the prior service rendered to the said City by each of the employees of the participating departments, and the average prior service compensation received by each and make and execute all prior service certifications and all other reports and certifications which may be required of the City under the provisions of the TMRS Act, or in compliance with the rules and regulations of the board of trustees of the state municipal retirement system. 
(Code 1981, § 12.41; Ord. of 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 2-199. - Participation in Supplemental Death Benefits Fund. 
    The City hereby elects to participate in the Supplemental Death Benefits Fund of the state municipal retirement system for the purpose of providing in-service death benefits for each of the City's employees who are members of said system, and for the purpose of providing post-retirement death benefits for annuitants whose last covered employment was as an employee of the City, in the amounts and on terms provided for in V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 852.004, 854.601 through 854.605, 855.313, 855.314, 855.408, and 855.502. 
(Code 1981, § 12.42; Ord. of 11-14-1995) 
Secs. 2-200-2-221. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-222-2-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY PLANNING COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to appoint a zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.007. 

Sec. 2-251. - Created. 
    There is hereby created the City Planning Commission ("commission"). Said commission shall have all rights and powers and perform all duties as are required by law. In addition, the commission shall perform all functions set aside to the City Planning Commission in the zoning for the City. The commission shall meet from time to time as required by law and applications for zoning changes. The commission shall consist of five members, the majority of which shall constitute a quorum. A majority of those present at any properly called meeting at which a quorum is present shall decide all issues unless a greater proportion is required by other applicable law. 
(Code 1981, § 11.110; Ord. of 4-9-1979) 
Sec. 2-252. - Reports. 
    The City Council shall not take any action with respect to any change in its existing zoning regulations without first securing the final report of the City Planning Commission. In preparing its report the commission may meet either separately or during the course of a meeting with the City Council. In the event it meets in the course of a City Council meeting the commission shall make its final report to the City Council before the City Council takes any action with respect to the subject matter of the report. 
(Code 1981, § 11.111; Ord. of 4-9-1979) 
Sec. 2-253. - Notices. 
    Notice of City Planning Commission hearings shall be made as required by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 211.006, 211.007. 
(Code 1981, § 11.112; Ord. of 4-9-1979) 
Secs. 2-254-2-284. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING AND STANDARDS COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-285. - Created. 
    Pursuant to the authority vested in the City under the Texas Local Government Code, a building and standards commission (hereinafter in this article referred to as "the commission") is created which shall be composed of five regular members appointed for two-year terms. In making the initial appointments, the City Council shall appoint two regular members for one-year terms and the remaining members for two-year terms. Thereafter, all appointments to the commission shall be for two-year terms. The commission shall appoint from its members a chairperson, who shall serve in such capacity for a term of one year. 
(Code 1981, § 6.2; Ord. No. 98-07) 
Sec. 2-286. - Authority of commission. 
(a)  The commission shall have authority to exercise all powers, duties and responsibilities authorized by state law, including specifically the authority to hear and determine cases concerning alleged violation of this division and article VI of chapter 10 and those of any other similar ordinance: 
(1)  For the preservation of public safety relating to the materials or methods used to construct a building or improvement, including the foundation, structural elements, electrical wiring or apparatus, plumbing and fixtures, entrances, or exits; 
(2)  Relating to the fire safety of a building or improvement, including provisions relating to materials, types of construction or design, warning devices, sprinklers or other fire suppression devices, availability of water supply for extinguishing fires, or location, design, or width of entrances or exits; or 
(3)  Relating to dangerously damaged or deteriorated buildings or improvements. 
(b)  The commission as created and provided for under the provisions of state law shall, in addition to the statutory duties and responsibilities, have such additional duties and responsibilities as shall be from time to time delegated by the City Council and shall, in addition, determine such issues and render decisions in accordance therewith which may be from time to time required of an appellate body. In such cases, a simple majority of the members of the commission shall be sufficient to take action. 
(c)  The commission shall adopt rules and procedures governing meetings of the commission and the conduct of hearings before the commission. 
(Code 1981, § 6.3; Ord. No. 98-07) 
Secs. 2-287-2-305. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- V.T.C.A., Finance Code ch. 1 et seq.; finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 101 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-306-2-328. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TORT LIABILITY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Texas Tort Claims Act, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code ch. 101. 

Sec. 2-329. - Notice to City. 
(a)  Before the City shall be liable for damages for the death or personal injuries of any person or for damages to or destruction of property of any kind, which does not constitute a taking or damaging of property under article I, section 17, Constitution of the State of Texas, the person injured, if living, or, if deceased, such person's representatives, or the owner, the owner's agent or the owner's attorney of the property damaged or destroyed shall give the mayor notice in writing of such death, injury, damage or destruction, duly verified by affidavit, within six months after same has been sustained, stating specifically in such written notice, when, where, and how the death, injury, damage or destruction occurred, and the apparent extent of any such injury, the amount of damages sustained, the actual residence of the claimant by street and number at the date the claim is presented, the actual residence of such claimant for six months immediately preceding the occurrence of such death, injury, damage or destruction, and the names and addresses of all witnesses upon whom it is relied to establish the claim for damages. 
(b)  The notice requirements of this section do not apply if the City has actual notice that death has occurred, that the claimant has received some injury, or that the claimant's property has been damaged. 
(Code 1981, § 11.100; Ord. of 4-9-1979) 
Sec. 2-330. - Protection to officers responding to emergency. 
    Every officer, agent or employee of the City, while responding to emergency situations, is hereby authorized to act in such a manner as to most effectively deal with the emergency. This provision shall prevail over every other ordinance of the City and, to the extent to which the City has the authority to so authorize, over any other law establishing a standard of care in conflict with this section. Neither the City nor the employee shall be liable for any failure to use ordinary care in such emergency. 
(Code 1981, § 11.101; Ord. of 5-12-1986) 
Secs. 2-331-2-335. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SPECIAL FUNDS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-03, § 2, adopted June 14, 2011, set out provisions intended for use as 2-349. For purposes of clarity, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as 2-336. 

Sec. 2-336. - Special funds. 
(1)  Pursuant to the authority vested in the City Council under the Texas Local Government Code, a special fund is created that will be funded through the City's revolving line of credit obtained at the American National Bank of Texas for the specific purpose to pay for the settlement and expenses related to the Madden et al. vs. City of Wills Point litigation and no other purpose. 
(Ord. No. 11-03, § 2, 6-14-2011) 
Secs. 2-337-2-348. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MUNICIPAL RECORDS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 201 et seq. 

Sec. 2-349. - Definitions. 
    All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, magnetic tape, electronic media or other information-recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the City or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the City and shall be created, maintained and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. 
(Code 1981, § 2.40; Ord. of 12-10-1990) 
Sec. 2-350. - Additional definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department head means the officer who by ordinance, order or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the City of Wills Point that creates or receives records. 
    Essential record means any record of the City of Wills Point necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the City in an emergency or disaster, to the recreation of the legal and financial status of the City, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
    Permanent record means any record of the City for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent. 
    Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the City, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
    Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of electronic and other records storage systems. 
    Records management committee means the committee established in section 2-354. 
    Records management officer means the person designated in section 2-353. 
    Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
(Code 1981, § 2.41; Ord. of 12-10-1990) 
Sec. 2-351. - Municipal records declared public property. 
    All municipal records as defined in section 2-349 are hereby declared to be the property of the City. No City official or employee has, by virtue of such official's or employee's position, any personal or property right to such records even though such official or employee may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Code 1981, § 2.42; Ord. of 12-10-1990) 
Sec. 2-352. - Policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all municipal records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records management practice. 
(Code 1981, § 2.43; Ord. of 12-10-1990) 
Sec. 2-353. - Designation of records management officer. 
    The City Secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management officer for the City. As provided by state law, the name of each successive holder of the office shall be filed with the director and librarian of the Texas State Library within 30 days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. 
(Code 1981, § 2.44; Ord. of 12-10-1990) 
Sec. 2-354. - Establishment of records management committee; duties. 
    A records management committee consisting of the City Administrator, fire chief and police chief is hereby established. The committee shall: 
(1)  Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing the records management program; 
(2)  Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and improvements if needed; 
(3)  Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer; 
(4)  Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control schedules; and 
(5)  Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the City. 
(Code 1981, § 2.45; Ord. of 12-10-1990) 
Sec. 2-355. - Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan. 
(a)  The records management officer and the records management committee shall develop a records management plan for the City for submission to the City Council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the City, and to properly preserve those records of the City that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out the duties of the position as prescribed by state law and this article effectively. 
(b)  Once approved by the City Council, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the City and records shall be created, maintained, stored or disposed of in accordance with the plan. 
(c)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the City. 
(Code 1981, § 2.46; Ord. of 12-10-1990) 
Sec. 2-356. - Duties of records management officer. 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each City office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to re-establish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the City; 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the City; 
(7)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all City departments by preparation of a manual of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation; 
(8)  Monitor records retention schedule and administrative rules issued by state library and archives commission to determine if the records management program and the City's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(9)  Disseminate to City and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(10)  Instruct personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records management program; 
(11)  Direct personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this article; 
(12)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, destruction, or other disposition of City records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law; 
(13)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, and the estimated costs and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(14)  Report annually to the City on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the City, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data complied under subsection (11) of this section; 
(15)  Bring to the attention of the City Council noncompliance by department heads or other municipal personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 201 et seq. 
(Code 1981, § 2.47; Ord. of 12-10-1990) 
Sec. 2-357. - Duties and responsibilities of department heads. 
    In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the City for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for which the department head and staff are responsible; and 
(3)  Maintain the records in the care of the department head and carry out their preservation, destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the City and the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 2.48; Ord. of 12-10-1990) 
Sec. 2-358. - Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state. 
(a)  The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads, shall prepare records control schedules on a department-by-department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of municipal records as the records management plan may require. 
(b)  Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reenact the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the City. 
(c)  Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department head and by a majority vote of the records management committee. 
(d)  Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian of the Texas State Library as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian. 
(Code 1981, § 2.49; Ord. of 12-10-1990) 
Sec. 2-359. - Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule. 
(a)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-358 shall be implemented by department heads according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit, or a department head requests in writing to the records management committee that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(c)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the records management committee. 
(Code 1981, § 2.50; Ord. of 12-10-1990) 
Sec. 2-360. - Records center. 
    A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by section 2-358, shall be under the direct control of the records management officer, policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under section 2-358. 
(Code 1981, § 2.51; Ord. of 12-10-1990) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code ch. 1 et seq.; local regulation of alcoholic beverages, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 11.38, 61.36, 109.31 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1-4-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL 

Sec. 4-19. - Prohibiting public possession and consumption. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, regardless of age or marital status, to possess or to consume any alcoholic beverage in any public place within the City limits without the consent of the owner of said public place or the person having the care, custody and control of said public place. 
(Code 1981, § 3.1; Ord. of 4-6-1971) 
Sec. 4-20. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage means alcohol, or any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, which is capable of use for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted. 
    Public place means any place that is visited by any person, open to the public and usually accessible to the public and shall include parking areas, roads, streets and highways within the City limits. 
(Code 1981, § 3.2; Ord. of 4-6-1971) 
Sec. 4-21. - Purchase of alcohol. 
    The fact that the purchase of alcoholic beverages was made in a place where the sale of same is legal shall not be a defense for the prosecution of any violation of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 3.3; Ord. of 4-6-1971) 
Sec. 4-22. - Conflict with state laws. 
    Nothing in this article shall be in conflict with the laws of the state as regards "disorderly intoxication" "minor in possession," "illegal transporting of alcoholic beverage," or "possession for the purpose of sale," said article being limited to possession alone in a public place as herein defined; nothing in this article shall prevent the owner of a public place or the person having the same under their care, custody and control from granting permission to anyone to consume, use or possess an alcoholic beverage except as otherwise provided by the laws of the state. 
(Code 1981, § 3.4; Ord. of 4-6-1971) 
Sec. 4-23. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, § 3.5; Ord. of 4-6-1971) 
Secs. 4-24-4-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SALE AND PURCHASE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-40. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of alcoholic beverage regulations is to protect the public health, safety and public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 4.1, 5-12-2009) 
Sec. 4-41. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, all definitions of words, terms and phrases as set forth in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code are adopted and made a part of this article. 
    Business means an establishment, including but not limited to a general merchandise or food store and/or shop of any size or motor vehicle fueling station, filling or service station engaged in the selling of beer and/or wine to the general public for off-premises personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. 
    Permit means an authorization granted by the City for the sale of alcoholic beverages within the City. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 4.2, 5-12-2009) 
State Law reference- Definitions, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.04. 
Secs. 4-42-4-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 4-61. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, distill, brew, sell and/or possess for the purpose of sale any beer, wine or other alcoholic beverage, or otherwise engage in any activity for which a license or permit is required by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, within the City, unless the person has a current and unrevoked permit issued by the City. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 4.3, 5-12-2009) 
Sec. 4-62. - Fees established. 
(a)  Permit fee. The annual permit fee for issuing a permit to operate, conduct, and maintain a business establishment selling alcoholic beverages in the City shall be in an amount that does not exceed 50 percent of the state fee for which an alcoholic beverage permit is required under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended. The permit fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  The City adopts those exemptions from the permit fee requirement as provided in V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 11.38(d). 
(c)  License fee. The annual license fee for a business establishment selling alcoholic beverages in the City shall be in an amount that does not exceed 50 percent of the state fee for which an alcoholic beverage license is required under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended. The license fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 4.4, 5-12-2009) 
Sec. 4-63. - Payment of fees. 
    All fees required under this article shall be paid in advance to the City Secretary for a one-year term at the same time that the state annual fee is due and payable for each respective license and/or permit, including renewals thereof. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 4.5, 5-12-2009) 
Sec. 4-64. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  The City Secretary shall, in the name of the City, issue and deliver to such applicant or person a permit (a receipt evidencing payment of the fee shall be sufficient proof of a City permit) to engage in a business that sells alcoholic beverages within the City of the character described in and authorized by the state permit or license held by such applicant or person. This permit issued in the name of the City shall authorize the conduct of such business upon the premises described in the state permit or license, and shall remain in force only so long as the state permit or license remains in force. The City permit will be issued upon payment to the City Secretary of the applicable fees for a permit or license as required by this article and according to state law. The City Secretary shall keep a record of all permits and/or receipts issued under this article. 
(b)  The permit shall be valid only for one year from the date of its issuance. All permits issued for the payment of permit or license fees under the terms of this article shall terminate at midnight on the day before the anniversary date of their issuance, and no receipt shall be issued covering a longer term than one year. Upon expiration of any permit issued under this article, the applicant or person shall renew annually thereafter during the time that such person is engaged in the business of selling alcoholic beverages within the City. 
(c)  Permit applications shall be filed with the City Secretary. 
(d)  All permits or licenses issued under this article shall be displayed in a conspicuous place at all times on the premises for which the permit or license is issued. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 4.6, 5-12-2009) 
Sec. 4-65. - Review and recommendation by City officials. 
    Every person making application for a permit, under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code ch. 11 or 61 within the City shall be required to provide to the City Police Chief all information as may be reasonably required, including a copy of the application presented to the state alcoholic beverage commission and a personal history. The police chief shall review this application and other supporting documentation, make a reasonable investigation as he deems prudent, and make a written recommendation as provided by state law. If the police chief makes a written objection to the issuance of any permit or license, this recommendation shall be communicated to the commission and no City permit shall be issued by the City until such time, if any, the commission shall grant the requested permit or license. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 4.7, 5-12-2009) 
Sec. 4-66. - Cancellation and suspension of permits. 
    A permit issued under this article may be cancelled, denied or revoked as provided under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code ch. 11 or 61. The City shall have all powers, duties and remedies permitted under state law. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 4.8, 5-12-2009) 
Sec. 4-67. - Annual processing and inspection surcharge. 
    An annual processing and inspection surcharge in an amount to be established by resolution of the City Council shall be charged by the City Secretary for accepting any application or renewal for which the permit fee is $100.00 or less. The city secretary shall issue a receipt for the processing and inspection surcharge and keep a record of the same in the city secretary's office. All receipts issued for the payment of a processing and inspection surcharge under the terms of this section shall terminate at midnight on the day before the anniversary date of the permit issuance, and no receipt shall be issued covering a longer term than one year. The annual processing and inspection surcharge will offset City administrative expenses. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 4.9, 5-12-2009) 
Sec. 4-68. - Processing procedures. 
    Before the City Secretary shall sign any City permit or application for a permit or license under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code as amended, or any annual renewal, the City permit and application shall be submitted to the appropriate City departments, as determined by the City Administrator, to ensure that the City permit and application comply with all City ordinances and regulations and are for premises located in a wet area. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 4.10, 5-12-2009) 
Sec. 4-69. - Violations and penalties. 
    A licensee or permittee who sells an alcoholic beverage without first having paid the fees levied under state law and this article, or who fails to pay the full amount of the fees levied under this article when due, commits a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $200.00. Each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. This penalty shall be in addition to all other remedies provided herein. Any violation of this article may be used as grounds for cancellation, suspension or denial of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 4.11, 5-12-2009) 
State Law reference- Local fee authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 11.38 and 61.36; recommendation of local officials, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 11.41. 
Secs. 4-70-4-98. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 4-99. - Alcoholic beverage retail sales near churches, public or private schools and public hospitals. 
(a)  Distance requirements; exception. 
(1)  Distance requirements. Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold by a dealer or person whose place of business is within 300 feet of a church, public or private school, or public hospital. 
(2)  Exception. The 300-foot distance requirement in subsection (a)(1) of this section does not apply to the holder of: 
a.  A license or permit who also holds a food and beverage certificate covering a premises that is located within 300 feet of a private school; or 
b.  A license or permit covering a premises where minors are prohibited from entering under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.53, and that is located within 300 feet of a private school. 
(3)  In this section, the term "private school" means a private school, including a parochial school, that: 
a.  Offers a course of instruction for students in one or more grades from kindergarten through grade 12; and 
b.  Has more than 100 students enrolled and attending courses at a single location. 
(b)  A private school may request from the City Council of the City that alcoholic beverage sales be prohibited by dealers or persons whose place of business is within 1,000 feet of the private school. This provision does not apply to a retail off-premises consumption permit or license if less than 50 percent of the gross receipts for the premises, excluding the sale of items subject to the motor fuels tax, is from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  Measurement requirements. 
(1)  Churches and public hospitals. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections. 
(2)  Public or private schools. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the public or private school shall be: 
a.  In a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across intersections; or 
b.  If the permit or license holder is located on or above the fifth story of a multistory building, in a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the base of the floor on which the permit or license holder is located. 
(d)  Notice requirements. Every applicant for an original alcoholic beverage license or permit for a location with a door by which the public may enter the place of business of the applicant that is within 1,000 feet of the nearest property line of a public or private school, measured along street lines and directly across intersections, must give written notice of the application to officials of the public or private school before filing the application with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission. A copy of the notice must be submitted to the commission with the application. This subsection does not apply to a permit or license covering a premises where minors are prohibited from entering the premises. 
(e)  Variance procedures. The City Council may allow variances to the regulation when it determines that enforcement of the regulation in a particular instance is not in the best interest of the public, constitutes waste or inefficient use of land or other resources, creates an undue hardship on an applicant for a license or permit, does not serve its intended purpose, is not effective or necessary, or for any other reason, after consideration of the health, safety, and welfare of the public and the equities of the situation, determines is in the best interest of the community. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 4.12, 5-12-2009) 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverage sales near church, school or hospital, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33. 
Sec. 4-100. - Alcoholic beverage retail sales near day-care or child-care facilities. 
(a)  The distance requirements relating to a public school contained in section 4-99(a) shall not apply to a day-care center and/or a child-care facility as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code § 42.002, for a holder of a wine and beer retailer's off-premises permit and/or license under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code ch. 26. 
(b)  The distance requirements relating to a public school contained in section 4-99(a) shall apply to a day-care center and/or a child-care facility as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code § 42.002 for a permit or license holder under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code ch. 25 (wine and beer retailer's permit), V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code ch. 28 (mixed beverage permit), V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code ch. 32 (private club registration permit), V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code ch. 69 (retail dealer's on-premises license), or V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code ch. 74 (brewpub license) who does not hold a food or beverage certificate. This subsection does not apply to a permit or license holder who sells alcoholic beverages if: 
(1)  The permit or license holder and the day-care center and/or child-care facility are located on different stories of a multistory building; or 
(2)  The permit or license holder and the day-care center and/or child-care facility are located in separate buildings and either the permit or license holder or the day-care center and/or child-care facility is located on the second story or higher of a multistory building; or 
(3)  To a foster group home, foster family home, family home, agency group home, or agency home, as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Human Resources Code § 42.002. 
(c)  The notice provisions contained in section 4-99(d) as required by V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33(c) do not apply to a day-care center and/or child-care facility. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 4.13, 5-12-2009) 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverage sales near day-care center or child-care facility, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.331. 
Sec. 4-101. - Sale of beer and/or wine in residential area prohibited. 
    The sale of beer and/or wine is prohibited at a location that is within residential areas or within residential zoning districts where residential uses are allowed. Residential areas include properties that allow vertical mixed use developments with a residential component. Under this article, the term "residential areas" shall mean any property located in the following districts as described in the City's zoning ordinance, as amended from time to time: 
(1)  "R-1" One-Family Dwelling District. 
(2)  "R-2" Duplex and Apartment District. 
(3)  "B-1" Neighborhood Business District. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 4.14, 5-12-2009) 
State Law reference- Authority of municipality to regulate sale of beer, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.32. 
Sec. 4-102. - Hours of sale of beer or wine. 
(a)  Beer and/or wine shall not be sold, offered for sale, or delivered at any time not permitted by this section. 
(b)  Permitted hours of sale. 
(1)  Monday through Saturday: Beer and/or wine may be sold, offered for sale, or delivered between 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on any day except Sunday. 
(2)  Sunday: Beer and/or wine may be sold between midnight and 1:00 a.m. and between 12:00 noon and 12:00 midnight. 
(c)  Penalty. A person commits an offense if the person sells or offers for sale an alcoholic beverage during prohibited hours or consumes or permits the consumption of an alcoholic beverage on the person's licensed or permitted premises during prohibited hours. An offense under this section is a Class A misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 4.15, 5-12-2009) 
State Law reference- Hours of sale: wine and beer retailer, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 105.04 and 105.05; penalty, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 105.10. 
Sec. 4-103. - No outside consumption. 
(a)  It is prohibited for persons, including customers, to leave the premises with open alcoholic beverages and it is the permittee/licensee's responsibility to ensure that no open alcoholic beverages are sold and carried out. 
(b)  It is prohibited for persons, including customers, to gather outside an establishment selling alcoholic beverages and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  It is prohibited for the manager or any employee to allow persons, including customers, to gather outside the property boundaries of an establishment selling alcoholic beverages and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  Penalty for violation. A person commits an offense if the person knowingly consumes liquor, beer or wine on the premises of a holder of a wine and beer retailer's off-premises permit or a retail dealer's off-premises license. A person is presumed to have knowingly violated this provision if the permittee/licensee has the warning sign displayed on the premises as required by V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 26.05 or 71.10. A violation of this provision is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00, unless a person has been convicted of a violation of this provision occurring within one year of a subsequent violation. In this case, the subsequent violation is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 4.16, 5-12-2009) 
State Law reference- Consumption of alcoholic beverage on premises licensed for off-premises consumption, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 101.72; warning sign required, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 26.05 and 71.10. 
Sec. 4-104. - Warning sign required. 
(a)  Each permittee of a wine and beer retailer's off-premises permit shall display in a prominent place on his premises a sign stating in letters at least two inches high: 
IT IS A CRIME (MISDEMEANOR) TO CONSUME LIQUOR OR BEER ON THESE PREMISES. 
(b)  A permittee who fails to comply with this provision commits a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 4.17, 5-12-2009) 
State Law reference- Warning sign required, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 26.05. 
Sec. 4-105. - Certain establishments prohibited. 
    A business that derives 75 percent or more of its gross revenue from the on-premises sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited from operating within the City, in accordance with V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.57(d). 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 4.18, 5-12-2009) 
State Law reference- Application of code, other jurisdictions, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.57. 
Sec. 4-106. - Failure to require and properly check identification. 
(a)  The term "identification" in this section shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph and giving such person's date of birth and shall include, without being limited to, a passport, military ID card, driver's license or state department of public safety ID card. 
(b)  All permittees, licensees, and/or their employees shall require and properly check identification before selling any alcoholic beverage to any customer to ensure an underage person is not sold and/or does not have in his possession, alcoholic beverages while in a licensed business. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 4.19, 5-12-2009) 
State Law reference- Sale to minors, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 106.03. 
Sec. 4-107. - Penalty; other remedies. 
(a)  Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be fined, upon conviction, not less than $1.00 nor more than $500.00, unless the violation involves fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation then the person shall be fined an amount not to exceed $2,000.00. Each day any violation or noncompliance continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The penalty provided herein shall be cumulative of other remedies provided by state law, and the power of injunction as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 54.012 and 54.016, may be exercised in enforcing this article whether or not there has been a complaint filed. 
(b)  The penal provisions imposed under this section are cumulative of all other remedies and non-exclusive. These penal provisions shall not be deemed nor construed to limit the availability of any remedy against any person or property otherwise provided by law including without limitation fines, penalties, closure, and injunction. The City retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. 
(c)  A person who violates a provision of this article in which a specific penalty is not provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, is punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 or by confinement in the county jail for not more than one year or by both. The term "specific penalty," as used in this section, means a penalty that might be imposed as a result of a criminal prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 4.20, 5-12-2009) 
State Law reference- General enforcement authority of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 54.001, 54.012 and 54.016; general penalty, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.05. 
Sec. 4-108. - Fees. 
    All permit fees and other fees adopted by the City, as amended, shall remain applicable to the regulations adopted by this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, § 4.21, 5-12-2009) 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate exhibitions, shows and amusements, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.032; sports, amusements and entertainment, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POOL HALLS AND GAME ROOMS 

Sec. 6-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Billiard table or pool table means any table, whether coin operated or not, surrounded by a ledge or cushion with or without pockets upon which balls are impelled by a stick or cue. 
    Game room is any building, room, structure, or any other place, in which is exhibited any type of mechanical or electronic game for hire, revenue, fee or gain of any kind. 
    Mechanical or electronic games includes any marble machine, slot machine, coin machine or other similar machine used for public amusement. 
    Pool hall means any building, room, structure, or any other place, in which is exhibited any type of pool or billiard table or mechanical or electronic game for hire, revenue, fees or gain of any kind. 
(Code 1981, § 5.1; Ord. No. 99-06) 
Sec. 6-20. - License requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, save and except religious, charitable or educational organizations authorized under the law of the state, to own and operate, for profit, any pool or billiard table or electronic game, as such terms are defined in section 6-19, within this City, except where specified, without having first obtained an appropriate license from the City Secretary, as provided in this article, which license shall at all times be displayed in some conspicuous place within the licensed place of business. 
(b)  As provided by the laws of the state, bona fide religious, charitable or educational organizations, and those persons operating billiard tables or games under the authority of such religious, charitable or educational organizations, are exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 5.3; Ord. No. 99-06) 
Sec. 6-21. - License/inspection and permit fees. 
    Every person operating a pool or billiard hall or game room within the corporate limits of the City shall pay a one-time application fee and an annual license fee for inspection purposes and a permit fee for each machine and/or table as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time for the privilege of pursuing said business. 
(Ord. No. 17-06, § 2, 5-9-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-06, § 2, adopted May 9, 2017, repealed the former § 6-21 and enacted a new § 6-21 as set out herein. The former § 6-21 pertained to license fee and derived from Code 1981, § 5.4 and Ord. No. 99-06. 
Sec. 6-22. - Additional license fees. 
(a)  The license fee for the operation of pool table, billiard table, electronic or mechanical games shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time. 
(b)  Fees are payable on January 1 each year and such payment is not transferable from one place of business to another. 
(Code 1981, § 5.5; Ord. No. 99-06) 
Sec. 6-23. - Operating within certain areas. 
    No one, acting for oneself or for another person, shall operate or maintain a pool hall, billiard hall, or game room as that term is defined in this article, within 300 feet of any church or school property. This shall not include pool halls and game rooms in operation as of October 11, 1999. 
(Code 1981, § 5.6; Ord. No. 99-06) 
Sec. 6-24. - Term of license. 
    Any license issued pursuant to this article shall expire December 31 of each year and be non-transferable. 
(Code 1981, § 5.7; Ord. No. 99-06) 
Sec. 6-25. - Alcoholic beverages. 
    The consumption of alcoholic beverages in or on the premises licensed hereunder is hereby prohibitied. No person authorized under the laws of the state, licensed hereunder, shall knowingly permit the use or consumption of any kind of alcoholic beverage in or upon the premises for which a license has been issued, as provided in this article, with exception to those owners, who hold a valid private club membership issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission (TABC). 
(Code 1981, § 5.8; Ord. No. 99-06; Ord. No. 17-06, § 3, 5-9-2017) 
Sec. 6-26. - Revocation of license. 
    The City Council is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke or cancel the license of any person authorized under the laws of the state, licensed to own and operate a pool or billiard table or tables or game room hereunder, after giving such licensee ten days' notice of a hearing and after conducting such hearing for the purpose of determining whether such license should be revoked; provided, however, that such power of cancellation or revocation shall be exercised only under the following conditions: 
(1)  For the violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(2)  For knowingly permitting the use or consumption of any alcoholic beverage in or upon the premises licensed hereunder. 
(3)  For knowingly permitting the presence on the premises of a person under the influence of intoxicating liquor, stimulants or other illegal drugs. 
(4)  For knowingly permitting disorderly conduct or immoral practices on the premises. 
(5)  For knowingly permitting the violation of any law of the state or of this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 5.9; Ord. No. 99-06) 
Sec. 6-27. - Inspection. 
    The City Administrator shall appoint or designate the chief of police or his designee to make periodic inspections of the licensed premises, whose duty shall be to determine compliance with the building provisions, the maintenance of toilets and other sanitary facilities, and compliance with the health, plumbing, sanitary and other applicable laws of this City and of this article. An owner, manager or employee of any game room or other person exercising control over a game room, a portion of a game room or an amusement redemption machine and/or table, shall provide a city official with immediate unrestricted access during business hours to all areas of the building and to all amusement redemption machines located in the game room. 
(Code 1981, § 5.10; Ord. No. 99-06; Ord. No. 17-06, § 4, 5-9-2017) 
Sec. 6-28. - Penalties. 
    Any person licensed hereunder violating any provisions of this article shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, § 5.12; Ord. No. 99-06) 
Sec. 6-29. - Regulations/restrictions. 
(a)  Shall not permit operation of the machines/tables between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(b)  Shall not permit any person under the age of 18 to play any amusement redemption machine. 
(c)  Not operate more than 20 machines and/or tables in any game room. 
(d)  The owner, manager or employee of a game room shall not permit any obstruction of public view by use of drawn shades, blinds, partitions or tinting or other obstructions or structures on any windows to such an establishment. 
(e)  Must post the words "GAME ROOM" in black four inch letters with white background on the front of the gaming room at entrance of the building that is visible for at least 25 feet. 
(f)  Must post a sign at the entrance of the game room that states the following in two inch black lettering with a white background: 
GAMBLING AND THE PROMOTION OF GAMBLING IN THE STATE OF TEXAS IS ILLEGAL. THIS BUSINESS DOES NOT PAY CASH IN LIEU OF WINNINGS FROM ANY AMUSEMENT REDEMPTION MACHINE. 
(Ord. No. 17-06, § 5, 5-9-2017) 
Secs. 6-30-6-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate sexually oriented businesses, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 243. 

Sec. 6-60. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial amusement, theater, show or similar establishment which regularly exhibits or feature: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult novelty store, bookstore, or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Chief of police means the chief of police of the City of Wills Point or the chief's designated agent. 
    Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
    Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
    Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
    Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. 
    Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
    Nudity or a state of nudity means: 
(1)  The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breast; or 
(2)  A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breast. 
    Operates or causes to be operated means to cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business, whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
    Semi-nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
    Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude. 
    Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult novelty store, adult bookstore, or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
    Specified anatomical areas means human genitals whether or not in a state of sexual arousal. 
    Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) of this section. 
    Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 25 percent, as the floor area existed on October 1, 1988. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease or sublease of the building; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by request or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Code 1981, § 10.16; Ord. of 3-9-1992) 
Sec. 6-61. - License required. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if such person operates a sexually oriented business without a valid license, issued by the City for the particular type of business. 
(b)  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the chief of police and sworn to by the applicant. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who must comply with section 6-75 shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements of section 6-75. 
(c)  The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of section 6-62 and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the health department, fire department, and building inspector. 
(d)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, such person must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20 percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 6-62, and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(e)  The fact that a person possesses a valid permit and/or license pursuant to other ordinances of this City does not exempt such person from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business license. A person who operates a sexually oriented business shall comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 10.17; Ord. of 3-9-1992) 
Sec. 6-62. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  The chief of police shall approve the issuance of a license by the City Secretary to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application unless the chief of police finds one or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in payment to the City of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(4)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this article, other than the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within two years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect. 
(5)  An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a license by the City to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding 12 months, or residing with a person whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months. 
(6)  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the health department, fire department, and the building inspector as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(7)  The license fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(8)  An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 12 months and has demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(9)  An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any other ordinance of this City. 
(10)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime: 
a.  Involving: 
1.  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 43: 
(i)  Prostitution; 
(ii)  Promotion of prostitution; 
(iii)  Aggravated promotion of prostitution; 
(iv)  Compelling prostitution; 
(v)  Obscenity; 
(vi)  Sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor; 
(vii)  Sexual performance by a child; 
(viii)  Possession of child pornography; 
(ix)  Any of the following offenses described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 22: 
A.  Public lewdness; 
B.  Indecent exposure; 
C.  Indecency with a child; 
2.  Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 22; 
3.  Incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway child as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 25; or 
4.  Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses; 
b.  For which: 
1.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or a combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
c.  An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of an offense in subsection (a)(10) of this section may qualify for a sexually oriented business only when the time period required by subsection (a)(10)b of this section has elapsed; provided, however, that, in addition to the foregoing factors, the chief of police shall consider the following evidence before final determination of the applicant's present fitness for a license under subsection (a)(10) of this section: 
1.  The extent and nature of the person's past criminal activity; 
2.  The age of the person at the time of the commission of the crime; 
3.  The amount of time that has elapsed since the person's last criminal activity; 
4.  The conduct and work activity of the person prior to and following the criminal activity; 
5.  Evidence of the person's rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort while incarcerated or following release; 
6.  Other evidence of the person's present fitness, including letters of recommendation from prosecution, law enforcement, and correctional officers who prosecuted, arrested, or had custodial responsibility for the person; the sheriff and chief of police in the community where the person resides; and any other persons in contact with the convicted person; and 
7.  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to the extent possible to secure and provide to the City the recommendations of the prosecution, law enforcement, and correctional authorities as required under this section; the applicant shall also furnish proof in such a form as may be required by the City that the applicant has maintained a record of steady employment and support of the applicant's dependents and has otherwise maintained a record of good conduct and has paid all outstanding court costs, supervision fees, fines, and restitution as may have been ordered in all criminal cases in which the applicant has been convicted. 
(b)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or applicant's spouse. 
(c)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be read at any time. 
(Code 1981, § 10.18; Ord. of 3-9-1992) 
Sec. 6-63. - Fees. 
(a)  The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license is as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time. 
(b)  If an applicant is required by ordinance of the City to obtain a license or a permit pursuant to any other applicable ordinance for the business at a single location, payment of the fee for the sexually oriented business license shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of payment of any other fees required by other applicable ordinances. 
(Code 1981, § 10.19; Ord. of 3-9-1992) 
Sec. 6-64. - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department and fire department, as well as the health inspector and building inspector, to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or such person's agent or employee commits an offense if such person, agent or employee refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the police department at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(c)  The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Code 1981, § 10.20; Ord. of 3-9-1992) 
Sec. 6-65. - Expiration of license. 
    Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 6-61. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date and when made less than 30 days before expiration date the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(Code 1981, § 10.21; Ord. of 3-9-1992) 
Sec. 6-66. - Suspension. 
    The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the chief determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with sections 6-61, 6-64, 6-69, 6-70, 6-72, 6-73, 6-74, and/or 6-75. 
(2)  Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(3)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article; 
(4)  Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(5)  Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(Code 1981, § 10.22; Ord. of 3-9-1992) 
Sec. 6-67. - Revocation. 
(a)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 6-66 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if the chief determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the chief of police during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)  A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in section 66-62(a)(10)a for which the time period required in section 66-62(a)(10)b has not elapsed; 
(6)  On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed in section 66-62(a)(10)a, for which a conviction has been obtained, and the persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; 
(7)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the same meaning as it is defined in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 21.01; or 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the City for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes, or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(d)  Subsection (b)(7) of this section does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view. 
(e)  When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under subsection (b)(5) of this section, an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under section 6-62(a)(10)b has elapsed. 
(Code 1981, § 10.23; Ord. of 3-9-1992) 
Sec. 6-68. - Appeal. 
(a)  If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license, or revokes or suspends a valid license, the chief of police shall send to the applicant, or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action and the right to an appeal. The aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the chief of police to the City Council. The filing of an appeal stays the action of the chief of police in suspending or revoking a license until the City Council makes a final decision. 
(b)  If the chief of police denies issuance of a license, or revokes or suspends a valid license under section 6-62(a)(9), then the chief shall send written notice to the applicant/licensee stating: 
(1)  The reasons for the suspension, revocation, denial, or disqualification; 
(2)  That such person has the right to an appeal under this section, and, after such appeal is exhausted, has those rights to judicial appeal by filing an action within 30 days of the City Council's final decision, in the district court of the county, for review of the evidence presented to the City and its decision; and 
(3)  The earliest date that such person may appeal. 
(Code 1981, § 10.24; Ord. of 3-9-1992) 
Sec. 6-69. - Transfer of license. 
    A licensee shall not transfer a license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Code 1981, § 10.25; Ord. of 3-9-1992) 
Sec. 6-70. - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if such person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of: 
(1)  A church; 
(2)  A public or private elementary or secondary school. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if such person causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if such person causes or permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
(d)  For the purposes of subsection (a) of this section, measurement shall be make in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted to the nearest property line of the premises of a church or public or private elementary or secondary school. 
(e)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(Code 1981, § 10.26; Ord. of 3-9-1992) 
Sec. 6-71. - Exemption from location restrictions. 
(a)  If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license to an applicant because the location of the sexually oriented business establishment is in violation of section 6-70, then the applicant may, not later than ten calendar days after receiving notice of the denial, file with the City Secretary a written request for an exemption from the location restrictions of section 6-70. 
(b)  If the written request is filed with the City Secretary within the ten-day limit, an appeal may be made in accordance with section 6-68. 
(Code 1981, § 10.27; Ord. of 3-9-1992) 
Sec. 6-72. - Additional regulation for escort agencies. 
(a)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if such person acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years. 
(Code 1981, § 10.28; Ord. of 3-9-1992) 
Sec. 6-73. - Additional regulations for nude model studios. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if such person appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(b)  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(Code 1981, § 10.29) 
Sec. 6-74. - Additional regulations for adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttal presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as the term is defined in this article. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, such person rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, such person rents or subrents the sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the term "rent" or "subrent" means the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Code 1981, § 10.30) 
Sec. 6-75. - Regulations pertaining to premises for exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, or other video reproduction which depicts "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually business oriented license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designation of any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The chief of police may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the chief of police or the chief's designee. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(7)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor level. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is on the premises. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through (8) of this section commits an offense if such person knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Code 1981, § 10.31; Ord. of 3-9-1992) 
Sec. 6-76. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, any person violating sections 6-61, 6-64, 6-69, 6-70, 6-72, 6-73, 6-74 and/or 6-75 is subject to the penalties of section 1-12. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under sections 6-61 and 6-72 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a preparatory school licensed by the state; or a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; 
b.  Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 6-61 that each item of descriptive, printed, film, or video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
(Code 1981, § 10.32) 
Sec. 6-77. - Injunction. 
    A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in violation of section 6-61 is subject to a suit for injunction and prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Code 1981, § 10.33; Ord. of 3-9-1992) 
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Livestock, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code ch. 141 et seq.; animal drives, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.025; animals at large, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.026; breeding animals, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.027; health and safety of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 821 et seq.; regulation of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 822. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1-8-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS 

Sec. 8-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cat means a male or female domestic mammal of the feline species, whether altered or not, commonly found in the City. 
    Dog means a male or female domestic mammal of the canine species, whether altered or not, commonly found in the City. 
    Owner means any person owning, harboring or in any way keeping a dog and/or cat within the limits of the City. 
(Code 1981, § 4.1; Ord. No. 02-03) 
Sec. 8-20. - Dogs running at large prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any keeper or owner of any dog to permit such dog to run at large within the City. As used in this section, the term "to run at large" means to be free of restraint on or beyond the boundaries of the premises of the keeper. Any such dog when not restrained on the premises of its owner shall be controlled by a leash held by a competent person and shall not be deemed running at large. 
(Code 1981, § 4.2; Ord. No. 02-03) 
State Law reference- Certain dogs and coyotes prohibited from running at large, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 822.007, 822.012; estrays, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code ch. 142; animals running at large on highways, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code § 143.101 et seq. 
Sec. 8-21. - Impoundment. 
(a)  The animal control officer is granted the duty to pick up and cause to be impounded any dog running at large in the City. The owner of an impounded animal may obtain the release of said animal from the City animal control officer, if said animal has not been taken to the designated animal shelter. To obtain the release of an animal prior to being taken to the animal shelter a fee shall be paid for pick-up as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time. 
(b)  The owner of an animal taken to the designated animal shelter may retrieve said animal within three days of impoundment by paying the fees and abiding by the requirements as prescribed by the animal shelter authority. 
(c)  The owners of animals that have been released from the designated animal shelter that do not comply with requirements of the shelter shall have the animal impounded and returned to the designated animal shelter. 
(d)  Animals impounded at the designated animal shelter more than three days shall become property of the animal shelter. 
(Code 1981, § 4.3; Ord. No. 05-07) 
State Law reference- Treatment of impounded animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.002; seizure of a dog causing death of or serious bodily injury to a person, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.002; quarantine and impoundment facilities related to rabies, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.051 et seq. 
Sec. 8-22. - Barking dogs. 
    It shall be unlawful to keep any dog in the City which by loud, frequent or habitual barking or howling causes annoyance and disturbs the peace and quiet of any person. For purposes of this section, the terms "frequent or habitual barking or howling" shall mean continuous barking or howling for a duration of at least 20 minutes. Any person who believes that there has been a violation of this section shall have the right and it shall be his duty to file a complaint against the owner or keeper of such dog with the City police department, which shall be adjudicated in the municipal court of the City. 
(Code 1981, § 4.4; Ord. No. 02-03; Ord. No. 13-04, § 2, 9-10-2013 ) 
Sec. 8-23. - Confinement during rabies emergency. 
    The City Administrator, whenever the City Administrator may detect danger from hydrophobia, shall request that the mayor issue a proclamation requiring all animals to be properly confined or securely muzzled, and it shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to fail to comply with such proclamation. Such proclamation shall be published for public dissemination. 
(Code 1981, § 4.5; Ord. No. 02-03) 
State Law reference- Rabies, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 826; authority of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.015. 
Sec. 8-24. - Maintenance of premises where dogs and cats are kept. 
    Every person keeping any dog or cat in the City shall maintain the area used or occupied by such animal in a sanitary manner at all times and such area shall be kept free of offensive odors, flies, rodents and other pests. 
(Code 1981, § 4.6; Ord. No. 02-03) 
Sec. 8-25. - Animal fighting. 
    No person shall possess, harbor or maintain care or custody of any animal for fighting contests, nor shall any person train, torment, badger, bait or use any animal for the reason of causing or encouraging the animal to attack human beings or domestic animals. 
(Code 1981, § 4.7; Ord. No. 02-03) 
Sec. 8-26. - Keeping of multiple adult dogs; impoundment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep on such owner's premises more than five dogs and/or cats over the age of three months. The animal control officer is hereby authorized to seize and impound any dogs and/or cats found on an owner's premises in excess of five, subject to the same procedures outlined in section 8-21 for the impoundment of dogs running at large. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any properly zoned veterinary hospital, clinic, or kennel. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 4.8, 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 8-27. - No liability for impoundment. 
    The City shall at no time ever incur liability because of the impoundment of any animal. In the event of loss, destruction, illness, deformity or other injury to an animal subject to impoundment at any time during the tenure of impoundment, such loss shall be the loss of the owner. If the owner of an impounded animal does not redeem it within the period of impoundment, disposition will be in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 4.9, 7-10-2007; Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 8-28. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. A culpable mental state is not required for a violation of this article, and need not be proved. 
(Code 1981, § 4.8; Ord. No. 02-03; Ord. No. 07-11, § 4.10, 7-10-2007) 
Secs. 8-29-8-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - KEEPING PIGS, SHEEP, GOATS AND CATTLE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Livestock, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code ch. 141 et seq.; animals at large, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.026. 

Sec. 8-60. - Animals prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or combination of persons to keep, display or feed any live swine, hogs, pigs, sheep, goats or cattle within the fire limits of the City, as such fire limits are defined by this Code, and prohibits the keeping of live swine, hogs and pigs within the City limits. 
(Code 1981, § 4.10; Ord. No. 02-03) 
Sec. 8-61. - Maintenance of premises where livestock kept. 
    Each place in the City used for feeding, breeding, stabling, pasturing or keeping any cow, goat, horse, sheep or any other animal of like species shall be kept free of offensive odors, flies, rodents and other pests. Each lot, pen, building, stable or other enclosure in or on which any such animal is kept, fed, bred, stabled, pastured or housed shall have a suitable means of removal of manure and droppings. After removal of manure and droppings, disposal units shall be securely screened or otherwise protected from flies, vermin and rodents. Manure from such removal shall not be left in the open, but shall be removed or buried. 
(Code 1981, § 4.11; Ord. No. 02-03) 
Sec. 8-62. - Prohibiting animals or domesticated livestock from running at large; impoundment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow any domesticated animal and/or livestock to range, graze, or run at large upon any property of another or any public place without the consent of the owner or the owner's agent. 
(b)  Said animal and/or livestock running at large shall be apprehended and impounded, at the owner's expense, for a period of 30 days. At such time, public notice will be given and after ten additional days the animal or livestock shall be sold at public auction. Each domesticated animal or head of livestock shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 4.12; Ord. No. 02-03; Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 11-9-2010) 
State Law reference- Estrays, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code ch. 142; animals running at large on highways, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code § 143.101 et seq. 
Sec. 8-63. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, § 4.13; Ord. No. 02-03) 
Secs. 8-64-8-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - KEEPING OF CHICKENS 

Sec. 8-85. - Prohibiting chickens and/or other fowl from running at large; impoundment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit chickens and/or other fowl to range, graze, or run upon any property of any other person without the permission of said person. 
(b)  Said chickens and/or other fowl running at large shall be apprehended and impounded, at the owner's expense for a period of 30 days. If the owner of an impounded chicken(s) and/or fowl does not redeem it within the period of impoundment, public notice will be given and after ten additional days, the chickens and/or other fowl shall be disposed of in accordance with this section. 
(c)  Any chicken(s) and/or fowl not redeemed within the above-stated time periods after impoundment, or release from quarantine, shall become the property of the City and shall at the direction of the animal control officer, City administrator or their designee be placed for adoption, transferred to a bona fide humane society or humanely destroyed. 
(Code 1981, § 4.21; Ord. No. 02-03; Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 8-86. - Keeping of fowl; sanitary requirements; declaration of nuisance. 
(a)  Sanitary requirements. Each place in the City used for feeding, harboring or keeping any poultry or fowl shall be maintained in a sanitary manner at all times and kept free of offensive odors, flies, rodents and other pests. 
(b)  Declaration of nuisance; complaint; violation. It shall be unlawful to keep any poultry or fowl in the City which by loud, frequent or habitual crowing or any other noise annoyance from such animal shall disturb the peace and quiet of any person of ordinary sensitivities. Any such person who believes that there has been a violation of this section shall have the right to file a complaint against the owner or keeper of such poultry or fowl in the municipal court of the City. 
(Code 1981, § 4.22; Ord. No. 02-03) 
Sec. 8-87. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, § 4.23; Ord. No. 02-03) 
Secs. 8-88-8-117. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - POISONOUS, DANGEROUS ANIMALS 

Sec. 8-118. - Unlawful to keep, display or harbor poisonous, dangerous animals; disposition. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, display, or harbor any poisonous reptile and/or dangerous animal within the corporate limits of the City. 
(b)  Any poisonous reptile and/or dangerous animal within the corporate limits of the City shall be apprehended by the City and humanely destroyed. 
(Code 1981, § 4.30; Ord. No. 02-03; Ord. No. 10-08, § 1, 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 8-119. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Poisonous, dangerous animal means: 
(1)  Any warm-blooded, carnivorous or omnivorous, wild or exotic animal (including but not limited to non-human primates, raccoons, skunks, foxes, and wild and exotic cats; but excluding fowl, ferrets and small rodents of varieties used for laboratory purposes). 
(2)  Any animal having poisonous bites. 
(Code 1981, § 4.31) 
Sec. 8-120. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, § 4.31; Ord. No. 02-03) 
Secs. 8-121-8-138. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DANGEROUS DOGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-02, § 1, adopted Feb. 14, 2017, repealed the former Art. VI., §§ 8-139-8-144, and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to vicious animals and derived from Code 1981, §§ 4.40-4.45 and Ord. No. 02-03. 

Sec. 8-139. - Definition. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dangerous dog means a dog that: 
(1)  Makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than in an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or 
(2)  Commits an unprovoked attack or injures a human being or domestic animal in a place other than in an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or 
(3)  Is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of fighting, or any dog trained for fighting; or 
(4)  Without provocation, chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private property in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack; or 
(5)  Has behaved in such a manner that the owner thereof knows or should reasonably know that the dog is possessed of tendencies to attack or to bite human beings or other animals. 
(Ord. No. 17-02, § 1, 2-14-2017) 
Sec. 8-140. - Dangerous dog declaration. 
(a)  Generally. If the animal control authority or its designee receives sworn statements from any witnesses, the animal control authority or its designee will determine if the dog is a dangerous dog. The animal control authority or its designee shall notify the owner in writing of the determination. 
(b)  Notice. Notwithstanding any other law including a municipal ordinance, an owner, not later than the 15 th day after the date the owner is notified that the dog owned by the owner is a dangerous dog, may appeal the determination of the animal control authority or their designee to the municipal court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  Hearing. 
(1)  The owner of a dog declared dangerous and in violation of compliance with section 8-141 shall have the right to appear before the municipal judge, no later than the 15 th day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered. 
(2)  The court shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to: 
(a)  The owner of the dog or the person from whom the dog was seized; and 
(b)  The person who made the complaint. 
(3)  Any interested party, including the city attorney/prosecutor, is entitled to present evidence at the hearing. The court shall determine the costs to house and care for the impounded dog during the appeal process. 
(4)  The municipal judge may uphold the dangerous dog declaration, in which event the owner shall comply with all requirements and conditions for maintaining a dangerous dog as set forth in section 8-141, or may unconditionally release the dog to its owner. 
(Ord. No. 17-02, § 1, 2-14-2017) 
Sec. 8-141. - Requirements for keeping dangerous dogs. 
    The owner of a dangerous dog shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  Confinement. All dangerous dogs shall be securely confined indoors or in an enclosed and locked pen or structure upon the premises of the owner. The pen or structure must have minimum dimensions of five feet by ten feet and must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. If no bottom is secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than two feet. All pens or structures must be adequately lighted and kept clean and sanitary. The enclosure must also protect the dog from the elements. 
(b)  Leash and muzzle. The owner of a dangerous dog shall not allow the dog to go outside its kennel, pen, or structure unless the dog is muzzled, restrained by a chain or leash not more than four feet in length, and under the physical control of a person. The muzzle must not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but must prevent the dog from biting any human or animal. 
(c)  Signs. The owner of a dangerous dog shall display in a prominent place on the owner's premises a clearly visible warning sign indicating that there is a dangerous dog on the premises. The sign must be readable from the public highway or thoroughfare. The owner shall also display a sign with a symbol warning children of the presence of a dangerous dog. Similar signs shall be posted on the dog's kennel, pen, or enclosed structure. 
(d)  Registration and insurance requirements. The owner of a dangerous dog shall register the dangerous dog with the City Secretary and provide a current photo and vaccination record of said dog annually. Registration fees are as adopted by resolution in the City's centralized fees document. The owner of a dangerous dog must obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least $100,000.00 to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog causing bodily injury to a person and provide proof of the required liability insurance coverage or financial responsibility to the City Secretary of the City on an annual and quarterly basis for as long as the dog remains in the City limits. 
(e)  Failure to comply. The owner of a dangerous dog that does not comply with section 8-141 shall deliver the dog to the animal control authority not later than the 30 th day after the owner learns that the dog is a dangerous dog. If on application of any person the municipal court finds, after notice and hearing that the owner of a dangerous dog has failed to comply with section 8-141 the court shall order the animal control authority or their designee to seize the dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure and impoundment of the dog. The owner shall pay any costs incurred in seizing/impoundment of the dog. 
(Ord. No. 17-02, § 1, 2-14-2017) 
Sec. 8-142. - Impoundment and destruction. 
    The Police Chief, or the chief's designee, may order the impoundment and destruction of any dog where: 
(a)  The dog has attacked, bitten or injured a human being or domestic animal and the circumstances indicate that there is a probability of additional occurrences relating to such dog; or 
(b)  The dog is a dangerous dog as defined in section 8-139 or 8-140, and the owner has failed to comply with the requirements and conditions for keeping a dangerous dog as defined in section 8-141; or 
(c)  The dog poses a threat of serious harm to the public health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 17-02, § 1, 2-14-2017) 
Sec. 8-143. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to dogs used by a police department or law enforcement agency. 
(b)  No dog may be declared dangerous for injury or damage sustained by a person who was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises of the animal's owner. 
(c)  No dog may be declared dangerous for injury or damage sustained by a person who was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal. 
(Ord. No. 17-02, § 1, 2-14-2017) 
Sec. 8-144. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 17-02, § 1, 2-14-2017) 
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Enforcement of municipal ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54 et seq.; regulation of land use, structures, businesses and related activities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211 et seq.; municipal regulation of housing and other structures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 214; nuisances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 217.002. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING AND SAFETY STANDARDS 

Sec. 10-19. - International Building Code adopted. 
    The City Council hereby adopts the 2006 edition of the International Building Code. Copies of the code, and the amendments thereto, as referenced herein, are on file in the office of the City Secretary for permanent record and inspection. The code compliance officer, or an authorized representative, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of the International Building Code as adopted herein and as amended. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 2(6.64), 7-8-2008) 
State Law reference- International Building Code as the commercial building code in the state, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.216. 
Sec. 10-20. - Amendments to building code. 
    The City Council hereby adopts the Recommended Amendments to the 2006 International Building Code prepared by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, dated September 2007, which are attached to the ordinance adopting these codes as attachment A. Attachment A is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the City Secretary. The amendments shall be further modified as follows: Option B is hereby adopted as set forth in attachment A. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 3(6.65), 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 10-21. - International Residential Code adopted. 
    The City Council hereby adopts the 2006 edition of the International Residential Code. Copies of the code and the amendments thereto, as referenced herein, are on file in the office of the City Secretary for permanent record and inspection. The code compliance officer, or an authorized representative, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of the International Residential Code, as adopted herein and as amended. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 4(6.66), 7-8-2008) 
State Law reference- International Residential Code as the municipal residential code in the state, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.212. 
Sec. 10-22. - Amendments to residential code. 
    The City Council hereby adopts the Recommended Amendments to the 2006 International Residential Code prepared by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, dated September 2007, which are attached to the ordinance adopting these codes as attachment B. Attachment B is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the City Secretary. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 5(6.67), 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 10-23. - International Mechanical Code adopted; amendments. 
    The City Council hereby adopts the 2006 edition of the International Mechanical Code. The City Council further adopts the Recommended Amendments to the 2006 International Mechanical Code prepared by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, dated September 2007, which are attached to the ordinance adopting this code as attachment C. Copies of the code, the amendments thereto, as referenced herein, are on file in the office of the City Secretary for permanent record and inspection. The code compliance officer or an authorized representative is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted herein and as amended. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 6(6.68), 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 10-24. - International Plumbing Code adopted. 
    The City Council hereby adopts the 2006 edition of the International Plumbing Code. Copies of the code and the amendments thereto, as referenced in this chapter, are on file in the office of the City Secretary for permanent record and inspection. The code compliance officer or an authorized representative is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted herein and as amended. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 7(6.69), 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 10-25. - Amendments to plumbing code. 
    The City Council further adopts the Recommended Amendments to the 2006 International Plumbing Code prepared by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, dated September 2007, which are attached to the ordinance adopting this code as attachment D. Attachment D is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the City Secretary. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 8(6.70), 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 10-26. - International Fuel Gas Code adopted. 
    The City Council hereby adopts the 2006 edition of the International Fuel Gas Code. The City Council further adopts the Recommended Amendments to the 2006 International Fuel Gas Code prepared by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, dated September 2007, which are attached to the ordinance adopting this code as attachment E. Copies of the code and the amendments thereto, as referenced herein, are on file in the office of the City Secretary for permanent record and inspection. The code compliance officer, or an authorized representative, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted herein and as amended. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 9(6.71), 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 10-27. - International Energy Conservation Code adopted. 
    The City Council hereby adopts the 2006 edition of the International Energy Conservation Code. Copies of the code and the amendments thereto, as referenced in this chapter, are on file in the office of the City Secretary for permanent record and inspection. The code compliance officer, or an authorized representative, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted herein and as amended. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 10(6.72), 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 10-28. - Amendments to energy conservation code. 
    The City Council hereby adopts the Recommended Amendments to the 2006 International Energy Conservation Code prepared by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, dated September 2007, which are attached to the ordinance adopting this code as attachment F. Attachment F is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the City Secretary. The amendments are intended to comply with the National Appliance Energy Conservation Act of 1987 (42 USC 6291-6309), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 11(6.73), 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 10-29. - National Electrical Code adopted. 
    The City Council hereby adopts the 2005 edition of the National Electrical Code. Copies of the code and the amendments thereto, as referenced herein, are on file in the office of the City Secretary for permanent record and inspection. The code compliance officer, or an authorized representative, is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted herein and as amended. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 12(6.74), 7-8-2008) 
State Law reference- National Electrical Code as municipal electrical construction code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.214. 
Sec. 10-30. - Amendments to electrical code. 
    The City Council hereby adopts the Recommended Amendments to the 2005 National Electrical Code prepared by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, dated June 22, 2005, which are attached to the ordinance adopting this code as attachment G. Attachment G is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the City Secretary. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 13(6.75), 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 10-31. - International Fire Code adopted; amendments. 
    The City Council hereby adopts the 2006 edition of the International Fire Code. The City Council further adopts the Recommended Amendments to the 2006 International Fire Code prepared by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, dated September 2007, which are attached to the ordinance adopting this code as attachment H. Copies of the code, the amendments thereto, as referenced herein, are on file in the office of the City Secretary for permanent record and inspection. The City Fire Marshal or an authorized representative is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of the International Fire Code, as adopted herein and as amended. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 14(6.76), 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 10-32. - International Property Maintenance Code adopted; amendments. 
    The City Council hereby adopts the 2006 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code. The City Council further adopts the Recommended Amendments to the 2006 International Property Maintenance Code prepared by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, dated September 2007, which are attached to the ordinance adopting this code as attachment I. Copies of the code, the amendments thereto, as referenced herein, are on file in the office of the City Secretary for permanent record and inspection. The code compliance officer or an authorized representative is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted herein and as amended. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 15(6.77), 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 10-33. - Incorporated codes and amendments. 
    The following listed documents are on file in the office of the City Secretary for permanent record and inspection: 
Attachment A Recommended Amendments to the 2006 International Building Code, prepared by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, dated September 2007. Attachment B Recommended Amendments to the 2006 International Residential Code, prepared by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, dated September 2007. Attachment C Recommended Amendments to the 2006 International Mechanical Code, prepared by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, dated September 2007. Attachment D Recommended Amendments to the 2006 International Plumbing Code, prepared by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, dated September 2007. Attachment E Recommended Amendments to the 2006 International Fuel Gas Code, prepared by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, dated September 2007. Attachment F Recommended Amendments to the 2006 International Energy Conservation Code, prepared by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, dated September 2007. Attachment G Recommended Amendments to the 2005 National Electrical Code, prepared by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, dated June 22, 2005. Attachment H Recommended Amendments to the 2006 International Fire Code, prepared by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, dated September 2007. Attachment I Recommended Amendments to the 2006 International Property Maintenance Code, prepared by the North Central Texas Council of Governments, dated September 2007.  
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 16, 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 10-34. - Applicability. 
    The regulations adopted by this chapter shall apply to all structures and components thereof within the City. In accordance with state law, the regulations adopted by this chapter are extended to the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 17, 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 10-35. - Fees. 
    All permit fees and other fees adopted by the City shall remain applicable to the regulations adopted by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 18, 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 10-36. - Violations; fines; abatement. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties of section 1-12. The imposition of any fine for any violation shall not constitute an estoppel for injunction or other available relief against any such violation. In the event that any such violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this article, such nuisance may be summarily abated by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 08-06, § 20, 7-8-2008) 
Secs. 10-37-10-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES 

Sec. 10-61. - Application. 
    All commercial properties inside the City limits located in the commercially zoned areas designated in Neighborhood Business District (B-1), Secondary And Highway Business District (B-2), and Central Business District (B-3), but specifically excluding properties located in the One-Family Dwelling District (R-1), Duplex and Apartment District (R-2), and Industrial District (I), shall comply with the minimum exterior standards set forth in this chapter, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  State and federally registered historic structures are exempt from the building facade requirements in section 10-62. 
(2)  The City Planning Commission and the City Council may impose alternate masonry requirements for structures, which requirements shall be set forth in writing upon final approval by the City Council prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(3)  Temporary construction buildings, field offices and sales offices are exempt from the building facade requirements in section 10-62 if removed when their usefulness has ended or after 18 months from initial placement, whichever comes first. Prior approval from the City Planning Commission and the City Council must be made for placement of temporary construction buildings, field offices and sales offices that require to be in place more than 18 months. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 2(6.78), 8-12-2008) 
Sec. 10-62. - Building facade requirements. 
(a)  Building materials. As may be applicable to meet the City's minimum requirements for building facade requirements within each zoning district as specified in section 10-61, the following masonry materials are permitted. All building material must be applied using the recommended standards from the manufacturer. 
(1)  Brick. A kiln-fired clay or slate material of severe-weather grade. 
(2)  Stone. Includes naturally occurring granite, marble, limestone, slate, river rock, and other similar hard and durable all-weather stone that is used in exterior building construction. Cast or manufactured stone products may also be used provided that such products yield a stone-like appearance and they are highly durable and maintenance-free. 
(3)  Burnished block. Grinded to reveal the aggregate matrix within the block. 
(4)  Decorative concrete block (CMU). Textured finish such as split-face, indented, hammered, fluted, ribbed or similar architectural finish. Lightweight concrete block is not acceptable. Cinder blocks (Heydike), smooth or untextured finished concrete blocks are not permitted on any side of the building facing a public street. 
(5)  Tilt-wall panels, textured finish. Smooth or untextured finished tilt-wall panels are not permitted on any side of the building facing a public street. 
(6)  Stucco. Concrete-plastering with cement plaster. 
(7)  Glass block. Any type of glass used as an exterior building material. 
(8)  Cement-based planks or paneling. Fabricated cement panels. May be utilized as an architectural accent material not to exceed 50 percent of any exterior surface. 
(9)  Exterior insulation and finish system (EIFS). May be utilized as an architectural accent material to be installed a minimum of three feet above ground level. 
(10)  Wood. For use in commercial and general industrial districts only. Wood accent materials may be utilized as an architectural accent material on the front facade only not to exceed 25 percent of the exterior surface. The accent material shall be a minimum of 11/2 inches in thickness and shall not be plywood, particle board or laminate and must be treated. 
(11)  Factory-finished (painted) metal panel. For use in commercial and general industrial districts only. Factory-finished (painted) metal panel may be utilized as an exterior material on the front facade not to exceed 50 percent of the exterior surface and on any side(s) of the building facing a public street or access road not to exceed 75 percent of the exterior surface. 
(b)  Minimum building facade standards. The standards and criteria contained within this subsection are minimum building facade standards and shall apply to all new commercial building construction in the neighborhood business district (B-1), secondary and highway business district (B-2) and central business district (B-3): 
(1)  The exterior building wall of all new structures in the above zoning districts shall require a front façade of 50 percent masonry and 25 percent masonry on any side(s) of the building facing a public street or access road. 
(2)  Wood. For use in the above zoning districts, wood accent materials may be utilized as an architectural accent material on the front facade only, not to exceed 25 percent of the exterior surface. The accent material shall be a minimum of 11/2 inches in thickness and shall not be plywood, particle board or laminate and must be treated. 
(3)  Areas of a facade that are devoted to windows, doors, or fascia shall not be counted as wall surface when calculating the building facade requirement. 
(4)  All accessory buildings shall conform to the exterior facade of the main building. 
(5)  Additions: 
a.  The exterior building facade of all new additions to existing structures in the above zoning districts shall comply with the building facade standards requirement herein; or 
b.  The City Council may consider a variance or other form of architectural design to the additions of structures that existed as of the initial adoption date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(6)  Nonconforming uses and structures. 
a.  Nonconforming status. The use of land, use of a structure, or a structure itself shall be deemed to have nonconforming status when each of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The use or structure that does not conform to the regulations prescribed in the district in which such use or structure is located was in existence and lawfully constructed, located and operating prior to, and at the time of, the event or action that made such use or structure nonconforming. 
2.  The event or action that made such use or structure nonconforming was one of the following: annexation into the City, adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived or a previous zoning ordinance, or amendment of this article or a previous zoning ordinance. 
3.  The nonconforming use has been operating since the time that the use first became nonconforming without abandonment, as abandonment is defined in subsection (6)d of this section. 
b.  Expansion. 
1.  No nonconforming use may be expanded or increased beyond the lot or tract upon which such nonconforming use is located as of the effective date of the section from which this article is derived, except to provide off-street parking space upon approval of the City Planning Commission and City Council. 
2.  No structure occupied by a nonconforming use shall be altered so as to increase the gross floor area. 
3.  No nonconforming structure shall be altered or expanded so as to increase the degree of nonconformity. 
c.  Change of use. 
1.  Any nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use, and once such change is made, the use shall not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use. 
2.  Where a conforming use is located in a nonconforming structure, the use may be changed to another conforming use by securing a certificate of occupancy. 
d.  Abandonment. Whenever a nonconforming use is abandoned, all nonconforming rights shall cease, and the use of the premises shall henceforth be in conformance with this section. Abandonment shall involve the intent of the user or owner to discontinue a nonconforming operation and the actual act of discontinuance. Any nonconforming use that is discontinued, or that remains vacant for a period of six months, shall be considered to have been abandoned. Any nonconforming use that is moved from the premises shall be considered to have been abandoned. 
e.  Destruction. If a nonconforming structure is destroyed by fire, the elements or other cause, it may not be rebuilt except to conform to the provisions of this section. In the case of partial destruction, where the cost of repairing or replacing the structure does not exceed 60 percent of its most recent appraised property tax value, reconstruction may be permitted after a hearing and favorable action by the City Planning Commission and City Council, provided that the repaired or new structure shall not exceed the original structure in lot coverage, gross floor area or height and shall not increase the degree of any nonconformity. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 3(6.79), 8-12-2008; Ord. No. 09-03, § 1, 8-11-2009) 
Sec. 10-63. - Refuse storage container screening requirements. 
    For all new construction in the Neighborhood Business District (B-1), Secondary and Highway Business District (B-2) and Central Business District (B-3), and within three years after adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived for all existing structures in said districts, refuse storage containers shall be enclosed on three sides with six-foot walls constructed of the same materials and finishes as the building front facade. All openings shall have a minimum width of eight feet and the gate's minimum height shall be six feet. Gates may also be constructed of wood or other materials customarily used in gate construction. Wire fences are prohibited for gates. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 4(6.80), 8-12-2008) 
Sec. 10-64. - Mechanical screening requirements. 
(a)  Ground-mounted equipment. For all new construction in the Neighborhood Business District (B-1), Secondary and Highway Business District (B-2) and Central Business District (B-3), and within three years after adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived for all existing structures in said districts, all ground-mounted equipment including, but not limited to, pad-mounted transformers, telephone switch boxes, and gas meters, shall be reasonably screened from the view of the public right-of-way and the view from adjacent properties. 
(1)  All required screening shall meet clearances as required by the affected utility companies. 
(2)  Acceptable means of screening are trees or evergreen-type shrubbery, masonry walls, or earthen berms in conjunction with landscaping. 
(3)  Screening heights shall be in proportion to the equipment the screening is designed to shield from view. A maximum height of a screen shall be ten feet. If a mechanical unit is taller than the maximum permitted height of the screening, the mechanical unit shall be set back from the screen five feet plus two feet for each foot it exceeds the height of the screen. 
(4)  Screening for mechanical units shall apply to new building construction only. 
(b)  Roof-mounted equipment. For all new construction in the Neighborhood Business District (B-1), Secondary and Highway Business District (B-2) and Central Business District (B-3), and within three years after adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived for all existing structures in said districts, all roof-mounted equipment including, but not limited to, fans, vents, and cooling towers shall be screened so as not to be visible to the immediate ground level and the ground level of adjacent properties. In addition, roof-mounted equipment shall be placed and finished in a manner which minimizes its visibility from overhead views from nearby buildings and elevated thoroughfare sections. 
(1)  Screening for roof-mounted equipment will come into effect only if the footprint for the mechanical equipment exceeds 45 square feet. 
(2)  Overall screening height shall be the height of the highest element of roof-mounted equipment. 
(3)  The outside of the screening device shall be painted or otherwise finished so as to be similar in color to the color of the roof surface or to the color of the building facade or trim, whichever color is more effective in minimizing the visibility of the equipment and screen from ground level. 
(4)  Roof color shall be compatible with building color. 
(5)  To the greatest extent possible, roof-mounted equipment shall be placed in a linear configuration except for normal plumbing vents or flues. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 5(6.81), 8-12-2008) 
Sec. 10-65. - Screening walls or visual barriers. 
    In the event that a structure located on property located in a B-1, B-2 and/or B-3 district sides or backs upon an R-1 or R-2 zoned district, a solid screening wall or fence of not less than six feet nor more than eight feet in height shall be erected along the entire property line separating these districts, except where visibility triangles or easements are required. The purpose of the screening wall or fence is to provide a visual barrier between the properties. The owner of such property shall be responsible for and shall build the required wall or fence along the entire property line dividing such property from the residential district. In cases where the City Planning Commission finds this requirement to be impractical for immediate construction, it may grant a temporary or permanent waiver of the required screening wall or fence until such time as the screening wall or fence may be deemed necessary by the City Council. In cases where the City Planning Commission finds this requirement to be better met by an irrigated evergreen living screen, the same may be substituted for the screening wall. City Planning Commission decision shall remain subject to final approval by the City Council, as is provided elsewhere in this Code. The terms of this section apply to all new construction in the above zoning districts, and all existing structures shall comply with this section within three years after adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 6(6.82), 8-12-2008) 
Sec. 10-66. - General fence regulations. 
(a)  Front yard fence. The term "front yard fence" is defined as any fence which is built past the front building line of the principal structure on a lot. The front building line is a line parallel to the front lot line which passes through the supporting member of the principal structure. Front yard fences are allowed, provided they comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Front yard fences are subject to the approval of the building inspector. A building permit is required for all front yard fences. 
(2)  Front yard fences must be decorative fences constructed of conventional fencing materials such as picket, split rail, or decorative iron. Fence material shall be pre-approved by the building inspector. Materials such as chain-link, wire, barbed-wire, railroad ties or plywood are not allowed. See-through fences that do not impact the visual dominance of the home are recommended. 
(3)  Front yard fences must not be higher than 48 inches. Posts may not be higher than six inches above the fence. 
(4)  No front yard fence may obstruct or impair the "visual sight-line" required of any driveway, street, alley, private street, avenue, lane, sidewalk, public way or public passageway. The minimum "visual sight-line" requirement is 25 feet of clear space. 
(b)  Sight-proof fences (i.e., brick or wood) may not exceed eight feet in height and see-through fences (i.e., chainlink) may not exceed six feet in height in rear yards in residentially-zoned districts (R-1, R-2). Where a corner lot has two front yards, the second front yard may be fenced in the same manner as any other side yard adjacent to a street. 
(c)  No old or used materials shall be used in the construction of any fence unless the materials have been examined and approved by the building inspector. Fencing material must be in a sound and usable condition. All fences shall be maintained in a good state of repair at all times. Painted or stained fences must be kept in good appearance. No fence may be electrified. 
(d)  Exceptions: 
(1)  For public and parochial schools, private and primary schools, and day-care centers, fences and berms may be a combined maximum height of 60 inches above grade, provided that the fence material is wrought iron or chainlink. 
(2)  Wire fences may be allowed to enclose pastures, cropland and other areas used for agricultural purposes. The wall or fence shall not exceed eight feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 7(6.83), 8-12-2008) 
Sec. 10-67. - Applicability. 
    The regulations adopted by this article shall apply to all commercial structures and components thereof on properties located within the Neighborhood Business District (B-1), Secondary and Highway Business District (B-2) and Central Business District (B-3) areas in the City. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 8, 8-12-2008) 
Sec. 10-68. - Fee 
    All permit fees and other fees adopted by the City, as amended, shall remain applicable to the regulations adopted by this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 9, 8-12-2008) 
Sec. 10-69. - Violations. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties of section 1-12. The imposition of any fine for any violation shall not constitute an estoppel for injunction or other available relief against any such violation. In the event that any such violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this article, such nuisance may be summarily abated by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, § 11, 8-12-2008) 
Secs. 10-70-10-96. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE LIMITS 

Sec. 10-97. - Established fire limits. 
    The following shall be and are hereby declared to be the fire limits of the City: 
    All the territory inside of the following streets: 
    Beginning at the intersection of O'Neal and Third Streets; 
    Thence North along Third Street to the intersection of Third and High Streets; 
    Thence West along High Street to the intersection of High and Sixth Streets; 
    Thence South along Sixth Street to the intersection of Sixth Street and O'Neal Streets; 
    Thence East along O'Neal Street to the place of beginning, including all of Blocks Nos. 10, 11, 12, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22 and 23. 
(Code 1981, § 7.20; Ord. of 6-7-1949) 
Sec. 10-98. - Construction in fire limits. 
(a)  No building or structure of wooden, ironclad (whether on wood or supports), stucco, or veneer type construction, or any building which contains wood supports, shall be permitted except as indicated in section 10-99. No building shall hereafter be built, enlarged, or altered, except in conformance with this article. 
(b)  The thickness of walls shall be not less than as given below: 
(1)  Brick walls shall be not less than 12 inches thick, except that small one-story buildings with floor areas of 750 square feet or less may have walls eight inches thick. 
(2)  Reinforced concrete walls may be three-fourths of the thickness of brick walls, but in no case less than eight inches. 
(3)  Hollow building tile may be used as filler walls provided such walls be supported on reinforced concrete beams and footings and adequate reinforced concrete or brick pillars or columns spaced not more than 16 feet apart; walls are to be not less than 12 inches thick. Small one-story buildings of less than 500 square feet floor in area may have walls of eight-inch hollow building tile. 
(4)  Solid stone walls shall be four inches thicker than brick walls for like construction. 
(5)  All exterior walls, party walls, and division firewalls shall have parapets extending at least 18 inches above the roof, and said parapets shall be at least 12 inches thick, except where eight-inch walls are permitted as above, in which case parapets may be eight inches thick. 
(Code 1981, § 7.21; Ord. of 6-7-1949) 
Sec. 10-99. - Exceptions. 
    The following structures are permissible within the fire limits: 
(1)  Temporary one-story frame buildings for the use of builders. 
(2)  Wooden fences not over eight feet high without roof or cover. 
(3)  Metal buildings. 
(Code 1981, § 7.22; Ord. of 6-7-1949) 
Sec. 10-100. - Roofs. 
(a)  All buildings or structures hereafter constructed in the fire limits shall have incombustible roof coverings except awnings or canopies. 
(b)  No roofing on an existing roof shall be renewed or repaired to a greater extent than ten percent of the roof surface, except in conformity with this article, and in no instance shall more than one permit be issued for each existing building in any one year. 
(Code 1981, § 7.23; Ord. of 6-7-1949) 
Sec. 10-101. - Repairs and additions. 
(a)  Any existing building within the fire limits which may hereafter be damaged by fire, decay, or otherwise, to an amount greater than 50 percent of its present value, exclusive of the foundation, shall not be repaired or rebuilt, but shall be removed. 
(b)  Extensions, remodeling, or additions to existing buildings shall not be considered as repairs, and shall not be permitted except when conforming with section 10-98. 
(Code 1981, § 7.24; Ord. of 6-7-1949) 
Sec. 10-102. - Arbitration. 
    Whenever an application for permit to repair any existing building already located within the fire limits is made by any person, and the City Council and the applicant disagree on the extent of repairs to be made, and a permit is denied by the designated building inspector, then the City Council or building and standards commission shall appoint a competent and disinterested person, and the applicant shall appoint a competent and disinterested person, which said two persons so appointed shall select a third member, and those said three persons shall appraise the building, examine the plan of the proposed work, and the statement of materials and labor to be used in the repairing or rebuilding of said building, and make a signed written report of their findings to the City Council or building and standards commission. If such report reflects clearly that said rebuilding or repairing would be a violation of this article, then such application for permit shall be denied by the City Council or building and standards commission, and if such report reflects that the person seeking said permit has complied with said article, and the requested rebuilding or repairing is not in violation of said article, then said City Council or building and standards commission shall issue a permit for the proposed rebuilding or repairing. 
(Code 1981, § 7.25; Ord. of 6-7-1949) 
Sec. 10-103. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, § 7.26) 
Secs. 10-104-10-134. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PERMITS 

Sec. 10-135. - Permit requirements. 
    No wall, structure, building, or part thereof shall hereafter be built, remodeled, enlarged, altered, demolished or moved prior to obtaining a permit from the City. 
(Code 1981, § 6.50; Ord. No. 05-04) 
Sec. 10-136. - General requirements. 
    The owner, builder, contractor, or their representative shall be required to furnish the following information and/or materials: 
(1)  Name of the owner. 
(2)  Address of construction site. 
(3)  Type of construction (new construction, additions, alterations, relocation or demolition) and type of occupancy. 
(4)  Copy of the building plans for new construction or addition to living area. 
(5)  A detailed drawing showing all property lines, building or structure location, fences, foundation elevations, drainage requirements and proposed utility connections, and set back lines. 
(6)  Ingress and egress methods shall be indicated. 
(7)  Adequate trash receptacles with authorized waste disposal company. 
(8)  General contractors and builders shall be required to register with the City. 
(Code 1981, § 6.51; Ord. No. 05-04) 
Sec. 10-137. - Construction permits and fees. 
    All permit requests shall be reviewed by code enforcement section, or their designee, and returned within ten working days. Upon approval of a permit for new construction, a fee will be assessed as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time. 
(Code 1981, § 6.52; Ord. No. 05-04; Ord. No. 07-14, § 3, 9-11-2007) 
Sec. 10-138. - Miscellaneous fees. 
    All miscellaneous fees (if applicable) shall be assessed as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time prior to issuance of permit as per the following: 
(1)  Fence permit: New fence or replacement of existing fence. 
(2)  Moving a structure: Moving a structure across City streets. 
(3)  Sign permit: To construct or replace any fixed or stationary sign or placement of a temporary sign for a period to exceed seven days. No sign shall be permitted on public right-of-way without City approval. 
(4)  Swimming pool permit: Addition to or replacement of any above-ground or below-ground swimming pool. All pools must be enclosed by screen or fence at least four feet in height equipped with locking gate. 
(5)  Storage buildings and carport: Any structure site-built or pre-fabricated and designated as a storage or parking facility. 
(Code 1981, § 6.53; Ord. No. 05-04) 
Sec. 10-139. - Appeal. 
    Should any permit application not be approved by the code enforcement section, the owner, builder, contractor, or the representative of the owner, builder, contractor shall have the right to appeal to the City Council and its decision shall be binding. 
(Code 1981, § 6.54; Ord. No. 05-04) 
Sec. 10-140. - Right of entry. 
    The code enforcement officer, or the code enforcement officer's designee, shall have cause to inspect any building, structure or lot for the purpose of determining permit compliance. 
(Code 1981, § 6.55; Ord. No. 05-04) 
Sec. 10-141. - Penalty for failure to comply. 
    Failure to comply with this article prior to any construction of any building or structure shall be deemed in violation and shall subject the person to the penalties of section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, § 6.56; Ord. No. 05-04) 
Secs. 10-142-10-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS 

Sec. 10-166. - Intent; declaration of nuisance. 
    The City declares every substandard or demolished building or structure as herein defined to be a public nuisance and subject to repair, vacation or demolition to abate such nuisance as herein provided in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the occupants and the public. 
(Code 1981, § 6.1; Ord. No. 98-07; Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 10-167. - Designation of official. 
    When this article refers to the duties of certain officials, the official designated by the City Council shall be the code compliance officer and those whom the code compliance officer authorizes and designates to act under the code compliance officer's authority. The code compliance officer is authorized to devote such personnel under the code compliance officer's direction to the extent necessary to accomplish enforcement of the provisions of this article. For the purposes of this article, the term "code compliance officer" shall mean the code compliance officer of the City. 
(Code 1981, § 6.4; Ord. No. 98-07) 
Sec. 10-168. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  Service. 
(1)  The code compliance officer or an authorized designee shall give notice of a violation of this article. 
(2)  Such notice shall be in writing and shall be served by personal delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the record owners of the affected property. 
(3)  Such notice shall be served to all unknown owners of such affected property by posting a copy of the notice on the front door of each affected improvement situated on the property or as close to the front door as practicable. 
(4)  If the owner's address is different from the address shown for the property involved, then the notice shall be sent or given to the address of the property, addressed to the occupant of such address. 
(5)  It is not necessary that the notice to the occupant of the property list any occupant by name or that the notice be mailed by certified mail. Service of the notice may be accomplished by first class U.S. Mail or by personal delivery to any occupant of the property who is at least 18 years of age. 
(b)  Contents. The notice shall contain the following: 
(1)  The names of all persons to whom the notice is being served; 
(2)  The street address or legal description of the premises; 
(3)  A general description of the building, structure improvements or condition deemed substandard or otherwise in violation of this article; 
(4)  A description of the violation of City standards that are present at the building; 
(5)  Notice of the date, time and place of the public hearing to determine whether the building complies with the standards set out in this article; 
(6)  A statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee will be required to submit at the public hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work; and 
(7)  Whether or not the building shall be vacated by the occupants and, if so, the date by which such vacation shall be effected. 
(Code 1981, § 6.5; Ord. No. 98-07) 
Sec. 10-169. - Order of the building and standards commission. 
(a)  After the public hearing before the building and standards commission, if the building, structure or dwelling is found to be in violation of the standards set out in this article, the building and standards commission may order that the building be vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished by the owner within the time provided for in this article. The building and standards commission may also order that the occupants be relocated within a reasonable time. If the owner does not take the ordered action within the allotted time, the building and standards commission shall make a diligent effort to discover each mortgagee and lienholder having an interest in the building, structure or dwelling or in the property on which the building is located. The building and standards commission shall send to each identified mortgagee and lienholder a notice containing: 
(1)  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the property on which it is located; 
(2)  A description of the violation of the standards that are present at the building; and 
(3)  A statement that the building and standards commission will vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the building or remove the occupants of the building if the ordered action is not taken within the time allotted by the building and standards commission. 
(b)  As an alternative to the procedure prescribed in subsection (a) of this section, the building and standards commission may make a diligent effort to discover each mortgagee and lienholder before conducting the public hearing and may give them a notice of and an opportunity to comment at the hearing. In addition, the building and standards commission may file notice of the hearing in the official public records of real property in the county. The notice must contain the name and address of the owner of the affected property if that information can be determined from a reasonable search of the instruments on file in the office of the county clerk, a legal description of the affected property and a description of the hearing. The filing of the notice is binding on subsequent grantees, lienholders, or other transferees of an interest in the property who acquire such interest after the filing of the notice, and constitutes notice of the hearing on any subsequent recipient of any interest in the property who acquires such interest after the filing of the notice. The order issued by the building and standards commission may specify a reasonable time for the building to be vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished by the owner or for the occupants to be relocated by the owner and an additional reasonable time for the ordered action to be taken by any of the mortgagees or lienholders in the event the owner fails to comply with the order within the time provided for action by the owner. The building and standards commission is not required to furnish any notice to a mortgagee or lienholder other than a copy of the order in the event the owner fails to timely take the ordered action. 
(c)  Within ten days after the date that the order is issued, the building and standards commission shall: 
(1)  File a copy of the order in the office of the City Secretary; and 
(2)  Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the City a notice containing: 
a.  The street address or legal description of the property; 
b.  The date of the hearing; 
c.  A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and 
d.  Instruction stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained. 
(d)  After the hearing, the building and standards commission shall promptly mail by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of the order to the owner of the building, if known, and to any lienholder or mortgagee of the building, if known. The building and standards commission shall use its best efforts to determine the identity and address of any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the building through the records of the county clerk and through other sources available to the City. 
(e)  At the hearing authorized under this section, the building and standards commission may require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the building to: 
(1)  Secure the building from unauthorized entry; and/or 
(2)  Repair, remove, or demolish the building within the time stipulated in the building and standards commission's order. 
(f)  If the building and standards commission allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 30 days to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the building and standards commission shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed. 
(g)  The building and standards commission will not allow the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90 days to repair, remove, or demolish the building or fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee: 
(1)  Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and 
(2)  Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within 90 days because of the scope and complexity of the work. 
(h)  If the building and standards commission allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90 days to complete any part of the work required to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee must regularly submit progress reports to the building and standards commission to demonstrate that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has complied with the time schedules established for commencement and performance of the work. The order may require that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee appear before the building and standards commission to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules. 
(i)  In a public hearing to determine whether a building complies with the standards set out in this article, the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to comply with the article and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. 
(j)  If the building is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished, or the occupants are not relocated within the allotted time, the building and standards commission may vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the building or relocate the occupants at the City's expense; provided, however, that approval of such expenditure is first obtained from the City Council. 
(k)  If the building and standards commission incurs expenses under subsection (j) of this section, the building and standards commission may assess the expenses on, and the City will have a lien against, the property on which the building was located. The lien is extinguished if, at any time before the City sells the property, the owner or another person having an interest in the legal title to the property reimburses the City for such expenses, plus interest at the rate provided for in judgments by laws of the state. If the City sells the property, the owner's right to extinguish the lien terminates. The lien arises and attaches to the property at the time the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the county clerk. The notice must contain the name and address of the owner if that information can be determined with a reasonable effort, a legal description of the real property on which the building was located, the amount of expenses incurred, and the balance due. 
(l)  If the notice is given and the opportunity to relocate the tenants of the building or to repair, remove or demolish the building is afforded to each mortgagee and lienholder as authorized by subsection (a), (b) or (c) of this section the lien is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens. 
(Code 1981, § 6.6; Ord. No. 98-07; Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 10-170. - Posting of placard on uninhabitable, dangerous buildings. 
(a)  If the code compliance officer or a designated representative, shall, upon inspection of any building within the City, find the same to be uninhabitable and dangerous, the code compliance officer shall place a placard on the uninhabitable and dangerous building reading as follows: 
WARNING 
    This building has been found to be and UNINHABITABLE AND DANGEROUS STRUCTURE by the Code Compliance Officer or a designated representative. This building is to be vacated immediately. This placard is to remain on the structure until it is repaired or demolished in accordance with the notice dated 
    ____________ which had been mailed to all known persons having an interest in this building or property as shown by the County Clerk of Van Zandt County. It is a violation of City Ordinance punishable by a fine up to $1,000.00, for anyone to remove this placard until such notice has been complied with. 
    Signed 
    Code Compliance Officer or Designee 
(b)  No person shall occupy any building posted with such placard, nor shall any person deface, destroy, or remove any such placard. 
(c)  A copy of such notice shall be posted on the front door as near to the front door as practicable on the uninhabitable and dangerous dwelling or building to which it relates. 
(Code 1981, § 6.7; Ord. No. 98-07) 
Sec. 10-171. - Placard building to be secured. 
    When the placard authorized by section 10-170 has been posted on any building in the City found to be a violation of this City, the owner or occupant thereof shall render it secure from entry by unauthorized persons. 
(Code 1981, § 6.8; Ord. No. 98-07) 
Sec. 10-172. - Emergency cases. 
    In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the life or safety of any person unless an uninhabitable and dangerous building is immediately repaired, vacated or demolished, the code compliance officer or a designated representative shall cause the immediate repair, vacation or demolition of such uninhabitable and dangerous building or dwelling. The costs of such emergency repair, vacation, demolition or other compliance shall be collected in the same manner as provided in section 10-169(k). 
(Code 1981, § 6.9; Ord. No. 98-07) 
Sec. 10-173. - Right of inspection. 
    The code compliance officer or a designated representative shall cause to be inspected any building or structure for the purpose of determining whether conditions exist which render such place uninhabitable or substandard within the terms of section 10-174. Cause for inspection may be based on any of the following: 
(1)  A complaint filed by any person; 
(2)  A report filed by the police department, fire department, or any other City department of any building or structure which is or may be uninhabitable or substandard within the terms of section 10-172; or 
(3)  General information or knowledge about the building or structure. 
(Code 1981, § 6.10; Ord. No. 98-07) 
Sec. 10-174. - Conditions constituting an uninhabitable or dangerous structure or dwelling. 
    An uninhabitable or substandard building or structure is defined as any building or structure: 
(1)  Whose walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle in excess of one-eighth inch horizontal measurement for each one foot of vertical measurement; 
(2)  Which, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33 percent or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting members, or 50 percent of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering; 
(3)  Which has been damaged by fire, explosion, wind, vandalism or elements of a nature so as to have become dangerous to life, safety or the general health and welfare of the occupants thereof or the people of the City; 
(4)  Which has inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or which has insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means of ingress or egress; 
(5)  Which has parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property; 
(6)  Which the stress in any material, member or portion thereof, due to all imposed loads, including dead loads, exceeds the stresses allowed in any applicable code for new buildings; 
(7)  Which, because of its condition, is unsafe, or unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of the people of this City; 
(8)  Which exists in violation of any material provision of the City's building code, plumbing code, fire prevention code, electrical code or the statutes of the state as revised, or that fail to comply with any material provision of this article. For the purposes of this subsection, violation of any material provision is a violation of any provision that involves a significant risk of personal injury, death or property damage; or 
(9)  Any debris or material that remains after a building has been fully or partially demolished, and the debris remains on the property for more than 30 days following demolition. 
(Code 1981, § 6.11; Ord. No. 98-07; Ord. No. 07-07, § 3, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 10-175. - Guide for repair, vacation or demolition of uninhabitable buildings. 
    The following guide shall be followed by the building and standards commission in determining whether to order the repair, vacation or demolition of any uninhabitable or dangerous building, structure or dwelling: 
(1)  Repair. If a building, structure or dwelling can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article, the building and standards commission shall order it repaired within 30 days. 
(2)  Vacation. If a building, structure or dwelling is in such condition as to make it a danger to the health, safety or general welfare of its occupants or the citizens of the City or if deemed necessary for the abatement of the nuisance, the building and standards commission shall order it vacated. 
(3)  Demolition. The building and standards commission may order a building, structure or dwelling demolished if it: 
a.  Is at least 50 percent damaged or deteriorated, on either a structural or original value basis; 
b.  Is an immediate danger to life or safety of any person and such danger is not immediately remedied or corrected to eliminate the danger; 
c.  Is in need of repair above and is not repaired within the reasonable time established by the building and standards commission; or 
d.  Is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, safety, or general welfare, has been ordered vacated by the building and standards commission, and has not been cured of the defects within a reasonable time. 
(Code 1981, § 6.12; Ord. No. 98-07) 
Sec. 10-176. - Procedures for conduct of hearing. 
(a)  A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape recording, or by other means of permanent recording determined to be appropriate by the building and standards commission. 
(b)  A copy of the tape of the proceedings shall be made available to all parties upon request and upon payment of the fee prescribed therefor. 
(c)  The building and standards commission may grant continuances for good cause shown. 
(d)  In any proceedings under this article, the chairperson of the building and standards commission or any building and standards commission member has the power to administer oaths and affirmations and to certify to official acts. 
(e)  Hearings need to be conducted according the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. However, oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. 
(f)  Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. 
(g)  Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
(h)  Each party shall have these rights, among others: 
(1)  To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; 
(2)  To introduce documentary and physical evidence; 
(3)  To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; 
(4)  To impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the witness to testify; 
(5)  To rebut evidence; and 
(6)  To represent oneself or to choose to be represented by anyone who is lawfully permitted to do so. 
(i)  The building and standards commission may inspect any building or premises involved in the appeal during the course of the hearing, provided that: 
(1)  Notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the inspection is made; 
(2)  The parties are given an opportunity to be present during the inspection; and 
(3)  The building and standards commission shall state for the record upon completion of the inspection the material facts observed and the conclusions drawn therefrom. 
Each party then shall have a right to rebut or explain the matters so stated by the building and standards commission. 
(j)  The decision shall be in writing and shall contain findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented, and the requirements to be complied with. A copy of the decision shall be delivered to the appellant personally or sent to the appellant by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. 
(k)  The effective date of the order shall be as stated therein. 
(Code 1981, § 6.13; Ord. No. 98-07) 
Sec. 10-177. - Enforcement of the order of the code compliance officer or the building and standards commission. 
(a)  After any order of the building and standards commission made pursuant to this article shall become effective, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order. Any such person who fails to comply with any such order or who commits those acts set forth in subsections (c) through (e) of this section is subject to the penalties of section 1-12. 
(b)  If, after any order of the building and standards commission made pursuant to this Code had become effective, the person to whom any such order directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the code compliance officer may cause such person to be prosecuted under subsection (a) of this section, and/or the building and standards commission may institute any appropriate action to abate such building as a public nuisance. 
(c)  No person shall occupy any building which has been posted as specified in this article. No person shall remove or deface any such notice so posted until the repairs, demolition or removal ordered by the building and standards commission have been completed pursuant to the provisions of all applicable building codes and ordinances. 
(d)  No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the City, or with any person who owns or holds any real estate or interest in any building which has been ordered repaired, vacated or demolished under the provisions of this article, whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the building and standards commission, person having an interest or estate in such building or structure, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, or demolishing any such building pursuant to the provisions of this article, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this article. 
(e)  Any person who is aggrieved by the actions taken by the building and standards commission may appeal such action to the City Council. Any person who is aggrieved by the actions taken under the provisions of this article after such person has exhausted the administrative remedy as provided herein, may file suit in the district court of the county, in the nature of an appeal from the action of the City Council, within 15 days, in which appeal to the district court the substantial evidence rule shall prevail, except as to the question of whether or not the premises is a nuisance, which said question of whether or not a nuisance exists shall be tried by the district court de novo. 
(Code 1981, § 6.14; Ord. No. 98-07) 
Sec. 10-178. - Posting of warnings on unsafe buildings. 
(a)  In the event the building and standards commission makes a determination after the public hearing that the building is deemed to be in violation of the terms of this article, the code compliance officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such building a notice to read as follows: 
DANGEROUS 
DO NOT ENTER, UNSAFE TO OCCUPY 
Code Compliance Officer of the City of Wills Point 
(b)  Such notice shall remain posted until required repairs, demolition, or removal is completed and such premises have been rendered safe. Such notice shall not be removed without written permission of the code compliance officer, and no person shall enter the building except for making inspection or required repairs or to demolish such building. 
(Code 1981, § 6.15; Ord. No. 98-07) 
Secs. 10-179-10-209. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FLOOD HAZARD PREVENTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Soil and water conservation, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code ch. 201; emergency management, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 418; City-county water control, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 411.002, 411.003; Flood Control and Insurance Act, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.311 et seq.; local rules, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.318. 

Sec. 10-210. - Adoption of map. 
    The flood hazard boundary map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, dated May 17, 1974, with panel numbers, H-01 and H-02, and any officially published revisions to this map, is hereby adopted as the official map for the enforcement of this article. Zone A on this map delineates the area within which the requirements of this article will be enforced. 
(Code 1981, § 6.20; Ord. of 1-9-1978) 
Sec. 10-211. - Statutory authority. 
    The state legislature has in V.T.C.A., Water Code §§ 16.311-16.319 delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood bases. 
(Code 1981, § 6.21; Ord. of 1-9-1978) 
Sec. 10-212. - Finding of facts. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(c)  Both of these findings create an emergency requiring protection from upcoming rainy seasons. 
(Code 1981, § 6.22; Ord. of 1-9-1980) 
Sec. 10-213. - Purpose of regulations. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure the potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 1981, § 6.23; Ord. of 1-9-1980) 
Sec. 10-214. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the administrative and interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
    Flood or flooding means a general or temporary condition or partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers or other inland water or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Habitable floor means any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor used only for storage purposes is not a "habitable floor." 
    HUD-Code manufactured home: 
(1)  Means a structure: 
a.  Constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development; 
b.  Built on a permanent chassis; 
c.  Designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the structure is connected to the required utilities; 
d.  Transportable in one or more sections; and 
e.  In the traveling mode, at least eight body feet in width or at least 40 body feet in length or, when erected on site, at least 320 square feet; 
(2)  Includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home; and 
(3)  Does not include a recreational vehicle as defined by 24 CFR 3282.8(g). 
    Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. 
    Mobile home: 
(1)  Means a structure: 
a.  Constructed before June 15, 1976; 
b.  Built on a permanent chassis; 
c.  Designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the structure is connected to the required utilities; 
d.  Transportable in one or more sections; and 
e.  In the traveling mode, at least eight body feet in width or at least 40 body feet in length or, when erected on site, at least 320 square feet; and 
(2)  Includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home. 
    Person means any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association or any other entity, including state and local governments and agencies. 
    Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a mobile home. 
    Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either: 
(1)  Before the improvement or repair is started; or 
(2)  If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 
For the purposes of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
    Variance means a grant or relief by the City from the terms of the flood hazard prevention regulations. 
(Code 1981, § 6.24; Ord. of 1-9-1978) 
Sec. 10-215. - Enforcement by City Administrator. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the City Administrator. 
(b)  Whenever any construction work is being done contrary to the provisions of this article, the City Administrator may order the work stopped by notice of writing served on the owner or contractor doing or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the City Administrator to proceed with the work. 
(Code 1981, § 6.25; Ord. of 1-9-1978) 
Sec. 10-216. - Building permit requirements. 
(a)  No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, improve, move or demolish any building or structure without first obtaining a separate permit for each building or structure from the City Administrator. 
(b)  No manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, shall be commenced until a separate permit has been obtained from the City Administrator. 
(c)  No mobile home shall be placed on improved or unimproved real estate without first obtaining a separate permit for each mobile home from the City Administrator. 
(d)  To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file a permit application on a form furnished for that purpose. The form must be completed and submitted to the City Administrator before the issuance of a permit will be considered. 
(Code 1981, § 6.26; Ord. of 1-9-1978) 
Sec. 10-217. - Application review procedures. 
(a)  To ensure that a building permit shall indicate the following regulations have been adhered to for all proposed development located within any official identified flood hazard area (zone A), the City Administrator shall review: 
(1)  All applications for construction and other developments to determine whether all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal and state law. 
(2)  All applications for construction and other developments to determine whether the mean sea level elevation has been provided for the lowest habitable floor including basement. 
(3)  All applications for new construction and substantial improvements including prefabricated buildings and mobile homes to determine whether such are: 
a.  Protected against flood damage; 
b.  Designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement; 
c.  Contain construction material and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage; 
d.  Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(4)  All applications for mobile homes to determine whether the structures are anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement in accordance with the state department of labor and standards' Texas Mobile Home Tie-Down Standards. 
(b)  The City Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source until such other data has been provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, as criteria for requiring that: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or floodproofed to or above the base flood level. 
(c)  The City Administrator shall maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 6.27; Ord. of 1-9-1978) 
Sec. 10-218. - Variance procedures. 
    The following steps shall be followed and the following standards shall be met in securing any variance: 
(1)  The appeals board as established by the City shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(2)  The appeals board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirements, decision or determination made by the City Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeals board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. 
(5)  Upon consideration of the factors noted in subsections (1) through (4) of this section and the intent of this article, the appeals board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article. 
(6)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
a.  Variances shall be issued only upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
b.  Variances shall be issued only upon: 
1.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, or create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(Code 1981, § 6.28; Ord. of 1-9-1978) 
Sec. 10-219. - Subdivision proposals. 
    All subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall include within such proposals base flood elevation data. 
(Code 1981, § 6.29; Ord. of 1-9-1978) 
Sec. 10-220. - Subdivision approval. 
(a)  An approval of a subdivision shall indicate that the following regulations have been adhered to for parts of the subdivision having areas officially identified as flood hazard areas (zone A): 
(1)  All subdivisions shall be required to: 
a.  Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
b.  Locate, elevate and construct all public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems so as to minimize flood damage. 
c.  Provide adequate drainage so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
d.  Locate, elevate streets and curbing and locate, size and shape lots in a manner which will permit each lot to provide an adequate building site for residential or nonresidential structures with the building permit requirements contained in this article. 
(2)  As a part of subdivision plat approval, water supply and sanitary sewer systems shall be designed and installed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into water systems and discharge of sewer systems into floodwaters. Plats with planned on-site waste disposal systems shall be approved only where these systems can be designed, located and constructed so as to avoid impairment of these systems or contamination from these systems during flooding. 
(b)  All mobile home parks and subdivisions located in a flood hazard area in which the base flood elevation data is available shall file an evacuation plan indicating alternate vehicular access and escape routes with the appropriate disaster preparedness authorities. 
(Code 1981, § 6.30; Ord. of 1-9-1978) 
Sec. 10-221. - Water and sanitary sewer design. 
    All new or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and/or discharge from the systems into the floodwaters. 
(Code 1981, § 6.31; Ord. of 1-9-1978) 
Sec. 10-222. - Alteration or relocation of watercourse. 
    The City Administrator shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state water development board prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and ensure that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained. 
(Code 1981, § 6.32; Ord. of 1-9-1978) 
Sec. 10-223. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties of section 1-12. In addition, any abutting owner or lessee or other person predicatively affected by the violation or the terms of this article may resort to any court of competent jurisdiction for any writ or to obtain such release in law or equity as may be deemed advisable in the premises. 
(Code 1981, § 6.33; Ord. of 1-9-1978) 
Secs. 10-224-10-254. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ADDRESS NUMBERING 

Sec. 10-255. - Exercise of police powers. 
    This entire article is and shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the state, and of the City, for public safety, comfort, convenience and protection of the City and citizens of the City, and all provisions hereof shall be construed for the accomplishment of that purpose. 
(Code 1981, § 16.60) 
Sec. 10-256. - Establishment of official City addresses. 
    The City in conjunction with Van Zandt 911 Addressing has established official addresses for the City. The City, when required, has the right to change the existing addresses for circumstances unforeseen. 
(Code 1981, § 16.61) 
Sec. 10-257. - Owner or occupant to number or permit numbering of structures. 
    Each owner, agent of the owner, or the occupant of any dwelling, business, or structure situated in the City shall place or permit to be placed thereon in a conspicuous place on such dwelling, business, or structure an official address number, so that the number may be plainly seen and observed from the street. 
(Code 1981, § 16.62) 
Sec. 10-258. - Specifications for numbers. 
    The numbers to be placed on dwellings, business, or structures, shall be a least three inches high and composed of a material to withstand actions of the elements. The numbers shall be reflective to light or of a contrasting color as to provide adequate visibility from the street. 
(Code 1981, § 16.63) 
Sec. 10-259. - Placement of numbers. 
    The owner or the occupant of any dwelling, business, or structure shall place such official number on the structure, provided the owner or occupant has been advised of an official number. The owner, or occupant of any dwelling, business, or structure shall be allowed five calendar days from the date of receipt of the notice to place such official number on the structure to readily identify the same. 
(Code 1981, § 16.64; Ord. No. 10-03, § 2, 2-9-2010) 
Sec. 10-260. - Official numbers to be kept on structures. 
    After an official number has been placed on a dwelling, business, or structure, the owner or occupant shall keep the official number in place, as per section 10-258. 
(Code 1981, § 16.65) 
Sec. 10-261. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties of section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, § 16.66) 
Chapter 12 - CIVIL RIGHTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1-12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOUSING DISCRIMINATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Texas Fair Housing Act, V.T.C.A., Property Code ch. 301. 

Sec. 12-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Age means the calendar age of an individual 18 years of age or over. 
    Creed means any set of principles, rules, opinions, and precepts formally expressed and seriously adhered to or maintained by a person. 
    Disability means a mental or physical impairment that substantially limits at least one major life activity, a record of the impairment, or being regarded as having the impairment. The term does not include current illegal use or addiction to any drug or illegal or federally controlled substance and does not apply to an individual because of an individual's sexual orientation or because that individual is a transvestite. 
    Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under sections 12-21, 12-22, or 12-23. 
    Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
    Family includes a single individual or group of individuals living together under one common roof. 
    Major life activities means functions such as, but not limited to, caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working. 
    Marital status means an individual's status as a single, married, divorced, widowed, or separated person. 
    Parenthood means a person's status as a parent or legal guardian of a child or children under the age of 18. 
    Rent includes lease, sublease, let, and otherwise grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
    Senior adult means a person 55 years of age or older. 
(Code 1981, § 16.40; Ord. No. 08-09, § 16.40, 9-9-2008) 
Sec. 12-20. - Interpretation and effect. 
    This article shall in no way be interpreted as creating a judicial right or remedy which is the same or substantially equivalent to the remedies provided under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, or the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 USC 1691). All aggrieved parties shall retain the rights granted to them by Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act. In construing this article, it is the intent of the City Council that the courts shall be guided by federal court interpretations of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act, where appropriate. 
(Code 1981, § 16.41; Ord. of 8-9-1993) 
Sec. 12-21. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
    Except as exempted by section 12-24, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age; 
(2)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age; 
(3)  Make, print, publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice statement or advertisement regarding the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, martial status, parenthood or age, or any intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination; 
(4)  Represent to any person because of race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; 
(5)  For profit or with the hope or expectation of profit, induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age; 
(6)  For profit or with the hope or expectations of profit to influence or attempt to influence, by any words, acts, or failure to act, any seller, purchaser, landlord or tenant of a dwelling so as to promote the maintenance of racially segregated housing or so as to retard, obstruct, or discourage racially integrated housing. 
(Code 1981, § 16.42; Ord. of 8-9-1993) 
Sec. 12-22. - Discrimination in the financing of housing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part of the making of commercial or residential real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against any such person in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, brokerage points, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or their financial assistance, because of: 
(1)  The race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, martial status, parenthood or age of such person or of any person associated with such person in connection with such loan or other financial assistance; or 
(2)  The race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age of the present or prospective owner of the property for which financial assistance is to be made or given. 
(Code 1981, § 16.43; Ord. of 8-9-1993) 
Sec. 12-23. - Discrimination in the provision or brokerage services. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deny access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account of race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age. 
(Code 1981, § 16.44; Ord. of 8-9-1993) 
Sec. 12-24. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
(a)  There shall be exempted from the application of section 12-21 all transactions involving: 
(1)  The rental of units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such units as the owner's residence. 
(2)  The rental of a single room in a dwelling containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than one family if the person offering such room for rental actually maintains and occupies the remainder of such dwelling as the owner's residence and not more than four such rooms are offered. 
(3)  The sale or rental of any single house by a private individual who owns such house, provided that: 
a.  The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; 
b.  The sale is made without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement or written notice in violation of this article (this shall not prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title); 
c.  The owner does not own more than three single-family houses at the time of the sale; 
d.  The owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on the owner's behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental or more than three such single-family houses at any one time; and 
e.  If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of sale or was not the most recent resident of such house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society or any non-profit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious association, or society from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, national origin, sex, mental or physical disability, marital status, parenthood or age. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a bona fide private club, not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in which a room is leased, subleased or rented only to persons of the same sex when such housing accommodation contains common lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities available for the use of all persons occupying such housing accommodation. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit the sale, rental, lease or occupancy of any dwelling designed and operated exclusively for senior adults and their spouses, unless the sale, rental, lease or occupancy is further restricted on account of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap and marital status. 
(f)  Nothing in this article shall bar a person who owns, operates or controls rental dwellings, whether located on the same property or on one or more contiguous parcels of property, from reserving any grouping of dwellings for the rental or lease to tenants with a minor child or children; provided, however, in the event that said reserved area is completely leased or rented, the person owning, operating or controlling said rental dwelling may not refuse to rent or lease any other available dwelling to the prospective tenant on the basis of the tenant's status as parent or any other of the protected classifications set forth in this article. 
(Code 1981, § 16.45; Ord. of 8-9-1993) 
Sec. 12-25. - Fair housing administrator. 
    The mayor shall appoint and the City Council shall confirm a fair housing administrator (hereinafter referred to as "administrator"), who shall have the responsibility for implementing this article. The administrator may delegate authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other City employees under the administrator's direction. 
(Code 1981, § 16.46; Ord. of 8-9-1993) 
Sec. 12-26. - Complaints. 
(a)  Only the person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or believes will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that has occurred or is occurring (hereinafter referred to as "person aggrieved") may file a complaint with the administrator. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. The administrator shall prepare complaint forms and furnish them without charge to any person, upon request. 
(b)  A copy of all complaints filed with the City shall be forwarded to the Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity Division of the Region VI office of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(c)  The administrator shall provide for free administrative counseling to those complainants who wish to file a private suit for relief in the local, state, or federal court. 
(d)  If any time the administrator shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any persons have committed or are committing a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint has been filed, the administrator may prepare and file a complaint upon the administrator's own motion and in the administrator's own name, and such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(e)  The administrator shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney General and the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of the Fair Housing Act, 42 USC 3601 et seq. (2006) and Texas Fair Housing Act, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 301.001 et seq., and shall treat such complaints hereunder in the same manner as complaints filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(f)  All complaints shall be filed on or before the first anniversary of the date following the occurrence or termination of an alleged discriminatory housing practice, whichever is later. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the administrator shall provide notice of the complaint by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the persons named therein who allegedly committed or were threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory housing practice. The accused may file an answer to the complaint within ten days of receipt of the written complaint. 
(g)  All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(Code 1981, § 16.47; Ord. of 8-9-1993) 
Sec. 12-27. - Investigation. 
(a)  Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided, the administrator shall cause to be made a prompt and full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint. 
(b)  If the administrator determines that there is not probable cause to believe that a particular alleged discriminatory housing practice has been committed, the administrator shall take no further action with respect to that alleged offense. 
(c)  During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of complaints, the administrator shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur, attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with the provisions of this article. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public by the administrator, by the complainant or by any other party to the proceedings without the written consent of all persons concerned. 
(d)  Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at conciliation by the administrator, but within 30 days of the filing of the complaint with the administrator, if the efforts of the administrator to secure voluntary compliance have been unsuccessful, and if the administrator had made a determination that a discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred, the administrator shall recommend to the City Attorney that such violations be prosecuted in municipal court. With such recommendations, the administrator shall refer the entire file to the City Attorney. The City Attorney shall, within 30 days after such referral, make a determination as to whether to proceed with prosecution of such complaint in municipal court. If the City Attorney determines to prosecute, the City Attorney shall institute a complaint and prosecute same to conclusion within 30 days after such determination or as soon thereafter as practicable. 
(Code 1981, § 16.48; Ord. of 8-9-1993) 
Sec. 12-28. - Cumulative legal effect. 
    This article is cumulative in its legal effect and is not in lieu of any and all other legal remedies which the person aggrieved may pursue. 
(Code 1981, § 16.49; Ord. of 8-9-1993) 
Sec. 12-29. - Unlawful intimidation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage or otherwise penalize any individual, group or business because such individual, group or business has complied with the provisions of this article, because such individual, group or business has exercised the rights established under this article, or enjoyed the benefits of this article, or made a charge, testified or assisted in any investigation, or in any proceeding hereunder or made any report to the administrator. 
(Code 1981, § 16.50; Ord. of 8-9-1993) 
Sec. 12-30. - Cooperation with the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. 
    The City Administrator and the City Attorney are authorized to cooperate with the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and the U.S. Attorney General pursuant to the provisions of the Fair Housing Act, 42 USC 3601 et seq. (2006) and Texas Fair Housing Act, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 301.001 et seq., and may render such services to the Secretary as they shall deem appropriate to further the policies of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 16.51; Ord. of 8-9-1993) 
Sec. 12-31. - Education and public information. 
    In order to further the objectives of this article, the administrator may conduct educational and public information programs. 
(Code 1981, § 16.52; Ord. of 8-9-1993) 
Sec. 12-32. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties of section 1-12. Each day a violation continues after passage of 75 days from date of the filing of the initial complaint with the administrator shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this article may be enjoined by order of a court of competent jurisdiction, and this remedy is in addition to any other penalty provision. 
(Code 1981, § 16.53; Ord. of 8-9-1993) 
Chapter 14 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency management, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 418; municipal programs, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.103. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL DISASTER EMERGENCY SERVICES COMMITTEE 

Sec. 14-19. - Creation of disaster committee. 
    There is hereby created the municipal disaster emergency services committee of the City which shall consist of the following: 
(1)  The mayor who shall serve as chairperson of the committee, and who shall also be known as municipal disaster coordinator. 
(2)  The assistant disaster coordinator of the City, who shall be charged with the preparation of a disaster services plan for the City, together with such other duties as the coordinator may prescribe. The assistant coordinator shall be appointed by and hold the position at the pleasure of the City Council. The assistant coordinator shall serve as vice-chairperson of the municipal disaster emergency services committee of the City. 
(3)  The directors of divisions and chiefs of services of such divisions as may be provided for by resolution by the City Council or by directive of the municipal disaster coordinator. 
(4)  Representatives from civic, business, industry, labor, veterans, professional or other groups, to be selected and appointed by the City Council. 
(Code 1981, § 9.100; Ord. of 10-9-1977) 
Sec. 14-20. - Authority of committee. 
    The authority of the municipal disaster emergency services committee shall include the recommendation for adoption by the City Council of a disaster services plan for the City, and the recommendation for adoption by the City Council of any and all mutual aid plans and agreements which are deemed essential for the implementation of such disaster services plan. The authority of said committee shall also include the making of a survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during an emergency, as provided for herein, as well as a continuing study of the need for amendments and improvements in the disaster services plan adopted by the City Council. The disaster emergency services committee shall meet upon the call of either the chairperson or vice-chairperson. 
(Code 1981, § 9.101; Ord. of 10-9-1977) 
Sec. 14-21. - Joined with county. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in said county in the formation of a disaster emergency services council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the formation of a disaster services plan and in the appointment of a disaster director for the county as well as all other powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of disaster services insofar as said program may affect the City. 
(Code 1981, § 9.102; Ord. of 10-9-1977) 
Sec. 14-22. - Office of disaster coordinator. 
(a)  The office of municipal disaster coordinator is hereby created. The municipal disaster coordinator shall have the authority to request the declaration of the existence of an emergency by the City Council or by higher authority. In the event it is deemed necessary to declare without delay the existence of an emergency, the coordinator may do so, if the City Council is not in session, but such action shall be subject to confirmation by the City Council at its next meeting. 
(b)  The authority of the municipal disaster coordinator shall include the following: 
(1)  The control and direction of the actual operation or training of the disaster services organization of the City; 
(2)  The determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the disaster services organization of the City; 
(3)  The maintenance of necessary liaison with other municipal, district, state, county, regional, federal or other disaster services organization; 
(4)  The marshaling, after declaration of an emergency as provided for in subsection (a) of this section, of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the City to aid in the carrying out of the disaster services plan; 
(5)  The issuance of all necessary proclamations as to the existence of an emergency and the immediate operational effectiveness of the disaster services plan; 
(6)  The issuance of reasonable rules, regulations or directives which are necessary for the protection of life and property in the City, such rules and regulations as and when promulgated shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall receive widespread publicity unless publicity will be of aid and comfort to the enemy; 
(7)  The supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the City is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of efforts in disaster services; 
(8)  The supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions; and 
(9)  The authorizing or agreements, after approval of the City Attorney, for the use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(Code 1981, § 9.103; Ord. of 10-9-1977) 
Sec. 14-23. - Disaster workers. 
    The operational disaster services organization of the City shall consist of the officers and employees of the City designated by the municipal disaster coordinator as well as all volunteer municipal workers. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such divisions, services and special staff as the City Council shall prescribe by resolution or the municipal disaster coordinator shall provide by directive. Any such resolution or directive shall set forth the form of organization, establish and designate divisions and services, assign functions, duties and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this article. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state defense and disaster relief council of the state and of the federal government. 
(Code 1981, § 9.104; Ord. of 10-9-1977) 
Sec. 14-24. - Controlling effect. 
    At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. This article shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule or regulation. 
(Code 1981, § 9.105; Ord. of 10-9-1977) 
Sec. 14-25. - Limitation of liability. 
    This article is an exercise by the City of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety, and neither the City, the agents and representatives of said City, or any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee or any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. The failure of any office or committee hereby created to prepare any report or plan or to perform any purely administrative task shall not be grounds for imposition of civil liability against such officer or committee member, either directly or indirectly. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the City a license or privilege, or otherwise permits the City to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack shall, together with any successors in interest, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Code 1981, § 9.106; Ord. of 10-9-1977) 
Sec. 14-26. - Restriction on expenditures. 
    No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the City in carrying out any disaster services activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the City Council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the City by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the City Council. 
(Code 1981, § 9.107; Ord. of 10-9-1977) 
Sec. 14-27. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)  Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the disaster services organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or to commit any act forbidden by any rules or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the disaster services organization of the City, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(Code 1981, § 9.108; Ord. of 10-9-1977) 
Sec. 14-28. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties of section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, § 9.109; Ord. of 10-9-1977) 
Chapter 16 - ENVIRONMENT AND HEALTH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Sanitation and environmental quality, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 341 et seq.; natural resources, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code ch. 1 et seq.; parks and wildlife, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code ch. 1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 16-1-16-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNSANITARY BUILDINGS AND LOTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Protection of public health, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 122.005; sanitation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 342; litter abatement, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 365; minimum standards of sanitation and health protection measures, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 341; general enforcement authority of municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54; regulation of businesses and occupations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 215. 

Sec. 16-19. - Unsanitary and unsightly places. 
    The City Council or its designated agent shall have the power to: 
(1)  Require the filling up, drainage, or other appropriate remedial action of any lots, grounds, or yards, or any other places in the City, which shall be unwholesome or have stagnant water therein, or from any other cause be in such condition as to be liable to produce disease; 
(2)  To regulate or require the filling up, altering or repairing of all sinks and the removal of all privies and directing the mode and material for cleaning and disinfecting the same, and for cleaning any house, building, lot, yard, or ground from filth, carrion, or any other impure or unwholesome matter of any kind; and 
(3)  To require the person owning any premises, lot or location within the City to maintain grass and weeds (as defined in section 16-20), and to keep the same free from abandoned property, debris, junk, litter or rubbish (as defined in section 16-21) as well as any other objectionable or unsightly or unsanitary matter of whatever nature. 
(Code 1981, § 9.1; Ord. No. 05-05; Ord. No. 07-13, § 9.1, 7-10-2007; Ord. No. 11-08, § 2, 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 16-20. - Maintenance standards for weeds and grass. 
    It is a violation of this article for the owner of any possessory interest in any real property located within the City to permit either grass exceeding 12 inches in height or weeds exceeding 12 inches in height to exist on 60 percent or more of that portion of any residential lot that is not covered by a permanent structure. 
(Code 1981, § 9.2; Ord. No. 05-05; Ord. No. 07-13, § 9.2, 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 16-21. - Maintenance standards for abandoned property, debris, junk, litter and rubbish. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned property means personal property over which the owner appears to have relinquished its claim of ownership or entitlement. Abandonment may be proved by circumstantial evidence, such as location, condition and length of time in either. 
    Debris means the remains of anything broken down or destroyed. 
    Junk means abandoned material or objects. 
    Litter means rubbish which has been scattered about. 
    Rubbish means useless waste or rejected matter. 
(b)  Unlawful activities enumerated. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person, including the owner of real property located within the City limits, or organization to permit abandoned property, debris, junk, rubbish or litter or any of the following items to remain on real property located within the City limits, when visible from the public right-of-way or a neighboring real property: 
a.  Broken, inoperable, or discarded household furnishings, appliances, machines, tools, cans, containers, boxes and cartons, lawn maintenance equipment, play equipment, toys, grills, camper parts and similar items; 
b.  Used or discarded building materials; 
c.  Items stored on rooftops or front, back or side porches of buildings; 
d.  Damaged merchandise; 
e.  Used, discarded or broken automotive parts or equipment; or 
f.  Any materials that tend by decay to become putrid or to provide harborage for rodents and other vectors. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any rubbish, junk or debris upon any vacant lot or private property within the City. 
(Code 1981, § 9.3; Ord. No. 05-05; Ord. No. 07-13, § 9.3, 7-10-2007; Ord. No. 11-08, § 2, 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 16-22. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  One time during each calendar year, the City Council or its designated agent shall personally notify, in writing, the owner of any premises or lots described in section 16-19 that a violation of this article appears to exist on his/her property (which property shall be identified in the notice). 
(b)  Such written notice may be served by: 
(1)  Personal delivery; 
(2)  By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district records of Van Zandt County; or 
(3)  If personal service cannot be obtained, then by: 
a.  Publication in a newspaper of local circulation at least once; 
b.  By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates; or 
c.  By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates. 
(c)  Unless the condition described in the notice is corrected within ten days of such notice or of the publication, the penalty provided for in section 16-25 shall be applicable. Notice by mail shall be deemed complete when deposited in a post office or official depository of the United States Postal Service, with postage affixed and postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the owner. If the condition that violates this article continues, or resumes, more than ten days after notice, each day that it continues shall be a separate violation. If a condition that constitutes a violation is remedied after the required notice letter is sent (or notice published), but later returns or resumes within the same calendar year that the notice was sent or published, violation may be enforced without the requirement of an additional notice or publication. 
(d)  If the City mails a notice to a property owner in accordance with subsection (b), and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered. 
(e)  In a notice provided under this section, the City may inform the owner by: 
(1)  Regular mail and a posting on the property; or 
(2)  By personally delivering the notice, that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the City without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within the one-year period, and the City has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the City without further notice may take any action permitted under this article to correct or remedy the condition and assess its expenses as provided by Texas Health & Safety Code, § 342.007. 
(Code 1981, § 9.4; Ord. No. 05-05; Ord. No. 07-13, § 9.4, 7-10-2007; Ord. No. 11-08, § 2, 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 16-23. - Correction or removal of conditions by city. 
(a)  The City may, after the ten days following the date of such notice of violation or of the publication, do such work as shall be reasonably necessary or cause such work to be done to bring such premises into compliance with the ordinances of the City. An administration fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time plus labor costs and the cost of publication in newspaper shall be billed to the owner of the premises. 
(b)  Should such expense remain unpaid for a period of 30 days from the date of billing and has been rendered and furnished as per section 16-22, the City shall file with the county clerk a statement of expense incurred in correcting said violation. When such statement is filed, the City shall have a privileged lien on such property, second only to a tax lien. For any such expenditures, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure had by the City. The statement of expense filed with the county clerk or certified copy thereof shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended and reasonableness of the charges. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5; Ord. No. 05-05; Ord. No. 07-13, § 9.5, 7-10-2007; Ord. No. 11-08, § 2, 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 16-24. - Dead animals. 
    The lessee or owner of a dead animal (e.g., horse, cow, swine, dog, cat, etc.) located in the City or within 500 feet of the City limits shall dispose of the carcass within 24 hours of the death of the animal by either transporting the carcass to a rendering plant or burying it. 
(Code 1981, § 9.6; Ord. No. 07-13, § 9.6, 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 16-25. - Failure to comply. 
    Any person who owns or occupies any property located within the City that is in violation of this article and who fails to comply, shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, § 9.5; Ord. No. 05-05; Ord. No. 07-13, § 9.7, 7-10-2007; Ord. No. 11-08, § 2, 12-13-2011) 
Secs. 16-26-16-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONED AND JUNKED VEHICLES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-54. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antique vehicle means a passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old. 
    Motor vehicle means: 
(1)  Any motor driven or propelled vehicle required to be registered under the laws of this state; 
(2)  A trailer or semitrailer, other than manufactured housing, that has a gross vehicle weight that exceeds 4,000 pounds; 
(3)  A house trailer; 
(4)  An all-terrain vehicle, as defined by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 502.001, designed by the manufacturer for off-highway use that is not required to be registered under the laws of this state; or 
(5)  A motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, or moped that is not required to be registered under the laws of this state, other than a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, or moped designed for and used exclusively on a golf course; and 
(6)  For purposes of this article, shall include a motorboat, outboard motor, or vessel subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code ch. 31. 
    Motor vehicle collector means a person who owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles and acquires, collects or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of an antique or special interest vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
    Motor vehicle demolisher means a person in the business of: 
(1)  Converting motor vehicles into processed scrap or scrap metal; or 
(2)  Wrecking or dismantling motor vehicles. 
    Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interests, is being preserved by a hobbyist. 
    Storage facility includes a garage, parking lot, or establishment for the servicing, repairing or parking of motor vehicles. 
    Vehicle means every mechanical device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public way but excepting devices moved by human power or moved exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1981, § 11.10; Ord. No. 01-01) 
Sec. 16-55. - Authorization to remove obstructing vehicle unaffected. 
    Nothing in this article shall affect a law authorizing the immediate removal of a vehicle left on public property that is an obstruction to traffic. 
(Code 1981, § 11.18; Ord. No. 01-01, § B) 
Secs. 16-56-16-83. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ABANDONED VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Abandoned motor vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 683. 

Sec. 16-84. - Criteria for designation as abandoned. 
(a)  A motor vehicle is abandoned if the motor vehicle: 
(1)  Is inoperable, is more that five years old, and has been left unattended on public property for more than 48 hours; or 
(2)  Regardless of its age or condition: 
a.  Has remained illegally on public property for more than 48 hours; 
b.  Has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or person in charge of the property for more than 48 hours; or 
c.  Has been left unattended on the right-of-way of a designated county, state, or federal highway for more than 48 hours; 
(3)  Has been left unattended for more than 24 hours on the right-of-way of a turnpike project constructed and maintained by the Texas Turnpike Authority, division of the state department of transportation, or a controlled access highway; or 
(4)  Is considered an abandoned motor vehicle under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 644.153(r). 
(b)  In this section, "controlled access highway" has the meaning assigned by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.302. 
(Code 1981, § 11.11(A); Ord. No. 01-01) 
Sec. 16-85. - Authority to take abandoned motor vehicle into custody. 
    The City Police Department may take into custody an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor (hereinafter, "abandoned property") found on public or private property. Such agency may use its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or contract for other personnel, equipment, and facilities to remove, preserve, store, send notice regarding, and dispose of an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor taken into custody by the agency. 
(Code 1981, § 11.11(B); Ord. No. 01-01) 
Sec. 16-86. - Notification. 
    Should the police department take into custody any abandoned property as provided in section 16-85, it shall send notice of abandonment to: 
(1)  The last known registered owner of each motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor taken into custody by the agency or for which a report is received under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.031; and 
(2)  Each lienholder recorded under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 501 for the motor vehicle or, under V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code ch. 31, for the watercraft or outboard motor. 
(Code 1981, § 11.11(C); Ord. No. 01-01) 
Sec. 16-87. - Contents of notice. 
    The notice provided for in section 16-86 must: 
(1)  Be sent by certified mail not later than the tenth day after the date the agency: 
a.  Takes the abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor into custody; or 
b.  Receives the report under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.031; 
(2)  Specify the year, make, model, and identification number of the item; 
(3)  Give the location of the facility where the item is being held; 
(4)  Inform the owner and lienholder of the right to claim the item not later than the 20th day after the date of the notice on payment of: 
a.  Towing, preservation, and storage charges; or 
b.  Garagekeeper's charges and fees under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.032 and, if the vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle impounded under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 644.153(q), the delinquent administrative penalty and costs; and 
(5)  State that failure of the owner or lienholder to claim the item during the period specified by subsection (4) of this section is: 
a.  A waiver by that person of all right, title, and interest in the item; and 
b.  Consent to the sale of the item at a public auction. 
(Code 1981, § 11.11(D); Ord. No. 01-01) 
Sec. 16-88. - Publication of notice. 
    The notice provided for in section 16-86 may be given by publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the county if: 
(1)  The identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined; 
(2)  The registration has no address for the owner; or 
(3)  The determination with reasonable certainty of the identity and address of all lienholders is impossible. 
(Code 1981, § 11.11(E); Ord. No. 01-01) 
Sec. 16-89. - Duration and content of published notice. 
    The notice of publication: 
(1)  Must be published in the same period that is required by section 16-87 for notice by certified mail and contain all of the information required by that section; and 
(2)  May contain a list of more than one abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor. 
(Code 1981, § 11.11(F); Ord. No. 01-01) 
Sec. 16-90. - Exemption from notice requirement. 
    The police department is not required to send a notice, as otherwise required by section 16-87, if the police department has received notice from a vehicle storage facility that an application has or will be submitted to the department for the disposal of the vehicle. 
Sec. 16-91. - Notification in case of theft and similar reports. 
    In addition to the notice required under section16-87, if the police department takes an abandoned motor vehicle into custody, the police department shall notify a person that files a theft report or similar report prepared by any law enforcement agency for the vehicle of that fact. The notice must be sent by regular mail on the next business day after the agency takes the vehicle into custody. The police department shall also provide the name and address of the person that filed the theft report or similar report to the vehicle storage facility or governmental vehicle storage facility that is storing the vehicle. 
Sec. 16-92. - Storage fees. 
    The police department or the agent of the police department that takes into custody an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor is entitled to reasonable storage fees: 
(1)  For not more than ten days, beginning on the day the item is taken into custody and ending on the day the required notice is mailed; and 
(2)  Beginning on the day after the day the agency mails notice and ending on the day accrued charges are paid and the vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor is removed. 
Sec. 16-93. - Auction or use of abandoned items; waiver of rights. 
(a)  If an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor is not claimed: 
(1)  The owner or lienholder: 
a.  Waives all rights and interests in the item; and 
b.  Consents to the sale of the item by public auction or the transfer of the item, if a watercraft, as provided by subsection (d) of this section; and 
(2)  The police department may sell the item at a public auction, transfer the item, if a watercraft, as provided by subsection (d) of this section, or use the item as provided by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.016. 
(b)  Proper notice of the auction shall be given. A garagekeeper who has a garagekeeper's lien shall be notified of the time and place of the auction. 
(c)  The purchaser of a motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor: 
(1)  Takes title free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership; 
(2)  Shall receive a sales receipt from the law enforcement agency; and 
(3)  Is entitled to register the motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor and receive a certificate of title. 
(d)  On consent of the state parks and wildlife department, the police department may transfer a watercraft that is not claimed to the state parks and wildlife department for use as part of an artificial reef under V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code ch. 89 or for other use by the state parks and wildlife department permitted under the Parks and Wildlife Code. On transfer of the watercraft, the state parks and wildlife department: 
(1)  Takes title free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership; and 
(2)  Is entitled to register the watercraft and receive a certificate of title. 
Sec. 16-94. - Auction proceeds. 
(a)  The police department is entitled to reimbursement from the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor for: 
(1)  The cost of the auction; 
(2)  Towing, preservation, and storage fees resulting from the taking into custody; and 
(3)  The cost of notice or publication as required by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.012. 
(b)  After deducting the reimbursement allowed under subsection (a) of this section, the proceeds of the sale shall be held for 90 days for the owner or lienholder of the vehicle. 
(c)  After the period provided by subsection (b) of this section, proceeds unclaimed by the owner or lienholder shall be deposited in an account that may be used for the payment of the auction, towing, preservation, storage, and notice and publication fees resulting from taking other vehicles, watercraft, or outboard motors into custody, if the proceeds from the sale of the other items are insufficient to meet those fees. 
(d)  The City may transfer funds in excess of $1,000.00 from the account to the City's general revenue account to be used by the police department. 
(e)  If the vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle impounded under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 644.153(q), the state department of public safety is entitled from the proceeds of the sale to an amount equal to the amount of the delinquent administrative penalty and costs. 
Sec. 16-95. - Use of certain abandoned motor vehicles. 
(a)  The police department that takes an abandoned motor vehicle into custody that is not claimed may: 
(1)  Use the vehicle for agency purposes; or 
(2)  Transfer the vehicle to any municipal or county agency or school district for the use of that agency or district. 
(b)  The police department shall auction the vehicle as provided by this article if the law enforcement agency or the City or county agency or school district to which the vehicle was transferred under subsection (a) of this section discontinues use of the vehicle. 
(c)  This section does not apply to an abandoned vehicle on which there is a garagekeeper's lien. 
(d)  The police department must comply with the notice requirements of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.012 before the department may transfer a vehicle under subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
Sec. 16-96. - Authorization to remove obstructing vehicle unaffected. 
    Nothing in this division shall affect a law authorizing the immediate removal of a vehicle left on public property that is an obstruction to traffic. 
(Code 1981, § 11.11(H); Ord. No. 01-01) 
Secs. 16-97-16-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - JUNKED VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Junked vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.071 et seq. 

Sec. 16-121. - Defined. 
    In this division, "junked vehicle" means a vehicle that is self-propelled and: 
(1)  Displays an expired license plate or invalid motor vehicle inspection certificate or does not display a license plate or motor vehicle inspection certificate; and 
(2)  Is: 
a.  Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
b.  Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
1.  Seventy-two consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
2.  Thirty consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
(Code 1980, § 1.12; Ord. No. 01-01; Ord. No. 11-05, § 2, 10-11-2011) 
Sec. 16-122. - Public nuisance. 
(a)  A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is visible from a public place or public right-of-way is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public, tends to reduce the value of private property, invites vandalism, creates a fire hazard, is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of municipalities, and is a public nuisance. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance. 
(c)  An offense under this section is subject to the penalties of section 1-12. 
(d)  Upon conviction of an offense under this section, the municipal court shall order abatement and removal of the nuisance. Removal shall be accomplished not later than the day following the date of such order. Beginning with the day following the date of such order, each day such nuisance continues unabated shall constitute a separate offense punishable at the new location. 
(Code 1981, § 11.13; Ord. No. 01-01) 
Sec. 16-123. - Authority to abate nuisance; procedures. 
    If an abatement of the nuisance and removal of the vehicle is sought to be accomplished, the following procedures, and those set forth in sections 16-124 and 16-125, shall be followed. 
(1)  Proper notice and public hearing is required before removal of the public nuisance. 
(2)  Once the notice is sent, the relocation of a junked vehicle to another location within the City limits shall have no effect upon the proceeding so commenced if the junked vehicle is deemed by the Chief of Police or the chief's designee to continue to constitute a public nuisance at the new location. 
(3)  After removal, a vehicle may not be reconstructed or made operable. 
(4)  No later than the fifth day after removal, a notice identifying the vehicle or part of the vehicle must be given to the state department of public safety. 
(5)  The municipal court of this City is designated as the hearing body to conduct under the procedures adopted under this article. Such court is directed to establish appropriate administrative procedures and may issue necessary orders to enforce the procedure so established, as well as those set forth in this article. 
(6)  All procedures for abatement and removal of a public nuisance must be administered by regularly salaried, full-time employees of this City; provided, however, that any authorized person may remove the nuisance. 
(7)  The Chief of Police, the chief's designee, and any other person authorized to administer these procedures may enter private property to examine a public nuisance, to obtain information to identify the nuisance, and to remove or direct the removal of the nuisance. 
(Code 1981, § 11.14; Ord. No. 01-01) 
Sec. 16-124. - Abatement and removal-Notice. 
(a)  If the Chief of Police or person designated by the chief determines that a nuisance as defined in section 16-122 exists, whether on public property, on a public right-of-way, or on private property, the chief (or such other person designated by the chief) shall issue a notice in writing stating the nature of the nuisance and that: 
(1)  The nuisance must be abated and removed not later than the tenth day after the date on which the notice was personally delivered or mailed; and 
(2)  Any request for a hearing must be made before that ten-day period expires. 
(b)  The City must provide not less than ten days' notice of the nature of the nuisance. The notice must be personally delivered, sent by certified mail with a five-day return requested, or delivered by the United States Postal Service with signature confirmation service to: 
(1)  The last known registered owner of the nuisance; 
(2)  Each lienholder of record of the nuisance; and 
(3)  The owner or occupant of the property on which the nuisance is located; or, if the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way. 
(c)  If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, the notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, personally delivered. 
(d)  If a notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the return. 
(e)  If no hearing has been requested within the time stipulated, citation for violation of this article shall be duly issued to appropriate persons, and enforcement hereof shall be accomplished by the same means as utilized in traffic offenses. 
(Code 1981, § 11.15; Ord. No. 01-01) 
Sec. 16-125. - Same-Hearing. 
(a)  If a hearing is requested by a person for whom notice is required, the hearing shall be held not earlier than the 11th day after the date of service of notice. 
(b)  At any such hearing, the junked vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable. 
(c)  At any such hearing, if the junked vehicle is found to be a public nuisance, the municipal court shall enter its order for abatement and removal as provided in section 16-122(d). Unless the nuisance has been abated and removed with the time stipulated in section 16-122(d), citation shall be duly issued to appropriate persons and enforcement hereof shall be accomplished by the same means as utilized in traffic offenses. 
(d)  If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, a resolution or order requiring removal of the nuisance must include the vehicle's: 
(1)  Description; 
(2)  Vehicle identification number; and 
(3)  License plate number. 
(Code 1981, § 11.16; Ord. No. 01-01) 
Sec. 16-126. - Disposal. 
(a)  After notice and, if requested, hearing, and upon entry of an order for abatement and removal, a junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, must be removed by the appropriate person. It may be removed by the City to a scrap yard, a motor vehicle demolisher, or other suitable site. 
(b)  The City may operate a disposal site if the City Council determines that commercial disposition of junked vehicles is not available or is inadequate. The City may: 
(1)  Finally dispose of a junked vehicle or vehicle part; or 
(2)  Transfer it to another disposal site if the disposal is scrap or salvage only. 
(Code 1981, § 11.17; Ord. No. 01-01) 
Sec. 16-127. - Exceptions. 
    Section 16-121 shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part: 
(1)  That is completely enclosed in a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(2)  That is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage, if any, are: 
a.  Maintained in an orderly manner; 
b.  Not a health hazard; and 
c.  Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery. 
(Code 1981, § 11.18; Ord. No. 01-01) 
Sec. 16-128. - Governmental purpose. 
    All of the provisions provided in this article are hereby declared to be governmental and for the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of this community and of the general public. Any member of the City Council or any duly appointed official or employee of this City charged with the enforcement of this article, acting for the City, in the discharge of duties, shall not thereby be rendered personally liable for, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damages accruing or which may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of such duties. 
(Code 1981, § 11.19; Ord. No. 01-01) 
Secs. 16-129-16-154. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AUTO WRECKING AND SALVAGE OPERATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Automobile wrecking and salvage yards, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 396. 

Sec. 16-155. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Automobile graveyard means any location (whether operated as a business or otherwise) that is maintained, used, or operated for storing, keeping, buying, or selling junked, wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or dismantled motor vehicles (as the term "motor vehicle" is hereinafter defined) and motor vehicle parts. 
    Automotive wrecking and salvage yard means an outdoor place where a person stores three or more vehicles for the purpose of dismantling or wrecking the vehicles to remove parts for sale or for use in automotive repair or rebuilding. 
    Junk shall mean copper, brass, iron, steel, rope, rags, batteries, tires, or other material that has been discarded or sold at a nominal price by a previous owner of the material. The term does not include a wrecked vehicle. 
    Junked vehicle shall mean a vehicle that is self-propelled and: 
(1)  Does not have lawfully attached to it: 
a.  An unexpired license plate; and 
b.  A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; and 
(2)  Is: 
a.  Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
b.  Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
1.  72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
2.  30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
    Junkyard means a place where a business that owns junk, and is operated to store, buy, or sell junk, keeps all or part of the junk outdoors until the business disposes of the junk. 
    Motor vehicle means: 
(1)  Any motor driven or propelled vehicle required to be registered under the laws of this state; 
(2)  A trailer or semitrailer, other than manufactured housing, that has a gross vehicle weight that exceeds 4,000 pounds; 
(3)  A house trailer; 
(4)  An all-terrain vehicle, as defined by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 502.001, designed by the manufacturer for off-highway use that is not required to be registered under the laws of this state; or 
(5)  A motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, or moped that is not required to be registered under the laws of this state, other than a motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, or moped designed for and used exclusively on a golf course; and 
(6)  Includes a motorboat, outboard motor, or vessel subject to registration under V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code ch. 31: 
    Outdoor storage location means an outdoor location upon which or within which containers, discarded or unusable equipment, trash, rubbish, or other equipment is stored, kept or maintained in such manner as to be visible to the public. 
    Solid , as used in reference to a fence, wall, door or gate, means constructed and maintained so that the outer surface is continuous and without interstices, gaps, spaces, or holes; provided, however, that for the purposes of this article, a properly constructed and maintained chain link fence with strips or slats completely eliminating the ability to see through it is a solid fence. 
    Wrecked vehicle means a discarded, junked, damaged, or worn-out automotive vehicle that is not in a condition to be lawfully operated on a public road. 
    Yard means an automobile graveyard, an automobile wrecking and salvage yard and a junk yard, as the case may be. 
(Code 1981, § 11.21; Ord. of 6-8-1992) 
Sec. 16-156. - Purpose. 
    The City Council declares that to promote the health, safety, welfare, and convenience of its citizens as well as to promote tourism and business development within the City and to protect the public and private investment in physical improvements in this City, it is necessary to regulate the establishment, operation and maintenance of junkyards, automobile graveyards, and automobile wrecking and salvage yards. The City Council considers that the regulation of such operations, whether conducted for business purposes or otherwise, is a means of protecting and providing for the general welfare and promoting the safety of citizens of this City. The City Council further declares that, unless regulated, such operations are detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tend to reduce the value of private and public property, invite vandalism, create fire hazards, constitute public and private nuisance creating hazards to the health and safety of citizens of this City and are detrimental to the economic welfare of the City and its citizens by producing urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of this City. 
(Code 1981, § 11.22; Ord. of 6-8-1992) 
Sec. 16-157. - License. 
    To protect the public health, safety, and welfare, any person who owns or intends to own and/or operate, whether for business purposes or otherwise, and automobile graveyard, and automobile wrecking and salvage yard or junkyard or an outdoor resale business or outdoor storage location within this City shall obtain from the City Secretary a non-assignable license authorizing such operation and shall renew the same annually in accordance with the terms and provisions of this section as set forth below: 
(1)  A fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time is imposed for the issuance or renewal of a license. 
(2)  The validity of a license at any time is expressly conditioned upon the operation and maintenance of the yard or location in strict accordance with all of the terms and provisions of this article. Any such license may be suspended or revoked by the City for noncompliance with any requirement of this article. 
(3)  License renewals hereunder shall be effected annually not later than the first day of each fiscal year of this City. 
(4)  Fees received under this licensing program shall be deposited in the general fund of this City. 
(5)  No person who, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, owns, operates or maintains an automotive graveyard, automotive wrecking and salvage yard or junkyard or an outdoor resale business or outdoor storage location within this City shall be required to obtain an original license covering such operation until the expiration of 90 days from such effective date. 
(Code 1981, § 11.23; Ord. of 6-8-1992) 
Sec. 16-158. - Screening requirements. 
(a)  Except as provided below in connection with the use of natural objects as a screen, any automobile graveyard, automobile wrecking and salvage yard or junkyard or outdoor storage location shall be completely surrounded and enclosed by a solid fence or wall. All sides of the yard shall be bounded by a solid fence or wall at least six feet in height. A fence or wall required by this article shall be constructed and maintained in compliance with the requirements set forth below: 
(1)  All fences shall be constructed of wood, masonry, corrugated sheet metal, chain link, or any combination, of those wall constructed of only one, as opposed to a combination, of those materials. 
(2)  Chainlink fences shall be constructed of galvanized chainlink fencing with wood or metal slats or strips run through all links of the chainlink fence. 
(3)  All fences or walls shall extend downward to within three inches of the ground and shall test plumb and square at all times. 
(4)  All fences or walls shall be constructed in compliance with all applicable provisions of any building code of this City as the same shall be effect at any time; provided, however, that should any provision of any such building code conflict, the more stringent requirement shall prevail. 
(b)  Any part of a fence or wall required by this article may consist in whole or in part of a solid wall and door, or walls and doors of any completely enclosed building on the premises, if that wall or door meets all construction requirements set forth in this article. 
(c)  In lieu of the solid fence requirement as set forth above, any location required by the terms and provisions of this article to be screened may be screened by natural objects such as plantings, hedges or trees; provided that any such natural object screen so used shall be at least as effective in completely screening any such location from public view as a fence meeting the requirements set forth above would have been had such a fence been constructed or any such location. 
(d)  Openings in the prescribed enclosure that are necessary to permit reasonable access to such yard shall be equipped with a solid gate or gates, constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements for a fence or wall as set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 11.24; Ord. of 6-8-1992) 
Sec. 16-159. - Operating requirements of automobile graveyards, automobile wrecking and salvage yards, and junkyards. 
    The following regulations shall apply to all automobile graveyards, automobile wrecking and salvage yards, and all junkyards located with the City limits: 
(1)  Any license required and issued pursuant to this article shall be plainly displayed on this premises cover by the license. 
(2)  Any such yard shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and one which does not constitute a hazard to public health. 
(3)  No part of a yard not covered by any required license and/or which is not enclosed as set forth in section 16-158 shall be used as an automobile graveyard, an automobile wrecking and salvage yard or junkyard, and all operations thereon must be conducted within the required enclosure. 
(4)  Any such yard must have appropriate drainage and no water shall be allowed to stand in any place in or on the yard in such manner as to afford a breeding place for mosquitoes. 
(5)  Weeds and vegetation in or on the yard, other than flowers and trees, shall be kept at a height of not more than 12 inches. 
(6)  No garbage or other waste likely to emit foul or offensive odors or attract vermin shall be kept in or on the yard. 
(7)  No refuse of any kind (except salvageable parts) shall be kept or allowed to accumulate in or on the yard and any such salvageable parts shall be neatly stacked or segregated. 
(8)  No junk, parts or salvage shall be stored, allowed to rest upon or protrude, for any period of time whatever, over any public street, walkway or curb, and no refuse or trash shall be allowed to become scattered or blown away from or off the yard. 
(9)  Automobiles or other property shall not be stacked higher than one foot below the top of the required screening fence and, in order to provide firefighting accessibility, shall be kept and maintained at all times in rows not exceeding two automobiles in width, which rows shall be a minimum of ten feet apart. 
(10)  Neither motor vehicles nor junked vehicles, parts or other such property kept on or in the yard shall be allowed to deteriorate to the extent that such property becomes a health hazard or a fire hazard and, upon direction of appropriate health or fire inspectors, such property will be removed by the owner of the yard at the sole expense of such owner. 
(11)  All gasoline from any fuel tank, antifreeze fluid, motor oil or other liquids of an inoperable or junked vehicle, in or on the yard shall be completely drained and removed from such vehicle and no fluids or combustible material of any kind shall be allowed to remain in any inoperable or junked vehicle located in or on the yard. 
(12)  Inspection of a yard by designated representatives of the City will be permitted by the owner of the yard at any reasonable time. 
(13)  No such yard shall be allowed to become a nuisance, public or private, nor shall any such yard be operated or allowed to exist in such manner as to become injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the community or of any residents or businesses in the community. 
(14)  In connection with the operation or maintenance of such yard, no person shall. 
a.  Discharge or deposit upon any public or private property, including the yard, any industrial, chemical, hazardous, or other regulated waste, it being required hereby that all such materials be disposed of at a state-approved or federally approved disposal site; 
b.  Permit crankcase or radiator drainings, vehicle engine wash or other oils, greases, vehicle fuels, lubricants or like material to be discharged or deposited to any area of the City, including the yard; 
c.  Discharge into any sewage facility or creek bed any industrial or chemical waste which could have a bio-toxic effect upon such facility or upon any person or facility located downstream from such yard; 
d.  Cause any discharge of any material that constitutes a hazard to humans or wildlife; or 
e.  Allow junk, trash or other refuse to accumulate in any creek bed which would in any manner block or impede the flow of water. 
(15)  Any person who permits or commits a discharge prohibited by this section shall, in addition to any fine or penalty levied hereunder, be responsible for any cost or expense incurred by the City in the containment and/or mitigation of the prohibited discharge. 
(Code 1981, § 11.25; Ord. of 6-8-1992) 
Sec. 16-160. - Location of yard. 
    No fence required under the provisions of section 16-158 hereof for any automotive graveyard, automotive wrecking and salvage yard or junkyard may be located within 25 feet of the right-of-way of any public street or way; within 100 feet of a residence; or within 300 feet of a church or school; provided, however, that there shall be exempted from this location requirement any residence which is located adjacent to any such yard and which is owned or leased by the operator of any such yard; and further provided, that the distance requirements set forth herein shall not apply to any entity which is actively engaged in the business operation of any such yard as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Code 1981, § 11.26; Ord. of 6-8-1992) 
Sec. 16-161. - Public or private nuisance. 
    Any automobile graveyard, automobile wrecking and salvage yard or junkyard which is operated or maintained in violation or contravention of the screening requirements set forth in section 16-158 or in violation or contravention of the operating requirements set forth in section 16-159 shall be deemed to be and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance or a private nuisance, as the case may be. 
(Code 1981, § 11.27; Ord. of 6-8-1992) 
Sec. 16-162. - Enforcement. 
    Both civil and criminal remedies are provided herein for violation of any section of this article. 
(1)  Any person is entitled to appropriate injunctive relief to prevent a violation or threatened violation of this article from continuing or occurring. 
(2)  Any person who knowingly and intentionally violates this article is subject to the penalties of section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, § 11.28; Ord. of 6-8-1992) 
Sec. 16-163. - Cumulative effect. 
    This article shall be and is hereby declared to be cumulative of all other ordinances of this City and shall not operate to repeal or affect any other ordinance except insofar as the provisions thereof might be inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions of this article, in which event the more stringent provisions shall prevail. 
(Code 1981, § 11.29; Ord. of 6-8-1992) 
Sec. 16-164. - Governmental purpose. 
    All of the regulations provided in this article are hereby declared to be governmental and for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of this community and of the general public. Any member of the City Council or any official or employee of this City charged with the enforcement of this article, acting for the City in the discharge of duties, shall not thereby be rendered personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that might accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of such duties. 
(Code 1981, § 11.31; Ord. of 6-8-1992) 
Secs. 16-165-16-181. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SMOKING IN CITY FACILITIES 

Sec. 16-182. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City facility or facilities means all buildings, structures, and enclosed public areas owned or operated by or under the control of the City. 
    Smoke, smokes or smoking means carrying or holding a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind or any other lighted smoking equipment or device; the combustion of any cigar, cigarette, tobacco or similar article; or any other combustible substance in any manner or in any form; and emitting or exhaling the smoke of a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 1, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 16-183. - Smoking prohibited in City facilities; penalty. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person smokes in a City facility. 
(b)  Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties of section 1-12. A culpable mental state is not required for a violation of this article, and need not be proved. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 2, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 16-184. - Signs. 
    Signs shall be visibly placed at or near a public entrance to City facilities to notify persons entering the premises that smoking is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 3, 5-15-2007) 
Sec. 16-185. - Other applicable laws. 
    Nothing in this article excuses noncompliance with any state or federal law, provisions of this Code, any other applicable ordinance of the City, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, which prohibits smoking. 
(Ord. No. 07-04, § 4, 5-15-2007) 
Secs. 16-186-16-208. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DRILLING AND MINING[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Oil and gas, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code ch. 81 et seq.; lease of municipal oil, gas or mineral land, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 253.005; disposition of the public domain, oil and gas, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code ch. 52; municipal regulation of exploration and development of mineral interests, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 92.007; access to property and records, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 91.1012. 

Sec. 16-209. - Permit required. 
    The City Council directs and establishes a permit required for any drilling for oil and/or gas and any mining for any natural material upon any City park and/or City-owned property. 
(Code 1981, § 18.70; Ord. No. 02-04) 
Secs. 16-210-16-229. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - NOISE CONTROL 

Sec. 16-230. - Noise interfering with enjoyment of property or public peace and comfort. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause to be made or allow any unreasonably loud, disturbing noise in the City, which is offensive to the ordinary sensibilities of inhabitants of the City, which noise renders the enjoyment of life or property uncomfortable or interferes with the public peace and comfort. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 2, 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 16-231. - Specific acts deemed loud and disturbing. 
    The following acts, among others, are declared to create loud and disturbing noises and shall be deemed a violation of this article, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, streetcar or other vehicle, except as a danger signal, as required by state law. 
(2)  The playing, operating or permitting to be operated of any radio receiver set, phonograph, musical instrument, television, stereo or any other device in such a manner, or with such volume as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace, quiet, comfort, or repose of persons of ordinary sensibilities, including neighboring persons, in any dwelling, apartment, hotel or other type of residence. 
(3)  The owning, keeping, possessing or harboring of any animal or fowl which, by frequent or habitual noise making, emits or makes an unreasonably loud, disturbing noise or interferes with the use, comfort and repose of neighboring persons of ordinary sensibilities. The provisions of this article shall apply to all public and private facilities, including any animal shelter, commercial kennel, or veterinary clinic, which hold or treat animals. 
(4)  The use of any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar, bus or vehicle so out of repair or so loaded, which emits or creates loud grating, grinding or rattling noise. 
(5)  The discharge into the open air of the exhaust from any motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively and efficiently prevent loud and disturbing noises. 
(6)  The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the quiet and peace of the neighborhood. 
(7)  The use of any drum or other instrument or sound-amplifying equipment for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise, to any performance, show, sale or display of merchandise as to attract customers to any place of business. 
(8)  The use of or permitting the use of mechanical loudspeakers or sound amplifiers in a fixed or moveable position mounted on any vehicle in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park, place or public property for the purpose of commercial advertising, giving instructions, directions, talks, addresses, lectures, or transmitting music to any person or persons or assemblages of persons in such a manner as to be offensive to the ordinary sensibilities of inhabitants of the City and so as to interfere with the public peace and comfort or make the enjoyment of life or property uncomfortable. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 2, 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 16-232. - Use of bell, siren, compression or exhaust whistle on vehicles. 
    No vehicle shall be equipped with and no person shall use upon a vehicle within the City any bell, siren, compression or exhaust whistle, except that vehicles operated in the performance of duty by law enforcement officers, fire department and ambulances may attach and use a bell, siren, compression or exhaust whistle. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 2, 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 16-233. - Exception for emergency, public service work, City-sponsored events or other permitted events. 
    Sound caused in the performance of emergency or public service work, including public utility operations, acting to protect the health, safety, or welfare of the community shall not be subject to the provisions of this article. Sound caused during City-sponsored events including, but not limited to, City parades, City festivals and any other City-sponsored events shall not be subject to the provisions of this article. Nothing in this paragraph, however, shall be construed to permit law enforcement, ambulance, fire or other City personnel to make excessive noise in the performance of their duties when such sound is clearly unnecessary. 
    Sound caused by the following activities or sources also shall not be subject to the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Railway locomotives and/or railway cars; 
(2)  Aircraft operations; 
(3)  Houses of worship bells or chimes; and 
(4)  Occasional outdoor gatherings, public dances, parades, shows, and/or sporting/ entertainment events provided that the events are conducted pursuant to a permit or license issued by the City relating to the staging of the events. 
    Nothing in this paragraph, however, shall be construed to permit the aforementioned activities or sources to make excessive noise in the performance of the activities, events or duties when such sound is clearly unnecessary. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 2, 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 16-234. - Enforcement responsibility. 
    The City police department shall have enforcement responsibility for the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 2, 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 16-235. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 10-02, § 2, 1-12-2010) 
Secs. 16-236-16-249. - Reserved. 
Chapter 18 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal fire protection, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 342; safety, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 751 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Arson reward. 
    The City hereby offers a reward of $250.00 for the arrest and conviction of any person found guilty of committing the crime of arson within the corporate limits of said City. This reward is a standing offer, and shall be paid out of the general fund of the City. 
(Code 1981, § 7.70; Ord. of 12-3-1963) 
State Law reference- Arson generally, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 28.02; crime stoppers, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 414. 
Secs. 18-2-18-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE MARSHAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Fire regulations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 342; warrants for fire marshals, V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure art. 18.05. 

Sec. 18-21. - Creation of office. 
    The office of fire marshal is hereby created. Such office shall be independent of other City departments, the fire marshal reporting directly to the mayor and City Council. Such office shall be filled by appointment annually by the mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council. The said fire marshal shall be properly qualified for the duties of the office, and shall be removed only for cause. The fire marshal shall receive an annual salary as set by the City Council during budget preparation. 
(Code 1981, § 7.1; Ord. of 7-11-1977) 
Sec. 18-22. - Investigation of fires. 
    The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within this City by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be begun within 24 hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The fire marshal shall keep in the fire marshal's office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this article. 
(Code 1981, § 7.2; Ord. of 7-11-1977) 
Sec. 18-23. - Taking testimony. 
    The fire marshal, when of the opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing; and if the fire marshal shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with such fire, the fire marshal shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or either of them, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by the fire marshal, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. 
(Code 1981, § 7.3; Ord. of 7-11-1977) 
Sec. 18-24. - Power to summon witnesses. 
    The fire marshal, after receiving the consent of a majority of the City Council, shall have the power to summon witnesses before the fire marshal to testify in relation to any matter which is by the provisions of this article a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document or other piece of tangible evidence deemed pertinent thereto. The said fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any person appearing as witnesses before the fire marshal. 
(Code 1981, § 7.4; Ord. of 7-11-1977) 
Sec. 18-25. - Refusal to testify. 
(a)  Any witness who, after being summoned to appear and/or produce tangible evidence in the manner provided by section 18-24, refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear to testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of said fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document or other piece of tangible evidence, touching any matter under examination, is guilty of a misdemeanor; and it shall be the duty of the fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. 
(b)  Any person violating this section is subject to the penalties in section 1-12; provided, however, that any person so convicted shall have the right of appeal. 
(Code 1981, § 7.5; Ord. of 7-11-1977) 
Sec. 18-26. - Private investigation requirement. 
    All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in the fire marshal's discretion or at the direction of the City Council, be private, and persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined. 
(Code 1981, § 7.6; Ord. of 7-11-1977) 
Sec. 18-27. - Power to enter buildings. 
    The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance of the duties imposed upon the fire marshal by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. 
(Code 1981, § 7.7; Ord. of 7-11-1977) 
Sec. 18-28. - Monthly examinations. 
(a)  The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent, and without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the City, and it shall be the fire marshal's duty, monthly or more often, to enter upon and make or cause to be entered and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. 
(b)  Whenever the fire marshal shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger persons or property therein, and whenever the fire marshal shall find an improper or dangerous arrangements of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including without limitation chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustible, inflammable and refuse materials, or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the firefighters or occupants, the fire marshal shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the aggrieved owner or occupant, the fire marshal may, within five days, appeal to the mayor, who shall investigate the cause of the complaint and unless by the mayor's authority the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by said owner or occupant. At the end of each month the fire marshal shall report to the state fire marshal all existing hazardous conditions, together with a separate report on each fire in the City during the month. 
(Code 1981, § 7.8; Ord. of 7-11-1977) 
Sec. 18-29. - Buildings liable to fire. 
    Any owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same when, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, it is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of others, or is especially liable to fire and is so occupied that fire would endanger other persons or their property therein, shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, § 7.9; Ord. of 7-11-1977) 
Sec. 18-30. - Improper arrangement of stoves and heating appliances. 
    The City prohibits the use of any and all dangerous chimneys, flues, fireplaces, stovepipes, ovens, and other apparatus (collectively, "apparatus") used in or about any building, other structure or premises and requires that the dangerous apparatus be removed or placed in a safe condition as required by the City's building codes and state law. It is a violation of this article when: 
(1)  Any owner or occupant of any building, other structure or premises who keeps or otherwise maintains any building, other structure or premises with an improper arrangement of a stove, range/oven, furnace or other heating appliance of any kind whatsoever, including but not limited to chimneys, flues, stovepipes, fireplaces, pipes and any other apparatus used in or about or otherwise connected to any building, other structure or premises so as to be dangerous due to fire hazard or the health and/or safety of persons or the property of others; 
(2)  Any owner or occupant of any building, other structure or premises who keeps or maintains any building, other structure or premises with an improper arrangement of a lighting device or system, or with the storage of explosives, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable materials, refuse and/or any other condition that is dangerous due to fire hazard or the health and/or safety of persons or the property of others; or 
(3)  Any owner or occupant of any building, other structure or premises that creates a dangerous condition that promotes, augments, or causes fires, or that creates a dangerous condition for firefighters and/or occupants of such building, structure or premises. A violation of this article shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, § 7.10; Ord. of 7-11-1977) 
Sec. 18-31. - Order before prosecution. 
    No prosecution shall be brought under sections 18-29 and 18-30 until the order provided for in section 18-28 is given, and the party notified shall fail or refuse to comply with the same. 
(Code 1981, § 7.11; Ord. of 7-11-1977) 
Secs. 18-32-18-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIREWORKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of municipality to regulate the use of fireworks, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.003; regulation of fireworks and fireworks displays, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2154. 

Sec. 18-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fireworks means a composition or device: 
(1)  Designed for entertainment to produce a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation; and 
(2)  Defined by 49 CFR 173.56(j)(1996). 
(Code 1981, § 9.10; Ord. of 8-14-1978) 
Sec. 18-52. - General requirements. 
    No person within the City limits may: 
(1)  Manufacture, sell, or give away fireworks; or 
(2)  Store, possesses, or uses fireworks, unless: 
a.  The fireworks are stored, possessed, or used for public display purposes and not for promotional or advertising purposes; and 
b.  The requirements of this article are satisfied. 
(Code 1981, § 9.11; Ord. of 8-14-1978) 
Sec. 18-53. - Permit requirement. 
    No person may store, possess, or use fireworks without first obtaining a permit for that purpose from the fire marshal. 
(Code 1981, § 9.12; Ord. of 8-14-1978) 
Sec. 18-54. - Application for permit. 
(a)  A permit applicant shall, at least ten days before using fireworks, file with the fire marshal a completed permit application showing the: 
(1)  Pyrotechnician's: 
a.  Business address; 
b.  Proof of legal competency; and 
c.  Record of previous experience with fireworks; 
(2)  Address of the proposed display; 
(3)  Amount, type, and class of fireworks to be used; 
(4)  Address of the company supplying the fireworks; 
(5)  Date of proposed display; 
(6)  Starting and ending times of the proposed display; and 
(7)  Diagram of the proposed display grounds, detailing: 
a.  Firing points; 
b.  Location of buildings and highways on or adjoining the grounds; 
c.  Spectator restraining lines; and 
d.  Overhead obstructions; 
(8)  Completed permit application to the state fire marshal, including the surety bond or insurance coverage required by state law. 
(b)  The fire marshal shall, within five days from the date of the completion of the requirements of this section, approve or refuse to approve issuance of the permit. If the fire marshal refuses to approve issuance, the fire marshal shall immediately send to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested, a written statement explaining the basis of the refusal. 
(Code 1981, § 9.13; Ord. of 8-14-1978) 
Sec. 18-55. - Refusal to issue permit. 
    The fire marshal shall refuse to approve issuance of a permit if the applicant: 
(1)  Intentionally makes a false statement as to a material matter in the permit application; 
(2)  Is a fugitive from justice; 
(3)  Is under a felony indictment; 
(4)  Has been finally convicted of a felony offense within that five-year period immediately preceding the filing of the application; 
(5)  Has been finally convicted of a misdemeanor violation of an explosives law or regulation within that two-year period immediately preceding filing of the application; 
(6)  Held a permit issued under this article, which permit was revoked within that one-year period immediately preceding the filing of the application; 
(7)  Is an unlawful user of, or is addicted to, a controlled substance or dangerous drug; or suffers from any other handicap, infirmity, defect, or condition which might reasonably diminish the applicant's competency to safely conduct the proposed activity or would create an unreasonable risk of injury to life or property in the performance of the proposed activity. 
(Code 1981, § 9.14; Ord. of 8-14-1978) 
Sec. 18-56. - Transfer and duration of permit. 
    A permit is neither transferable nor assignable. A permit expires: 
(1)  On the expiration date shown on the permit; 
(2)  When the permittee completes the permitted activity; 
(3)  When the permittee abandons the permitted activity; or 
(4)  If the permittee is an employee conducting the permitted activity within the course and scope of employment, when the employer's permit expires or is revoked, whichever occurs first. 
(Code 1981, § 9.15; Ord. of 8-14-1978) 
Sec. 18-57. - Duties of permittee. 
    A permittee shall: 
(1)  Upon request, make the permit available for inspection to a member of the fire department, police officer, or other authorized person; 
(2)  Notify the fire marshal of the loss or destruction of an unexpired permit, notice to be given immediately upon discovery of the loss or destruction; 
(3)  Secure a replacement permit for that lost or destroyed; 
(4)  Comply immediately with the fire marshal's order to dispose of fireworks which become hazardous during the performance of the permitted activity; and 
(5)  Return the permit to the fire marshal immediately upon its expiration, together with a statement detailing the cause of expiration and the disposition of unused fireworks. 
(Code 1981, § 9.16; Ord. of 8-14-1978) 
Sec. 18-58. - Public displays. 
    The operator of a public fireworks display shall: 
(1)  Restrain spectators with barriers placed at least 200 feet from firing point; 
(2)  Fire projectiles: 
a.  Vertically; or 
b.  So that they will impact in a body of water; 
(3)  Maintain an unobstructed spatial separation of: 
a.  600 feet between the ignition point and a school; 
b.  200 feet between the ignition point and a highway, railroad, or building other than a school; and 
c.  50 feet between the ignition point and an overhead obstruction; 
(4)  Discontinue the display if the wind carries fireworks debris to adjoining property; and 
(5)  Immediately after display: 
a.  Search the display site for unfired fireworks or fireworks debris; and 
b.  Safely dispose of any unfired fireworks or fireworks debris in the manner prescribed by the fire marshal. 
(Code 1981, § 9.17; Ord. of 8-14-1978) 
Sec. 18-59. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The fire marshal shall revoke a permit if the permittee: 
(1)  Intentionally makes a false statement as to a material matter in the permit application; 
(2)  Knowingly allows another to use the permit; 
(3)  Violates a term or condition of the permit; 
(4)  Fails within the applicable time period to comply with an order or notice served under this article; or 
(5)  Fails to discharge a duty imposed by section 18-57 or 18-58. 
(b)  The fire marshal shall, within five days from the date of revocation, send to the permittee by certified mail, return receipt requested, a written statement explaining the basis of the revocation. 
(Code 1981, § 9.18; Ord. of 8-14-1978) 
Sec. 18-60. - Appeal rights. 
    If the fire marshal refuses to approve the issuance of a permit or revokes a permit issued under this article, that action is final unless the applicant or permittee, within ten days after receiving a written notice of action, files, a written appeal with the City Council. Upon filing such an appeal the City Council shall convene a special meeting within 72 hours, at which time the applicant and fire marshal shall present such evidence as is appropriate in support of their respective positions. The City Council shall make a decision within 24 hours after said hearing. 
(Code 1981, § 9.19; Ord. of 8-14-1978) 
Sec. 18-61. - Seizure of fireworks. 
    The fire marshal may seize, remove, or cause to be seized or removed any fireworks possessed, or transported, in violation of this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 9.20; Ord. of 8-14-1978) 
Sec. 18-62. - Penalties. 
    In addition to the provisions of section 18-61, any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties of section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, § 9.21; Ord. of 8-14-1978) 
Secs. 18-63-18-82. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AMBULANCE SERVICES 

Sec. 18-83. - Service generally. 
    The City Fire Department/Emergency Medical Service (EMS) shall provide ambulance service within the City and to the service area designated by the state department of health, EMS division. It shall be unlawful for any person not employed by the City Fire Department/EMS to provide ambulance pick-up in the City and/or the designated service area. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution if the ambulance service is provided: 
(1)  By another ambulance service operating pursuant to a mutual aid agreement. 
(2)  By another ambulance service, as approved or requested by the fire chief, or the fire chief's designee, operating at a special event or for a specific instance. 
(Code 1981, § 7.51; Ord. No. 02-10) 
Sec. 18-84. - Fees. 
(a)  The City shall charge user fees for ambulance services provided within the service area in response to those individuals and/or organizations using the City's ambulance service. Such fees to be established by resolution of the City Council and reviewed from time to time. 
(b)  The user fees established in subsection (a) of this section shall be collected by the City and/or its designated agent. 
(Code 1981, § 7.52; Ord. No. 02-10) 
Sec. 18-85. - Transports by ambulance. 
    The individual and/or organization receiving ambulance service and any person contracting for the service shall be responsible for payment of the fees as provided. A hospital, nursing facility, or health care system requesting ambulance service, for the purpose of this article, shall be considered the party responsible for payment of the fees. In case of service received by a minor, the parent or guardian shall be responsible for payment of fees. 
(Code 1981, § 7.53; Ord. No. 02-10) 
Sec. 18-86. - Ambulance transport policy. 
    It shall be the policy of the City Fire Department/EMS ambulance to transport patients as medically necessary to hospitals of choice, based on signs and symptoms and approval of Medical Control. Otherwise transportation will be to the closest appropriate medical facility. 
(Code 1981, § 7.54; Ord. No. 02-10) 
Sec. 18-87. - City residents. 
    Each residential water meter in the City water system shall be assessed an ambulance fee on water bills as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time. The assessment fee shall constitute payment of ambulance fees not covered by insurance. 
(Code 1981, § 7.55; Ord. No. 02-10) 
Sec. 18-88. - Penalty. 
    Any person, violating this article shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, § 7.57; Ord. No. 02-10) 
Chapter 19 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
ARTICLE I. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS 

Sec. 19-1. - Statutory authorization. 
    The Legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, V.T.C.A. Water Code, § 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City of Wills Point, Texas, does ordain as follows: 
(Ord. No. 10-05, art. I, § A, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 19-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of Wills Point are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, art. I, § B, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 19-3. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, art. I, § C, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 19-4. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development, which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, art. I, § D, 7-13-2010) 
Secs. 19-5-19-14. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 19-15. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
    Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
    Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, Al-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, VI-30, VE or V. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) [means] the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one-percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year-Also called the base flood. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a nonbasement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
    Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the administrator, where the boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as zones A, M, and/or E. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS). See flood elevation study. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway. See Regulatory floodway. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include longterm storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or; 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
    Special flood hazard area. See Area of special flood hazard. 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
    Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in subsections 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, art. 2, 7-13-2010) 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 19-16. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
    The chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Wills Point. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, art. 3, § A, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 19-17. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report titled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Van Zandt County, Texas, and Incorporated Areas", dated December 17, 2010, with flood insurance rate map (FIRM), dated December 17, 2010; and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, art. 3, § B, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 19-18. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, art. 3, § C, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 19-19. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, art. 3, § D, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 19-20. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, art. 3, § E, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 19-21. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, art. 3, § F, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 19-22. - Warning and disclaimer or liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, art. 3, § G, 7-13-2010) 
Secs. 19-23-19-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 19-35. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
    The Mayor of Wills Point or his/her designee is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance-National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, art. 4, § A, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 19-36. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this chapter. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 19-17, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article V. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, art. 4, § B, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 19-37. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 19-36(2); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection 19-36(1). 
(b)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, art. 4, § C, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 19-38. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance. 
(b)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection 19-37(b) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter (section 19-3). 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(k)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
(1)  The criteria outlined in subsections (a) through (i) are met; and 
(2)  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, art. 4, § D, 7-13-2010) 
Secs. 19-39-19-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 19-55. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and, 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, art. 5, § A, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 19-56. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 19-17, subsection 19-36(8) or subsection 19-57(3), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in subsection 19-37(a)(1) is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two feet above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones Al-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: 
1.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, 
2.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision, 
3.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or 
4.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, 
be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones Al-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of this subsection be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at two feet above the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, art. 5, § B, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 19-57. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 19-2, 19-3, and 19-4. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of sections 19-18 and 19-37; and the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 19-17 or subsection 19-36(8). 
(d)  Base flood elevation data, with the establishment of a floodway, shall be generated by a detailed engineering study for all zone A areas, within 100 feet of the contour lines of zone A areas, and other streams not mapped by FEMA, as indicated on the community's FIRM. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(f)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, art. 5, § C, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 19-58. - Severability. 
    If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, art. 5, § D, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 19-59. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this court order and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this court order by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this court order or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $2,000.00 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day a violation occurs is a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, art. 5, § E, 7-13-2010) 
Chapter 20 - ITINERANT MERCHANTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate hawkers and peddlers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.031; regulation of sales and solicitation, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1801 et seq. 

Sec. 20-1. - Exercise of police power. 
    This entire chapter is and shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the state, and of the City, for the public safety, comfort, convenience and protection of the City and citizens of said City, and all the provisions hereof shall be construed for the accomplishment of that purpose. 
(Code 1981, § 10.1; Ord. No. 03-05) 
Sec. 20-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consumer means any individual who seeks or acquires real or personal property, services, money, or credit for personal or household purposes. 
    Itinerant merchant means any person, firm, company, partnership, corporation or association engaged in any activity mentioned in this section. 
    Itinerant vendor means and includes any person, as well as the agents and employees of such person, who in the City engages in the temporary or transient business of selling, exhibiting or offering for sale any goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property or exhibiting goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof and who for the purpose of carrying on such temporary or transient business either hires, rents, leases or occupies open space upon any public or private premises in the City in, upon, through or from which any consumer transaction is offered, advertised or completed. 
    Merchant means any party to a consumer transaction other than a consumer. 
    Outdoor sales activity means any sales activity in which items are displayed for sale outdoors or in a truck, pickup, station wagon, or other motor vehicle or trailer, which is parked, stopped, or standing at a fixed location for a period of 15 minutes or more, or in a tent, shed, or other temporary structure. This does not include the presentation or display of goods or advertisement of services or credit by a merchant from a location adjacent to a permanent building from which the merchant permanently conducts business. 
    Peddle means to go from house-to-house or from place-to-place in the City, soliciting, selling or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, newspapers, magazines or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines. 
    Special City event means any event in which any person has obtained from the City Council specific permission to restrict normal public access to any City street, road, highway or park. 
    Stationary vendor means a merchant who is engaged in, or who attempts to engage in, outdoor sales activity. 
(Code 1981, §§ 10.2, 10.6; Ord. No. 03-05) 
Sec. 20-3. - License requirement. 
    It shall hereafter be unlawful for any itinerant vendor to: 
(1)  Peddle to any consumer; 
(2)  Conduct any outside sale activity; or 
(3)  Act as either a stationary vendor or an itinerant vendor; 
without having first applied for and obtained an itinerant merchant's license from the City Secretary. It shall also hereafter be unlawful to conduct any such activity in the City without physically possessing such license while engaged in such activity. 
(Code 1981, § 10.3; Ord. No. 03-05) 
Sec. 20-4. - Application for license. 
(a)  Application. Every person desiring to engage in an activity defined in section 20-2 shall apply for an itinerant merchant's license from the City Secretary. The application must include the following: 
(1)  The full name, home address, permanent business address (if any), telephone number, driver's license number, and proof of identity; 
(2)  A brief description of the nature, character, and quality of the goods or services to be sold; 
(3)  The specific location, if any, in which the applicant intends to conduct business; 
(4)  If the applicant is employed by or is the agent of another, the name and business address of the principal/hiring person; 
(5)  If a motor vehicle is to be used in the business, a description of the vehicle, together with the motor vehicle registration number, license number, and a copy of the vehicle's current proof of liability insurance; 
(6)  A copy of the applicant's current state sales tax permit. 
(b)  Denial, suspension or revocation of license. 
(1)  Any license issued under this chapter may be denied, suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: 
a.  Fraud or misrepresentation in the application of this license; 
b.  Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of conducting the business of vending; 
c.  Conducting the business in any way contrary to the provisions of this chapter; 
d.  Conducting the business in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or constitute a danger to the public health, safety or welfare; or 
e.  Conviction of any felony offense or any misdemeanor offense involving moral turpitude within a period of three years prior to the date of the application for an itinerant merchant's license. 
(2)  Upon denial, suspension or revocation, the City shall deliver written notice to the applicant/license holder stating the action taken and the reasons supporting such action. The written notice shall be delivered to the applicant/license holder's place of business or mailed to the applicant/license holder's last known address. 
(c)  Appeals. Any person who is denied a license or whose license has been suspended or revoked may appeal the same by filing a written notice of appeal to the City Council. All appeals must be filed with the City Secretary within ten days after notice of denial, suspension or revocation of a license. The appeal shall be heard by the City Council within 30 days after receipt. At least five days' notice of the date of the hearing shall be given to the applicant or license holder. Based upon the hearing of the appeal and the facts relative thereto, the City Council will either sustain or reverse the decision to deny, suspend or revoke the license. The decision of the City Council shall be final. 
(d)  Duration of license. The itinerant merchant's license provided for in this chapter shall continue for the period of time prescribed by the City Secretary, but shall not continue for more than 365 days. 
(Code 1981, § 10.4; Ord. No. 03-05) 
Sec. 20-5. - Insurance requirements. 
    The application shall be accompanied by a certificate of liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, indemnifying the applicant in an amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time from all loss, injury or damage suffered, incurred or in any way caused by an activity conducted by the applicant pursuant to the itinerant merchant's license. The City shall be named as an additional insured on said insurance policy. 
(Code 1981, § 10.5; Ord. No. 03-05) 
Sec. 20-6. - License fee. 
    The license fee for each itinerant merchant shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time. 
(Code 1981, § 10.7; Ord. No. 03-05) 
Sec. 20-7. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Producers of farm or dairy products when selling or seeking to sell their own fresh produce; 
(2)  Sales or solicitations by minors, provided the profits from any sale or solicitation will be paid to an organization that is exempt from taxation under Internal Revenue Code of 1986, § 501(c)(3), as that provision may be amended from time to time; or 
(3)  Sales or solicitation by any person who has registered and fully qualified to act as a merchant with the sponsor of any special City event. 
(Code 1981, § 10.8; Ord. No. 03-05) 
Sec. 20-8. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating this chapter shall be subject to the penalties of section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, § 10.9; Ord. No. 03-05) 
Chapter 22 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 29; court procedures, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. ch. 45. 

Sec. 22-1. - Created and established. 
    There is hereby created and established for the City a court to be known as the Municipal Court of Wills Point, Texas. 
(Code 1981, § 2.20; Ord. of 2-14-1983) 
Sec. 22-2. - Jurisdiction of court. 
    This municipal court shall have exclusive original jurisdiction within the territorial limits of the City in all criminal cases arising under the ordinances of the City and are punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 in all cases arising under municipal ordinances that govern fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse or $500.00 in all other cases arising under a municipal ordinance. The municipal court shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the justice of the peace for the precinct in which the City is situated for all criminal cases arising under the laws of this state that are punishable by fine only and which the violations occur within the territorial limits of the City or violations arising under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code ch. 106, that do not include confinement as an authorized punishment. 
(Code 1981, § 2.21; Ord. of 2-14-1983) 
Sec. 22-3. - Municipal judge. 
(a)  Said municipal court shall be presided over by a judge to be known as the judge of the municipal court. 
(b)  The municipal judge is to be appointed to this position by the City Council to serve for a term of two years, to coincide with the term of the mayor. 
(c)  The municipal judge so appointed is not required to be a licensed attorney; however, such judge shall be a citizen of the United States and a citizen of the state. 
(d)  The municipal judge shall receive a salary to be set by the City Council, which salary may not be diminished during the judge's term of office. Furthermore, said municipal judge may be removed from office for incompetency, inefficiency, official misconduct, or for good cause during the term for which appointed. However, such judge shall be given an opportunity to present a defense and oppose said grounds of removal in a hearing before the mayor and City Council. 
(e)  Any vacancy in the office of the municipal judge by death, resignation, or otherwise shall be filled by the City Council, which may appoint some qualified person to act in place of the municipal judge; and the appointee shall have all of the powers and discharge all the duties of the office and shall receive the same compensation therefore as is payable to the regular municipal judge while so acting. 
(Code 1981, § 2.22; Ord. of 2-14-1983; Ord. No. 10-01, § 1, 1-12-2010) 
Sec. 22-4. - Municipal court clerk. 
(a)  The office of municipal court clerk is hereby created. The municipal court judge shall appoint and dismiss the municipal court clerk with the approval of the City Administrator. 
(b)  The municipal court clerk shall keep the records of the proceedings of the municipal court and its panels or divisions, administer oaths, process, and generally perform the duties for the municipal court that a county clerk performs for a county court. 
(c)  The municipal court clerk shall be appointed for a two-year period unless the municipality provides for a longer term pursuant to article XI, section 11, of the Texas Constitution. The municipal court clerk shall be subject to discharge at the will of the City Administrator. 
(d)  The municipal court clerk shall receive such compensation as the City Council shall fix from time to time by ordinance or resolution, and shall furnish such surety bond as may be required by the City Council by ordinance or resolution, the premium to be paid by the City. 
(Code 1981, § 2.23; Ord. No. 06-02) 
Sec. 22-5. - Municipal court technology fund. 
(a)  Establishment of municipal court technology fund. 
(1)  There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, hereinafter called the "the fund," pursuant to V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure art. 102.0172. 
(2)  The fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue account of the City. 
(b)  Establishment of amount of the fee; assessment and collection. 
(1)  The fee shall be in the amount of $4.00. 
(2)  The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
a.  A sentence is imposed on the person; 
b.  The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication; or 
c.  The court defers final disposition of person's case. 
(3)  The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after the date upon which the ordinance from which this chapter is derived was adopted. 
(4)  The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the City Administrator, who shall deposit the fee into the municipal court technology fund. 
(c)  Designated use of the fund and administration. 
(1)  The fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of technological enhancements for the municipal court of this City, including computer systems, computer networks, computer hardware, computer software, imaging systems, electronic kiosks, electronic ticket writers, or docket management systems. 
(2)  The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the City Council. 
(Code 1981, § 2.26; Ord. No. 2001-02) 
Sec. 22-6. - A municipal court building security fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established a municipal court building security fund (the "fund") pursuant to V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure art. 102.017. 
(b)  The municipal court of the City (the "municipal court") is hereby authorized and required to assess a municipal court building security fund fee ("fee") in the amount of $3.00 against all defendants convicted in a trial or misdemeanor offense by the municipal court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee. 
(c)  The municipal court clerk is hereby authorized and required to collect the fee and to pay same to the treasury of the City. All fees so collected and paid over to the treasury of the City shall be segregated in the fund. 
(d)  The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of security devices and/or for the building housing the municipal court of the City. The term "security devices and/or services" shall include any and all items described in V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure art. 102.017(d). 
(e)  The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the City Council. 
(Code 1981, § 2.27; Ord. No. 02-06) 
Sec. 22-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-07, § 2, adopted October 11, 2011, repealed § 22-7, which pertained to juvenile case manager; fee and derived from § 2.28 of the 1981 Code; Ord. No. 05-09. 
Sec. 22-8. - Collection of debts and accounts receivable. 
(a)  In accordance with V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure art. 103.0031, the City Council authorizes the City Administrator to execute a contract with a private vendor to provide services for the collection of debts and accounts receivable, such as unpaid fines, fees, court costs, forfeited bonds and restitution, as well as fees imposed when an accused has failed to appear as ordered to be paid by a court serving the City. 
(b)  In accordance with V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure art. 103.0031, an additional collection fee of 30 percent shall be imposed on all debts and accounts receivable for offenses committed after June 18, 2003, including unpaid fines, fees, court costs, forfeited bonds and restitution, as well as fees imposed when an accused has failed to appear that are more than 60 days past due and have been referred to a private vendor for collection. 
(c)  The City Council authorizes payment to the private vendor a contingent fee of 20 percent of the amount collected by the private vendor for offenses committed before June 19, 2003. 
(Ord. No. 08-13, §§ 1-3, 12-9-2008) 
Chapter 24 - OFFENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 1 et seq. 

Sec. 24-1. - Discharge of firearms. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot off or discharge any firearms, gas cartridge gun, or air guns within the City limits. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, §§ 11.1, 11.2) 
State Law reference- Authority of municipality to regulate the discharge of firearms, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 217.003, 229.001(b), 229.002, 343.003. 
Sec. 24-2. - Loitering. 
(a)  Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, as hereinafter defined, in, on, or about any place, public or private, when such loitering is accompanied by activity or is under circumstances that afford probable cause for alarm or concern for the safety and well-being of persons or for the security of property, in the surrounding area. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Loiter means and includes the following activities: the walking about aimlessly without apparent purpose; lingering; hanging around; lagging behind; the idle spending of time; delaying; sauntering and moving slowly about, where such conduct is not due to physical defects or conditions. 
    Place means and includes, but is not limited to, the following: all places commonly known as being distinctively public, such as public streets, public restrooms, sidewalks, parks, municipal airports, parking lots, alleys and buildings; all places privately owned but open to the public generally such as shopping centers, transportation terminals, retail stores, movie theaters, office parking lots, buildings and restaurants; and all places distinctively private, such as homes or private residences and apartment houses. 
    Surrounding area means that area easily and immediately accessible to the person under observation. 
(c)  Enforcement. This section shall be enforced upon request in writing from the owners and/or managers of business establishments or shopping centers or areas, and the posting of proper signs upon their premises stating that the premises are protected by City ordinance and giving the Code of Ordinances section. 
(d)  Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, §§ 11.31A-11.31C; Ord. No. 98-05) 
Sec. 24-3. - Curfew hours for minors. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Curfew hours means: 
(1)  11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. on the following day; and 
(2)  12:01 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday until 6:00 a.m. on that day. 
    Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
    Guardian means: 
(1)  A person whom, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor, or 
(2)  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
    Minor means any person under 17 years of age. 
    Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or other entity operating, managing, or conducting any business at any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership, the officers of a corporation, and the persons responsible for operations of any other entity. 
    Parent means a person who is: 
(1)  A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of a minor; or 
(2)  At least 18 years of age who has been authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
    Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas, including parking areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops and stores. 
    Remain means: 
(1)  To linger, stay; 
(2)  Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises. 
    Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk or death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(b)  Offenses. 
(1)  A minor commits an offense if such minor remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours. 
(2)  A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if such parent or guardian knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours. 
(3)  The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment or other person responsible for its operation commits an offense if such owner, operator, or any employee knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment or other such place during curfew hours. 
(c)  Defenses. 
(1)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b) of this section that the minor was: 
a.  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
b.  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
c.  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
d.  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without detour or stop; 
e.  Involved in an emergency; 
f.  On the sidewalk or other similar area abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence; 
g.  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the City, the Wills Point Independent School District, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, any such activity; 
h.  Exercising rights protected under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution such as the right of free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly; or 
i.  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Family Code, ch. 31. 
(2)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b)(3) of this section that the owner, operator, employee of an establishment, or other such person, promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(d)  Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in subsection (c) of this section is applicable. 
(e)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person violating this section shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(2)  When required by applicable provisions of the Texas Family Code, the municipal court shall waive original jurisdiction over a minor who violates subsection (b)(1) of this section and shall refer the minor to juvenile court. 
(f)  Administration and review. In accordance with V.T.C.A., Texas Local Government Code § 370.002, the City Council shall review this section and the conditions the ordinance from which this section is derived was intended to remedy on or before August 12, 2017, which is three years from its date of passage, and every third year thereafter. Upon review, public hearings shall be conducted on the need to continue, modify or abolish the section. 
(Code 1981, §§ 11.31-11.33; Ord. No. 01-03; Ord. No. 07-09, §§ 11.31-11.33, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 14-07, § 1, 8-12-2014) 
State Law reference- General authority for juvenile curfew, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.905; county juvenile curfew, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 351.903; children taken into custody for violation of juvenile curfew, V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure art. 45.059. 
Sec. 24-4. - Advertisements on utility poles. 
(a)  Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to place upon any utility pole, telephone or electric light pole within the City limits, any placards, political posters or other advertisements. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person violating this section shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, §§ 11.80, 11.81; Ord. of 6-7-1966) 
Chapter 26 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code ch. 1 et seq.; municipal authority over public grounds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 282. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARK REGULATIONS 

Sec. 26-19. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to consume, or to have in their possession, any alcoholic beverage in any City park, playground, recreational facility, or City lake, including parks owned or leased by the City and all City-owned property wherever located. 
(Code 1981, § 18.41; Ord. No. 03-02) 
Sec. 26-20. - Vehicular speed limit in City parks and recreational areas. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour in any City park or recreational area owned or leased by the City. 
(Code 1981, § 18.42; Ord. No. 03-02) 
Sec. 26-21. - Parking limited to designated areas. 
    It shall be unlawful to park vehicles in any City park or recreational area owned by the City in any area other than those areas specifically designated by signs or otherwise for use as parking space for vehicles. 
(Code 1981, § 18.43; Ord. No. 03-02) 
Sec. 26-22. - Camping prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to camp overnight in any City park or City recreational area without written approval of the City Administrator or the City Administrator's designee. 
(Code 1981, § 18.44; Ord. No. 03-02) 
Sec. 26-23. - Overnight parking of motor homes and recreational vehicles prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any mobile home, camper, tent, tent-trailer, motor home or other recreational vehicle with sleeping accommodations or any commercial vehicle to remain overnight on any park or recreational area owned by the City without written approval of the City Administrator or the City Administrator's designee. 
(Code 1981, § 18.45; Ord. No. 03-02) 
Sec. 26-24. - Hunting prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to hunt, molest, trap or pursue any game or wild animals within the limits of any City park, recreational area or City-owned lake property. All such parks, recreational areas and lake properties are declared to be game preserves. 
(Code 1981, § 18.46; Ord. No. 03-02) 
Sec. 26-25. - Firearms prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession any pistol, rifle, shotgun or other type of firearm while in any City park, City recreational area, City-owned lake property, or City property wherever located, except in such areas as may be designated by the City Council as firing ranges. 
(Code 1981, § 18.47; Ord. No. 03-02) 
Sec. 26-26. - Off-road vehicular traffic prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to park or operate any off-road motorized vehicle, which includes four wheelers, three-wheelers, motorcycles, motorbikes, and the like, in over or through any park or recreational area owned by the City. 
(Code 1981, § 18.48; Ord. No. 03-02) 
Sec. 26-27. - Horseback riding prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse in any City park or recreational area owned by the City. 
(Code 1981, § 18.49; Ord. No. 03-02) 
Sec. 26-28. - Swimming in City Lake prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to swim or enter the water for the purpose of swimming or bathing in the Wills Point City Lake or any pond or lake in any recreational area owned by the City. 
(Code 1981, § 18.50; Ord. No. 03-02) 
Sec. 26-29. - Boats are prohibited on lakes in City parks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor-driven boat in the Wills Point City Lake or any pond or lake in any recreational area or park owned by the City. 
(Code 1981, § 18.51; Ord. No. 03-02) 
Sec. 26-30. - Sanitation requirements. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to defecate, urinate, or commit a nuisance of any nature in the water or along the shoreline within 200 feet of the water at any lake or pond in a recreational area owned by the City. 
(Code 1981, § 18.52; Ord. No. 03-02) 
Sec. 26-31. - Skates, hockey, skateboards, bicycles, and other sport or toy vehicles and paintball use prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for persons on roller skates, in-line skates, roller blades, hockey and in-line hockey, skateboards, bicycles, or riding in or by means of any coaster, sled, toy wagon, scooter or similar device to go upon sidewalks or parking areas, where such sidewalks are designated for walking trails, or parking areas are designated for vehicle parking in any recreational area or park owned by the City. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in paintball use in any recreational area or park owned by the City. 
    The following warning shall be posted for recreational activities involving hockey and in-line hockey; skating, in-line skating, roller skating, skateboarding, roller blading; and soap box derby use. 
WARNING 
TEXAS LAW (CHAPTER 75, CIVIL PRACTICE AND REMEDIES CODE) LIMITS THE LIABILITY OF A GOVERNMENTAL UNIT FOR DAMAGES ARISING DIRECTLY FROM HOCKEY, IN-LINE HOCKEY, SKATING, IN-LINE SKATING, ROLLER-SKATING, SKATEBOARDING, ROLLER-BLADING, PAINTBALL USE, OR SOAP BOX DERBY USE ON PREMISES THAT THE GOVERNMENTAL UNIT OWNS, OPERATES, OR MAINTAINS FOR THAT PURPOSE. 
(Code 1981, § 18.53; Ord. No. 03-02; Ord. No. 12-06, § 2, 11-13-2012 ) 
Sec. 26-32. - Fishing stations. 
    Fishing stations located in a recreational area are restricted to catch and release only. It shall be unlawful to keep fish from said fishing stations. 
(Code 1981, § 18.54; Ord. No. 03-02) 
Sec. 26-33. - Operational hours for City parks. 
    The City parks, playground, and recreational facilities owned or leased by the City shall be open for public use between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. Approved activities may exceed the 12:00 midnight closing time, for which prior approval must be obtained from the City Administrator or the City Administrator's designee. 
(Code 1981, § 18.55; Ord. No. 03-02) 
Sec. 26-34. - Athletic field inspections/closures in City parks and recreational areas. 
(a)  Reasons for athletic field closures. 
(1)  It is raining at game time. 
(2)  Baseball or softball infields are too wet. 
(3)  Athletic fields need to be closed in the interest of participant safety and/or preservation of good playing surfaces. 
(b)  Procedures for athletic field closures. 
(1)  Inspect athletic field by 4:00 p.m. 
(2)  Make a decision based upon field condition or weather. 
(3)  Consult with the appropriate athletic association's field manager, or designee, about the status of the field. 
(4)  Should the association's field manager and the City's representative not agree, the decision of the City representative shall take precedence. 
(5)  Continuously monitor weather and field conditions on evenings when fields will be in use after 6:00 p.m. When necessary a City representative will come in and close fields affected. 
(6)  The appropriate association's field manager has the responsibility to inform the association and the participants about field closures. 
(Code 1981, § 18.56; Ord. No. 03-02) 
Sec. 26-35. - All persons shall abide by all rules and requirements. 
(a)  Damage to park property. If any person damages or defaces any real or personal property in any recreational area or park owned or under the control or responsibility of the City, such person shall be held responsible for the actual costs to repair or replace such damaged item or items. 
(b)  The written rules and regulations concerning prohibited or regulated conduct shall be posted at conspicuous places in City parks and recreational areas. Proof that the person in charge of a supervised play or amusement activity verbally informed the actors that their conduct was disruptive to said supervised activity shall be prima facie evidence that the actors willfully disrupted, prevented or hindered such supervised play or amusement program and that such act constituted a nuisance. Any person accused of violating any rule or regulation may be expelled from all property and facilities of the City for such time as the City's designated representative shall direct. Any person expelled from a City park or recreational area of the City by the City's designated representative who comes upon any City park or City recreational area shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction may be subject to a fine. 
(Code 1981, § 18.57; Ord. No. 03-02; Ord. No. 12-06, § 3, 11-13-2012) 
Sec. 26-36. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, § 18.58; Ord. No. 03-02) 
Chapter 28 - SECONDHAND GOODS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 28-1-28-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCASIONAL, YARD, OR GARAGE SALES 

Sec. 28-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Occasional sales means any sale of tangible personal property at retail, including, but not limited to, garage sales, patio sales, yard sales and all other on sites as herein provided by a person who does not hold themselves as to engage in or does not habitually engage in the business of selling such tangible personal property at retail. 
    Retail sales means all retail sales, except occasional sales, as that term is herein defined. 
(Code 1981, § 10.12; Ord. No. 05-03) 
Sec. 28-20. - Locations and conditions of conducting. 
    Occasional sales, including garage sales, patio sales, and yard sales, are hereby permitted within residential areas provided that: 
(1)  The number of such sales shall not exceed four during any calendar year; 
(2)  Such occasional sales are not conducted by any person or group of persons engaged in or who habitually engages in the business of selling such tangible property at retail; 
(3)  The sale shall be confined to the personal property to whom permit is obtained; 
(4)  No new merchandise (i.e., merchandise acquired solely for the purpose of resale) shall be sold at such occasional sale; 
(5)  The duration of each such sale shall not exceed three consecutive calendar days. 
(Code 1981, § 10.13; Ord. No. 05-03) 
Sec. 28-21. - Registration and fees. 
    Any individual desiring to conduct an occasional sale shall, a minimum of 24 hours prior to the sale, apply for a permit with the City Secretary, or the City Secretary's designee, by providing the name, address, date, and location of the proposed occasional sale. A permit fee shall be required as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time. 
(Code 1981, § 10.14; Ord. No. 05-03) 
Sec. 28-22. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties in section 30-4(e). 
(Code 1981, § 10.16; Ord. No. 05-03) 
Chapter 30 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of signs by municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 216. 

Sec. 30-1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of the regulations of this chapter is to encourage and promote a signage element of the City that is consistent with the high aesthetic standards established in other standards of the City's development. The regulations of this chapter are intended to be a positive tool to accomplish this purpose for the benefit of the general public, as well as the business community, and are not designed to discourage or inhibit aesthetically pleasing signage design, materials and placement. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 2(6.84), 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 30-2. - Applicability. 
    The regulations of this chapter shall govern the placement and construction of all outdoor advertising display and signs within the City. In accordance with state law, the provisions of this chapter are extended into the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 2(6.85), 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 30-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Awning means a structure hung from the surface of a building designed to provide protection from sun, rain, wind, and other climatological condition. An awning may be composed of fabric, steel, wood, Plexiglas, or other material. 
    Billboard means a large off-premises sign. 
    CBD means the central business district described in the City's zoning as the "B-3 District." 
    Election sign means a political sign relating to a particular election. 
    Flashing signs means all signs which alter their illuminated intensity through the use of a sequential-strobing light, rotating beacons, flashing lights, or other devices (including satellites) which cause the illumination to vary in intensity, brightness or display content. 
    Illuminated means any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs, or outlines which are illuminated by electrical lights, luminous tubes, or other means which create light from an artificial source. 
    Logo means any formalized design, insignia, or trademark of a company or product which is commonly used to advertise that company or product. 
    Marquee means any "theater-type" sign in which letters are physically removable to allow for different messages. Marquee signs are generally illuminated. 
    Message sign means any sign which, through the use of independently illuminated light bulbs, displays the time, day, date, temperature, and brief messages, either in a scrolling, flashing, or digital manner. 
    Off-premises sign means a sign displaying advertising copy that pertains to a business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service, or product that is not principally located or primarily manufactured or sold on the premises on which the sign is located. 
    On-premises sign means a freestanding sign identifying or advertising a business, person, or activity, and installed and maintained on the same premises as the business, person or activity. 
    Pole sign means any sign which is freestanding from a structure or building and supported by, from, or on top of a pole or beam composed of metal, wood, plastic, or some other material. 
    Political sign means a sign relating to or dealing with the structure or affairs of government or politics, and includes signs relating to campaigns for elected office. 
    Portable sign means any outdoor advertising display which is movable from one location to another and which is not attached to a fixed structure or does not have supports embedded in the ground. The term "portable sign" shall specifically include an outdoor advertising display located in or on a vehicle, except where: 
(1)  Such sign merely identifies the vehicle as belonging to such business by displaying the name, address and/or telephone number of such business and/or identifying the type of product or service offered by such business; 
(2)  The primary use of such vehicle is for the transportation of persons or products or the delivery of services in connection with such business; and 
(3)  Such vehicle is currently state-licensed, state-inspected and in operable condition. 
A sandwich board sign or "A" frame sign is considered a portable sign. 
    Projecting sign means any sign that projects from a building at a 90-degree angle and which has one end attached to the building or other permanent structure. 
    Sign means an outdoor structure, sign, display, light device, figure, painting, drawing, message, plaque, poster, billboard, or other thing that is designed, intended, or used to advertise or inform. Any interior illuminated or moving sign, or light, which is visible from the exterior of a structure may be determined as being erected on the exterior of the building or structure. 
    Window sign means any sign, banner, or painted message which is displayed from the building interior and is visible through the window of the establishment. This type of sign is one that is intended directly for viewing from the outside and does not include interior signs which may be partially visible from the outside of the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 2(6.86), 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 30-4. - Off-premises, temporary and other short-term signs. 
(a)  Prohibited signs. Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, all off-premises signs are prohibited and no permit shall be granted for the construction of any off-premises signs. 
(b)  Temporary signs. Signs that are removed in their entirety (including both display features and the structures to which the display features are attached) no later than 20 days after the sign is first put in place are excepted from this chapter, so long as any such signs are only displayed for no more than 40 days per calendar year for any one particular business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service, or product. 
(c)  Election signs. Election signs may only be displayed for a period beginning on the date of the filing deadline for the particular election to which the election sign is related and ending no more than seven days after the election. 
(d)  Political signs. No political signs shall be located on any property owned by the City. 
(e)  Occasional sales signs. Two off-premises signs shall be permitted, not to exceed two square feet in size, related to occasional sales as defined in chapter 28. No off-premises signs shall be permitted on utility poles or on public rights-of-way. Signs posted under this subsection may be posted a maximum of two days prior to the beginning date of the occasional sale and shall be removed within 24 hours following the last date of the occasional sale. Notwithstanding any other ordinance provision to the contrary, the failure to obtain an occasional sale permit prior to the beginning date of the occasional sale shall result in an increase of the permit fee to $25.00, and the failure to timely remove all off-premises signs allowed under this subsection shall result in a penalty not to exceed $25.00 per sign. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 2(6.87), 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 30-5. - Signs located in the Central Business District (B-3). 
    The following standards shall apply to all property located within the area zoned CBD (B-3). The term "property" shall include, but is not limited to, commercial, office, retail, residential, industrial, municipal, and institutional premises. 
(1)  Permitted signs. Only three classes of signs (other than traffic control signs) will be permitted in the CBD (B-3): 
a.  Wall signs. 
1.  Intent. This type of sign shall be favored within the CBD (B-3). It may be mounted with an awning on the same building facade. The standards in this subsection also apply to signs painted directly on the building surface. 
2.  Minimum height. No wall sign may be mounted in a manner that results in the lowest portion of the sign being less than 61/2 feet or greater than 20 feet above the sidewalk surface. Businesses and offices may mount signs at lower elevations that indicate the name of the establishment and street address only. These signs must not exceed eight square feet. 
3.  Maximum height. Wall signs shall be allowed a maximum height of 20 feet at their highest point above the sidewalk surface. They shall not be allowed to extend above the existing building roof line. Where a building is less than 20 feet tall, the roof line shall constitute the maximum allowable elevation. 
4.  Thickness. Wall signs do not have to be flush with the building surface. To accommodate structural and electrical equipment, a wall sign may be up to one foot thick. 
5.  Area. There shall be only one display face for a wall sign. Allowable footage shall be based on the following table: 
Building 
Frontage Surface Area 
(One-Story) Additional Area 
(Per Story) Max. 
Area 1-50 linear feet 25 sq. ft. 55 sq. ft. 40 sq. ft. 51-100 linear feet 30 sq. ft. 55 sq. ft. 45 sq. ft. Over 100 linear feet 35 sq. ft. 10 sq. ft. 50 sq. ft.  
6.  Illumination. Wall signs may be illuminated internally through the use of fluorescent tubes. These may also be externally illuminated through the use of "gooseneck" reflectors and lights, provided that such reflectors are equipped with proper glass lenses concentrating the illumination upon the surface of the sign so as to prevent glare upon the street or adjacent property. Spotlights and floodlights may also be used to externally illuminate wall signs provided that the lights are so directed or shielded that the light source is not directly visible from any street, sidewalk, or adjacent property. 
7.  Movement. Wall signs shall not be permitted to move, rotate, gyrate, or give the impression of movement. 
8.  Lettering. Wall signs may have lettering up to 31/2 feet in height. Letters should be contained within the sign face. Individually mounted letters must be no greater than four feet in height. Letters must be permanent and nonremovable. 
9.  Number. There shall be only one wall sign per business or each building facade. The total area of all signs per facade must not exceed the area standard set forth above for the cumulative sum of all signs. 
b.  Marquee signs. 
1.  Intent. Marquee signs are to be generally considered as "theater-type" signs, which have changeable message boards. Use of a marquee sign will be limited to entertainment-oriented land uses (movie theaters, dramatic theaters, civic centers, opera houses, restaurants, etc.). Verification of this fact will be required on the sign permit. 
2.  Minimum height. The lowest portion of a marquee sign must be no less than eight feet or no greater than 20 feet above the sidewalk surface, or integrated into existing pole signs. 
3.  Maximum height. Marquee signs shall be no greater than 20 feet above the sidewalk surface at their highest point. Marquee signs shall not extend more than five feet above the existing building roof line. Where a building is less than 20 feet tall, the roof line shall constitute the maximum allowable elevation. 
4.  Projection. Marquee signs shall be no greater than six feet from the building surface. A distance of at least two feet shall be maintained between the outer edge of the marquee sign and any traffic control sign. 
5.  Movement. Marquee signs shall not be permitted to move, rotate, gyrate, or give the impression of movement. 
6.  Number. One marquee sign per business shall be allowed. 
7.  Separation. All marquee signs shall be no closer than 30 feet from neighboring signs, measured by the nearest face to the nearest face. 
c.  Projecting signs. 
1.  Minimum and maximum heights. The lowest portion of a projecting sign must be no less than 71/2 feet or no greater than 12 feet above the sidewalk surface. 
2.  Area. Maximum four square feet per sign one-sided or two-sided. 
3.  Projection. Projecting signs shall be no greater than two feet from the building surface. A distance of at least two feet shall be maintained between the outer edge of the projecting sign and any traffic control sign. 
4.  Movement. Projection signs shall not be permitted to move, rotate, gyrate, or give the impression of movement. 
5.  Number. One projecting sign per building shall be allowed. 
6.  Separation. All projecting signs shall be no closer than 20 feet from neighboring signs, measured by the nearest face to the nearest face. 
(2)  Prohibitions. The following types of signs (both interior and exterior) shall not be permitted within the CBD: off-premises, portable, pole (except by special exception), vehicular, banner (except by special exception), bench, roof, flashing, and any other type of sign which does not come under the three classifications provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 2(6.88), 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 30-6. - On-premises/off-premises signs located on property outside the central business district and on property in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City. 
    The following standards shall apply to all property within the City limits and in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City, but outside the CBD. The term "property" shall include, but is not limited to, commercial, office, retail, residential, industrial, municipal, and institutional premises. 
(1)  Billboard and off-premises sign prohibition. Billboards and off-premises signs are prohibited in all areas inside the City limits and areas within the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(2)  Freestanding on-premises sign requirements. 
a.  Maximum area. 300 square feet per face. Temporary extensions, or cutouts, shall not exceed 20 percent of the sign area. 
b.  Minimum setback. Five feet outside the existing right-of-way. 
c.  Maximum height. 30 feet. 
d.  Spacing, off-premises. No off-premises sign shall be within 4,500 feet along the right-of-way of another off-premises sign. 
e.  Placement. No sign of this classification may be located within 75 feet of any residential area that is along the same right-of-way of the proposed sign. 
f.  Construction. Signs may not be attached to a building, and must only be of a monopole, steel nature. 
g.  Illumination. Signs may be illuminated internally through the use of fluorescent tubes or externally through the use of gooseneck reflectors and light, provided that such reflectors are provided with proper glass lenses concentrating the illumination upon the area of the sign so as to prevent glare upon the street or adjacent property. No flashing intermittent lights shall be allowed, and no lights may interfere with any traffic signal. 
(3)  On-premises sign requirements for signs attached to a building/structure. 
a.  Maximum area. There shall be only two display faces for on-premises signs. Allowable footage shall be based on the following table: 
Building Frontage Surface Area Maximum Height Ground 
Clearance 1-50 linear feet 60 sq. ft. 18 ft. 8 ft. 51-100 linear feet 100 sq. ft. 20 ft. 8 ft. 101-150 linear feet 150 sq. ft. 25 ft. 12 ft. Over 150 linear feet 200 sq. ft. 30 ft. 15 ft.  
b.  Minimum setback. Five feet outside the existing right-of-way. 
c.  Spacing, on-premises. No more than one on-premises sign per platted lot. 
d.  Placement. No sign of this classification may be located within 50 feet of any residential area. 
e.  Construction. Signs may be attached to building. Any sign not attached to the building must only be of a monopole or bi-pole, steel or wood nature. 
f.  Design. All signs shall be designed and constructed to wind pressures as outlined in the building code adopted by the City. 
g.  llumination. Signs may be illuminated internally through the use of fluorescent tubes, or externally through the use of gooseneck reflectors and light, provided that such reflectors are provided with proper glass lenses concentrating the illumination upon the area of the sign so as to prevent glare upon the street or adjacent property. No flashing intermittent lights shall be allowed, and no lights may interfere with any traffic signal. 
h.  Movement. Signs permitted under this section shall not be permitted to move, rotate, or gyrate by electrical or mechanical means or give the impression of movement through the use of diffraction grates or wind-sensitive/light sensitive surfaces. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 2(6.89), 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 30-7. - Exceptions. 
    The following signs are not regulated by the foregoing standards, shall not be required to obtain a permit under this chapter, and are otherwise governed by the following provisions: 
(1)  Traffic control signs. Any sign installed and maintained by the City, by the county, or by any department of the state which is in conformance with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(2)  City signs. Any sign or banner installed and maintained by the City. 
(3)  Construction signs. Any construction sign (one per lot) not exceeding 40 square feet in area which indicates the owner, architect, financial institution, and/or general contractor. 
(4)  Information signs. Warning signs, security signs, parking direction signs, and community or school information signs or banners. 
(5)  Real estate signs. Any non-illuminated temporary real estate sign of eight square feet or less which announces availability of real property through sale or lease. One real estate sign per building or lot is allowed. 
(6)  Political signs. Any sign pertaining to a public election which is located on private real property with the consent of the property owner that has an effective area 36 square feet or less, is eight feet high or less, is not illuminated, and does not have any moving elements. 
(7)  Message signs. Approved bank or financial institution message signs which scroll or flash the time, date, temperature, and a brief message. The message cannot change faster than once every five seconds. No physical movement will be permitted. These signs must not encroach on the City or state right-of-way. 
(8)  On-site banners. A banner may be used as a temporary on-premises sign for up 30 days. Banners will be hung from the wall only, and are subject to all pertinent standards and permit procedures. Streamers and promotional flags are not allowed. A maximum of one banner per business shall be allowed. 
(9)  Off-site special event banners. A temporary banner promoting a public event may be erected subject to the following special permitting procedures: 
a.  Application for a temporary permit must be submitted in writing to the code compliance officer 30 days prior to the opening date of the event. The application shall include the name of the organization making the request, a contact name and information, the dates, times and location of the event, the nature of the event, the size of the banner, the proposed location of the sign or banner, and signed permission from the property owner of the proposed banner site. 
b.  The code compliance officer shall review the application and make a determination based on the established criteria within five business days. Criteria for approval shall include: 
1.  The event must be sponsored by an area nonprofit or civic organization or a local chapter of a nonprofit organization, or benefit a local charity or charitable organization; 
2.  The event must be open to the public; 
3.  The event must be held in the Wills Point area; and 
4.  The banner or sign must not impede the visibility of vehicular traffic. 
c.  A temporary permit is valid for a maximum of 25 days prior to the opening date of the event and must be removed within two business days after the close of the event. The effective days and duration of the permit shall be set by the code compliance officer and shall be displayed on the permit. 
(10)  Interior signs. Any interior sign which is not visible from the centerline of the street parallel with the building facade shall be allowed. 
(11)  Flags. Any business may display a governmental flag in an appropriate, respectful manner. 
(12)  Historical markers. Any sign or plaque designating a local, state, or national landmark. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 2(6.90), 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 30-8. - General provisions. 
(a)  Content. The City does not regulate the content of signs; however, no sign shall contain any obscene, indecent or immoral words, pictures, descriptions or other such matter. 
(b)  Out-of-compliance signs. All signs within the City shall be maintained as to copy quality, structural neatness, and ground foliage. Failure to comply can result in permit revocation and removal of said structure at owner's expense. 
(c)  Electrical. Prior to the issuance of any permit for signs with lighting, a licensed electrician shall apply for an electrical permit and the local power company engineer shall verify that there is a minimum ten-foot clearance between any portion of the sign and all overhead power lines. 
(d)  Location. Signs permitted pursuant to this chapter may be located only in districts zoned B-1, B-2, B-3, and I, and must be situated no less than 100 feet from any residential or agricultural zoning district. 
(e)  Rights-of-way. No sign may be constructed or posted on a public or railroad right-of-way, and any sign constructed near such areas shall have a setback of no less than five feet from such rights-of-way. No sign shall be placed on a utility or traffic control pole, except when clearly permitted by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 2(6.91), 7-8-2008; Ord. No. 17-11, § 2, 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 30-9. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  All existing signs and awnings permanently affixed to a structure or real estate within the City limits on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be allowed to operate as nonconforming signs, if such signs and awnings were not erected in violation of the ordinances in effect at the time of their erection. In the event that a sign or awning permitted to remain in place as a nonconforming sign is blown down, or otherwise destroyed, or dismantled for any purpose other than maintenance operations or for changing letters, symbols, or other matter on such sign or awning, said sign may not be reconstructed or repaired except to conform to the provisions of this chapter. A sign or awning is considered to have been destroyed if the cost of repairing the sign or awning is more than 60 percent of the cost of erecting a new sign or awning of the same type at the same location. No sign presently in a public or railroad right-of-way shall be allowed to operate as a nonconforming sign under the provisions of this section. 
(b)  No person may cause an increase in the extent of nonconformity of a nonconforming sign. Illumination may not be added to a nonconforming sign. 
(c)  A nonconforming sign may not be moved or replaced except to bring the sign into conformity with this chapter. 
(d)  If a nonconforming sign remains blank for a continuous period of 180 days, that sign shall be deemed abandoned and shall, within 90 days after such abandonment, be altered to comply with the sign regulations in this chapter or be removed by the sign owner, owner of the property where the sign is located, or other person having control over such a sign. For purposes of this section, a sign is "blank" if: 
(1)  It advertises a business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction or other enterprise or activity that is no longer operating or being offered or conducted; 
(2)  The advertising message it displays becomes illegible in whole or substantial part; or 
(3)  The advertising copy paid for by a party other than the sign owner or promoting an interest other than the rental of the sign has been removed. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 2(6.92), 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 30-10. - Removing obsolete signs. 
(a)  All signs relating to a product no longer available for purchase by the public and all signs relating to a business which has been closed for at least six months or has moved away shall be termed obsolete. All advertising copy shall be removed, and painted wall signs shall be painted over with a color that resembles or matches the wall. If the owner or person responsible for the sign or if the tenant closing the business fails to remove or paint over the sign, the owner of the premises shall be responsible, and the work shall be done within 30 days following the date of obsolescence. All off-premises signs must be removed within 60 days following the date of obsolescence, or provide evidence that the sign will be used within 60 days. Said off-premises signs may be donated to the City. 
(b)  Notice to alter or remove signs. 
(1)  Any sign which is found to be in violation of this chapter may be removed by the code compliance officer after notification is given as provided herein. The notice shall: 
a.  Be personally delivered or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested to the owner of the property or of the sign; 
b.  Describe the nature of the violation; 
c.  Order the correction of the violation within a specified time, which shall not be less than five business days from the receipt of the notice; and 
d.  Give notice that the code compliance officer may remove and impound the unlawful sign at the owner's expense if the violation is not corrected within the time specified in the notice. 
(2)  If the person or business ordered to correct the violation fails to do so within the time specified, the code compliance officer may remove or cause removal of the unlawful sign; provided, however, that the person aggrieved by said notice or order may file an appeal with the board of adjustment in accordance with the provisions applicable for other appeals if timely filed. The procedures applicable to other appeals shall be followed and the order of the code compliance officer shall be stayed in accordance thereof, pending the final determination of the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 2(6.93), 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 30-11. - Permits. 
(a)  No sign, banner, or awning shall be erected within the City limits after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived unless the owner or lessee of the premises on which such sign, banner or awning is to be erected first obtains a permit from the code compliance officer. Signs to be erected in the CBD must be reviewed and approved by the City Planning Commission prior to receiving a permit. 
(b)  In order to obtain a building permit, a detailed drawing of the sign, awning, or banner must be submitted to the code compliance officer for approval, and the site of the sign must be flagged or marked. The filing fee will be based on the estimated cost of construction at the same rate established for building permits. 
(c)  The applicant must acquire all necessary building permits, as they apply to the particular sign, banner, or awning. All construction work is subject to City code enforcement. 
(d)  Any applicable state permit must be obtained prior to applying for a permit from the City. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 2(6.94), 7-8-2008) 
Sec. 30-12. - Enforcement. 
    All new signs, banners, and awnings constructed, erected, hung or displayed within the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived must comply with the regulations set forth in this chapter. The code compliance officer shall be responsible for enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Any person violating this chapter shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 2(6.95), 7-8-2008) 
Chapter 32 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Minimum standards of sanitation and health protection measures, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 341; local regulation of sanitation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 342; Solid Waste Disposal Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 361; municipal solid waste, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 363; litter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 365. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1-32-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DUMPING AND BURNING 

Sec. 32-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Combustible material means and includes all rubber of any kind, tires, plastics, carpets, treated lumber and similar refuse. 
    Garbage means and includes all animal and vegetable matter, waste material and refuse from kitchens, residences, and other premises, and shall include any and all toxic substances. 
    Rubbish means and includes all waste materials of any kind, such as scrap building materials, scrap metal, old automobile frames and parts, and any and all other substances which have been abandoned and are not neatly maintained for future use or sale. 
    Trash means and includes all waste paper, rags, boxes, grass, shrubs, yard and house cleanings, grass clippings, leaves, tree trimmings, glass, tin cans, ashes and similar refuse. 
(Code 1981, § 8.10; Ord. No. 08-04, § 8.10, 4-8-2008) 
Sec. 32-20. - Purpose. 
(a)  This article is adopted to prohibit the presence in the atmosphere of one or more air contaminants or combinations thereof in such concentration and of such duration as may tend to be injurious to or otherwise adversely affect human health or welfare, animal life, vegetation or property, or as to interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of animal life, vegetation or property. 
(b)  This article also is intended to prohibit the burning of rubbish, garbage, combustible materials and/or trash of any kind within the City limits. 
(Code 1981, § 8.11; Ord. No. 08-04, § 8.11, 4-8-2008) 
Sec. 32-21. - Burning and dumping prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation and/or organization to burn, dump and/or deposit any rubbish, garbage, combustible material, trash and/or other refuse in or upon any street or alley, whether public or private, within the City limits. 
(Code 1981, § 8.12; Ord. No. 08-04, § 8.12, 4-8-2008) 
Sec. 32-22. - Burning prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, to burn any rubbish, garbage, combustible material and/or trash of any kind, as defined in section 32-19, within the City limits at any time and under any circumstances. The burning, within the City limits, of any rubbish, garbage, combustible material, trash and/or any other substance that shall be particularly obnoxious due to smoke or odor, or the burning of which may endanger the public health, safety or welfare, including but not limited to, damage to property or vegetation and/or creation of a toxic or hazardous condition, shall be considered a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 8.13, 4-8-2008) 
Sec. 32-23. - Penalty. 
    Any person convicted of violating this article shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. Each day an offense occurs is a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 8.14, 4-8-2008) 
Sec. 32-24. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-01, § 2, adopted Feb. 12, 2012 , repealed § 32-24, which pertained to the burn ban variance municipal review board. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Sec. 32-25. - Variances. 
(a)  A variance to the provisions of this burn ban regulation shall be considered an exception to the City's burn regulations, rather than a right. The City Administrator may authorize a variance from the regulations of this burn ban regulation when, in the City Administrator's opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance with this regulation. The following limitations and criteria shall be used by the City Administrator to evaluate, grant or deny any burn ban variance request: 
(1)  Undue hardship. Special circumstances exist which affect the land and development involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this burn ban regulation: 
a.  Would deprive the owner or applicant of the ability to use the land appropriately, such as to construct new structures and/or buildings on the land and/or clean-up/beautify the land, which would promote public health and safety; 
b.  Granting of a variance shall be based upon a finding that the applicant's difficulties or hardship is due to unusual conditions or circumstances, such as a large amount of trash debris as defined in section 32-19; 
c.  Granting of a variance will not adversely affect surrounding property owners and their use; 
d.  Granting a variance shall not be detrimental to public health, safety and/or welfare; and 
e.  Financial hardship alone shall not be grounds for a variance. 
(2)  A variance shall not be approved if the circumstance for the hardship is caused or created by the owner of the property or the applicant seeking the variance. 
(b)  The applicant shall be responsible for providing all the data, documentation and/or justification for the requested variance. 
(c)  If the City Administrator deems it necessary and/or upon the applicant's request, the City shall hold a public hearing within 30 days after the completed application for a variance is filed and the fees paid. Ten days before the public hearing, a notice of a public hearing shall be sent via regular U.S. mail to all property owners within 200 feet of the affected property. Notice of the public hearing shall also be published in the official local newspaper ten days before the public hearing. 
(d)  If the City Administrator determines that a variance shall not be granted, then the applicant has the right to appeal the City Administrator's decision to the City Council for review at the next regularly-scheduled City Council meeting. All appeals must be made within ten days of the City Administrator's final decision. The City Council's decision is final. 
(e)  An application for a variance shall be made in writing in a form prescribed by the City and shall be accompanied by a fee, a burn site plan, mailing labels for property owner notification and any other information necessary to illustrate the reason for the variance request. 
(f)  The City Administrator may impose such conditions, limitations, safeguards, instructions and/or time restrictions that he or she deems necessary to the granting of any variance. Violation of any condition, limitation, safeguard, instruction or other restriction shall constitute a violation of this regulation. The following guidelines shall be followed as minimum requirements to burning: 
(1)  Burning shall be commenced and conducted only when wind direction and other meteorological conditions are such that smoke and other pollutants will not cause adverse effects to any public road, landing strip, navigable water, or off-site structure containing sensitive receptors. 
(2)  If at any time the burning causes or may tend to cause smoke to blow onto or across a road or highway, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant and/or other person initiating the burn to have flag persons posted on the affected road or highway to notify drivers, residents, and all other affected persons of this condition. 
(3)  Burning must be conducted downwind of, or at least 500 feet from any structure containing sensitive receptors located on adjacent properties unless prior written approval is obtained from the adjacent property owners and/or occupants with possessory control over said property. 
(4)  Burning shall be conducted in compliance with the following meteorological and timing considerations: 
a.  The initiation of burning shall commence no earlier than one hour after sunrise. Burning shall be completed on the same day and not later than one hour before sunset, and shall be attended by a responsible person at all times during the active burn phase when the fire is progressing. In cases where residual fires and/or smoldering objects continue to emit smoke after this time, such areas shall be extinguished if the smoke from these areas has the potential to create a nuisance or traffic hazard condition. In no case shall the extent of the burn area be allowed to increase after these stated times. 
b.  Burning shall not be commenced when the surface wind speed is predicted to be less than six miles per hour (five knots) or greater than 23 miles per hour (20 knots) during the burn period. 
c.  Burning shall not be conducted during periods of actual or predicted persistent low-level atmospheric temperature inversions. 
(g)  In addition to any other fees imposed by the City (including but not limited to an application fee), the City shall charge a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time for a fire apparatus/truck and Wills Point Volunteer Fire Department personnel to be available during the time of the controlled fire/burn. There shall be a minimum charge of one hour. Additional charges may apply, as needed. This minimum charge shall be due and must be paid at the time of scheduling the controlled fire/burn with the Wills Point Volunteer Fire Department. 
(h)  The following materials shall not be burned under any circumstances, which includes, but is not limited to: electrical insulation, treated lumber, plastics, non-wood construction/demolition materials, heavy oils, asphalt materials, potentially explosive materials, chemical wastes, and/or materials containing natural and/or synthetic rubber. 
(i)  If after the fire/burning commences, complaints are received about the level of smoke and/or other contaminants originating from the controlled fire/burning, the complaints will be forwarded immediately to the person overseeing the controlled burn and all burning shall cease and be extinguished immediately. If the person overseeing the controlled burn deems it necessary it shall be extinguished immediately, it shall be the applicant's (or designee's) responsibility to make other, alternate arrangements to remove the trash debris from the affected property in an appropriate manner. 
(j)  All trash debris that is authorized to be burned in the variance, must originate on the affected property. At no time shall any debris of any kind be brought in from another location, deposited, or otherwise discarded on the subject property to be burned. 
(k)  After the City Administrator approves a burn variance, it is the applicant's (or designee's) responsibility to contact the Wills Point Volunteer Fire Department to schedule a date and time to commence such burning. The Fire Chief, or the Fire Chief's designee, has the sole discretion to decide the date and time such authorized burning shall commence. Any variance granted by the City Administrator that is not exercised within 90 days from the date of granting shall lapse and may only be reinstated after a new application is submitted along with the fees and all other requisites are met in accordance with this article and state law. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 8.15(B), 6-10-2008; Ord. No. 12-01, § 3, 2-12-2012 ) 
Sec. 32-26. - Other applicable laws. 
    Nothing in this article excuses noncompliance with any state or federal law, provisions of this article, any other applicable ordinance of the City, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, which prohibits burning. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, § 8.15, 4-8-2008; Ord. No. 08-05, § 8.16, 6-10-2008) 
Chapter 34 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Public buildings and grounds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 281 et seq.; parks and other recreational and cultural resources, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 306 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Trench safety standards, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 756.021 et seq. 

Sec. 34-19. - Permit requirement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation or opening in any street, alley or public right-of-way of the City without first having obtained a permit to do so, except in emergencies. 
(Code 1981, § 6.40; Ord. of 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 34-20. - Application for permit. 
    The application for a permit to make any excavation or opening in any of the streets, alleys, or public rights-of-way of the City, except for the purpose of setting utility poles, shall be made in writing to the City Administrator and shall state clearly the name of the street, alley, or right-of-way in which it is proposed to make such an opening; the exact location where such opening is proposed; the purpose for making the opening; the work schedule for making and repairing such opening; and the name and address of the person proposing to make such excavation or opening. Where the proposed excavation or opening is extensive, a plan for such work shall be submitted with the application. Such plan shall show adequate dimensions to indicate the exact location of the proposed excavation. 
(Code 1981, § 6.41; Ord. of 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 34-21. - Emergencies. 
    In case of emergencies where there is not sufficient time to make application for a permit, the police dispatcher shall be notified and given the same information described in section 34-20. 
(Code 1981, § 6.42; Ord. of 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 34-22. - Bond requirement. 
    The City Administrator shall estimate the probable cost of restoring the street surface to its original condition or better. Such estimate shall include the cost of select backfill materials, proper compaction of backfill, replacement or surfacing materials and cleanup. The applicant shall file a performance bond in the sum of 100 percent of the City Administrator's estimate. The permit shall not be in effect until such performance bond is filed with the City Administrator and accepted by the City Administrator. The performance bond shall be underwritten by a surety company or companies acceptable according to the latest list of companies holding certificates of authority from the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States and duly authorized to act under the laws of the state as surety. Bond will not be required where work is performed by bona fide fulltime employees, excluding contract labor or contractors of the gas, telephone and electric utilities. 
(Code 1981, § 6.43; Ord. of 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 34-23. - Permit issuance. 
    When the bond required in section 34-22 shall have been accepted by the City Administrator, the City Administrator shall then issue a written permit for the excavation or opening described in the application. The permit shall contain a statement of requirements to be met by the permittee in restoring surfaces of streets, alleys and rights-of-way and for protecting the public, as deemed necessary by the City Administrator. The permittee shall be fully responsible for safeguarding persons and property from damage or injury, and should the requirements prove to be inadequate under the circumstances. When the permit is issued the permittee may then proceed with the work in the exact location named in the application, and in no other place. 
(Code 1981, § 6.44; Ord. of 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 34-24. - Accessibility of permit. 
    The permittee shall keep a copy of the permit for excavation or opening streets, alleys or rights-of-way at all times at the site of the work, and such permit shall be accessible to the City Administrator or authorized representatives. 
(Code 1981, § 6.45; Ord. of 5-8-1983) 
Sec. 34-25. - Accomplishment of work. 
    All of the work done by the permittee in excavating or opening streets, alleys or rights-of-way, in backfilling excavations and in restoring street surfaces shall be in accordance with the terms of the permit issued by the City Administrator. The City Administrator shall be notified before commencement of work. The City Administrator shall issue whatever directions regarding the work as the City Administrator deems necessary to the end that the streets, alleys and rights-of-way of the City shall not be unduly disturbed and traffic thereon obstructed. The permittee shall comply with such directions. The directions given by the City Administrator shall not relieve the permittee from any responsibility for the protection of persons and property should such directions prove to be inadequate under the circumstances. 
(Code 1981, § 6.46; Ord. of 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 34-26. - Inspection and acceptance. 
    Upon completion of all work described in the permit, the permittee shall notify the director of public works, who will then inspect such work. If the permittee has failed to comply with the terms of the permit and has not left the street, alley or right-of-way clean and in a good state of repair satisfactory to the director of public works, then the director of public works shall give written notice to the permittee describing the work to be done and requiring such work to be completed within a specified time period. If the permittee fails to complete the required work within the specified time period, the director of public works shall call upon the surety to accomplish the required work. When the director of public works inspects the work and finds the street repaired in a satisfactory manner and cleaned of debris resulting from the work the director of public works shall accept such repair by written certificate to the permittee and the surety. 
(Code 1981, § 6.47; Ord. of 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 34-27. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
Sec. 34-28. - Closure of city alley. 
    The City Council hereby abandons any and all public rights, title and interest, if any, to the alley, located going North and South between West O'Neal and West Orville and South 4 th and South 5 th streets. 
( Ord. No. 12-02, § 2, 3-13-2012 ) 
Secs. 34-29-34-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY 
DIVISION 1. - APPLICABLE TO ALL USERS IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-40. - Title; application. 
(a)  This article may be known and cited as the Right-of-Way Management Ordinance for the City of Wills Point. 
(b)  The provisions of this article apply to all persons using the City's public rights-of-way and all work performed, and facilities installed within public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 34-41. - Definitions. 
    All terms used in this article and not specifically defined herein, have the meaning provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Chapter 283 and 284. The following definitions apply in this article: 
    Abandon and its derivatives means the facilities installed in the public right-of- way that have been left in an unused or non-functioning condition for more than 120 consecutive calendar days, unless, after notice to the provider, the provider establishes to the city's reasonable satisfaction that the applicable facilities, or portion thereof, are still in active use. 
    Access line means (1) the transmission media within the rights-of-way extended to the end-user customer's premises network interface within the City that allows delivery of telecommunications service within the City; and (2) each termination point of a nonswitched telephone circuit consisting of transmission media connecting specific locations identified by, and provided to, the end user for the delivery of nonswitched telecommunications service within the City. Interoffice-transport and other transmission media that do not terminate at an end-user customer's network interface device are not access lines that would be separately identified and counted for the purposes of assessing the monthly line fee. 
    Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services. 
    Applicable codes means: 
(a)  Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization; and 
(b)  Local amendments to those codes to the extent not inconsistent with Chapter 284. 
    Cable service means "cable service" as defined in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended, 47 U.S.C. § 532 et seq. 
    Certificated telecommunications provider means a person who has been issued a certificate of convenience and necessity, certificate of operating authority, or service provider certificate of operating authority by the Texas Public Utility Commission to offer local exchange telephone service or a person who provides voice service. 
    Chapter 284 means V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Chapter 284. 
    City means the City of Wills Point, Texas. 
    City administrator means the city administrator of the City or his/her designee. 
    Closure means a complete or partial closing of one or more lanes of traffic of a thoroughfare for any period of time. 
    Construction means any of the following activities performed by any person within a public right-of-way: 
(1)  Installation, excavation, laying, placement, repair, upgrade, maintenance, or relocation of facilities or other improvements, whether temporary or permanent. 
(2)  Modification or alteration to any surface, subsurface, or aerial space within the public right-of-way. 
(3)  Performance, restoration, or repair of pavement cuts or excavations. 
(4)  Reconstruction of any of the work described in paragraphs (1) through (3) above. 
(5)  Other similar construction work. 
    Collocate and collocation means the installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of network nodes in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to a pole. 
    Consumer price index means the annual revised Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers for Texas, as published by the federal Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
    Concealment or Camouflaged means any wireless facility or pole that is covered, blended, painted, disguised, camouflaged, or otherwise concealed such that the wireless facility blends into the surrounding environment and is visually unobtrusive as allowed as a condition for City advance approval under Chapter 284, Sec. 284.105 in Historic or Design Districts. Concealment includes but is not limited to covering with a façade, designs that blend with the surrounding character of an area, paint that matches surrounding poles, disguising with landscaping, or locating underground. 
    Decorative pole means a streetlight pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signage or temporary holiday or special event attachments have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to City Code. 
    Design district means an area that is zoned, or otherwise designated by City code, and for which the City maintains and enforces unique design and aesthetic standards. 
    Design manual means the design requirements for specific types of facilities, including any adopted design manuals, the City's unified development code, adopted construction codes and any other City requirements. 
    Disaster emergency or disaster or emergency means an imminent, impending, or actual natural or humanly induced situation wherein the health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the City is threatened, and includes, but is not limited to any declaration of emergency by city, state or federal governmental authorities. 
    Distributed antenna system or DAS shall be included as a type of "network node." 
    Easement means any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the City for public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever. "Easement" shall include a private easement used for the provision of utilities. 
    Facilities means any and all network nodes, micro network nodes, transport facilities, equipment cabinets, node support poles, duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, underground and overhead passageways, and other equipment, structures, plant, and appurtenances and all transmission media used for the provision of wireless service or telecommunication service. 
    Federal Communications Commission or FCC means the Federal Administrative Agency, or lawful successor, authorized to oversee cable television and other multi-channel regulation on a national level. 
    Highway right-of-way means the right-of-way adjacent to a state or federal highway. 
    Historic district or historic area means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a historic area or historic district under municipal, state, or federal law. 
    Law means common law or a federal, state, or local law, statute, code, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance. 
    Licensee or applicant means any person with a license or authorized under state law, or the person applying for or receiving a permit to perform construction within the City's right-of-way and the owner of the utility within the right-of-way under the terms and conditions set forth herein. The term includes: (i) any officer, director, partner, manager, superintendent, or other authorized person exercising control over or on behalf of the licensee; and (ii) any contractor or subcontractor of the licensee, for purposes of compliance with the provisions of this article and the traffic control, construction, and maintenance requirements of this article. 
    Line fee means a monthly fee to be applied to each access line for the calculation of the total amount to be paid to the City as a rights-of-way fee. 
    Local means within the geographical boundaries of the City. 
    Location means the City-approved and lawfully permitted location for the network node and/or node support poles. 
    Macro tower means a guyed or self-supported pole or monopole with height parameters not greater than the lesser of (i) 55 feet, or (ii) ten feet higher than the tallest existing utility pole located within 500 linear feet of the new pole in the same public right-of-way and that supports or is capable of supporting antennas, as the prescribed by Chapter 284, Section 284.103, as may be amended. 
    Mayor means the Mayor for the City. 
    Micro network node means a network node that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than 11 inches. 
    Municipally owned utility pole means a utility pole owned or operated by a municipally owned utility, as defined by V.T.C.A., Utilities Code, § 11.003, and located in a public right-of-way. 
    Municipal park or park means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated by the City as a public park for the purpose of recreational activity. 
    MUTCD means Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
    Network node means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term includes: (i) equipment associated with wireless communications; (ii) a radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and (iii) coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a particular collocation; and does not include: (i) an electric generator; (ii) a pole; or (iii) a macro tower. 
    Network provider means a wireless service provider; or a person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or installs on behalf of a wireless service provider: (i) network nodes; or (ii) node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node. 
    Node support pole means a pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network node. 
    Permit means a written authorization for the use of the public right-of-way, including collocation on a service pole required from the City before a network provider or provider or person, as those terms are defined herein, may perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project over which the City has police power authority. 
    Permit holder means any person that has applied for or been issued a permit pursuant to the terms of this article. 
    Person means a natural person, a corporation, a limited liability company, a joint venture, a business trust, an estate, a trust, a partnership, an association, a company, a firm, a joint stock company or association, or any other legal entity. 
    Pole means a service pole, municipally owned utility pole, node support pole, or utility pole. 
    Private easement means an easement or other real property right that is only for the benefit of the grantor and grantee and their successors and assigns. 
    Project means any construction or placement of any structure or thing within any public right-of-way. 
    Provider has the same meaning as "network provider." To the extent allowed by law, provider also means a person that does not deliver telecommunications service within the City, but who uses, constructs or maintains facilities or transmission media within the public rights-of-way. 
    Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the City has an interest. The term does not include (i) a private easement, or (ii) the airwaves above the public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications. 
    Public right-of-way rate means an annual rental charge paid by a network provider to a municipality related to the construction, maintenance, or operation of network nodes within a public right-of-way in the City. 
    Public right-of-way management ordinance means an ordinance that complies with Chapter 284, Subchapter C. 
    School means an educational institution that offers a course of instruction for students in one or more grades from kindergarten through grade 12. 
    Service pole means a pole, other than a municipally owned utility pole, owned or operated by the City and located in a public right-of-way, including: (i) a pole that supports traffic control functions; (ii) a structure for signage; (iii) a pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and (iv) a pole or similar structure owned or operated by the City and supporting only network nodes. 
    Service provider means any electric utility, gas utility, telecommunications company, cable company, water utility, storm water utility, or wastewater utility, regardless of whether the service provider is publicly or privately owned or required to operate within the city pursuant to a franchise. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a public right-of-way improved and designated for and ordinarily used for pedestrian travel or pedestrian and bicycle travel. 
    Small cell shall be included as a type of "network node." 
    Street means only the paved portion of the right-of-way used for vehicular travel, being the area between the inside of the curb to the inside of the opposite curb, or the area between the two parallel edges of the paved roadway for vehicular travel where there is no curb. A "street" is generally part of, but smaller in width than the width of the entire right-of-way, while a right-of-way may include sidewalks and utility easements, a "street" does not. A "street" does not include the curb or the sidewalk, if either are present at the time of a permit application or if added later. 
    Substantially similar means a replacement or upgrade that does not include replacement of an existing node support pole nor defeat existing concealment elements of a node support pole; and a new or upgraded network node, including the antenna or other equipment element, will not be more than ten percent larger than the existing node, provided that the increase may not result in the node exceeding the size limitations provided by the City's design manual; and the new or upgraded pole will not be more than ten percent higher than the existing pole, provided that the increase may not result in the pole exceeding the applicable height limitations prescribed by the City's design manual. 
    Supervisor means the supervisor of public works or any other person designated by the City Administrator to administer this article. 
    SWPPP shall mean Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan. 
    TAS means Texas Accessibility Standards. 
    Telecommunications service means the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphics and other communications between or among points by wire, fiber optics, or other similar facilities, as well as the rental, lease, or furnishing of the facilities to accomplish such transmittal, but does not include transmissions for long distance purposes (interLATA and intraLATA) or any "wireless service" as defined by law. 
    Telecommunications service provider means any person that supplies telecommunications service to others within the City's corporate limits in exchange for money or other value. 
    Telecommunications utility means "telecommunications utility" as used in the Public Utility Regulatory Act, V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 51.002(11). 
    Traffic signal means any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
    Transmission media means any and all of the cables, fibers, wires or other physical devices owned, maintained or placed by a user to transmit and/or receive communication signals, whether analog, digital or of other characteristics, and whether for voice, data or other purposes. 
    Transport facility means each transmission path physically within a public right-of- way, extending with a physical line from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes. 
    Underground requirement area means an area where poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead or above ground structures have been removed and buried or have been approved for burial underground pursuant to municipal ordinances, zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions, that prohibit installing aboveground structures in a public right-of-way. 
    User means a person, organization or entity that owns, places, installs, maintains, or uses facilities within the public right-of-way or street, depending upon the context. 
    Utility pole means a pole that provides: (i) electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than 34.5 kilovolts; or (ii) services of a telecommunications provider, as defined by V.T.C.A., Utilities Code, § 51.002, Utilities Code. 
    Wireless facilities mean "micro network nodes," "network nodes," and "node support poles" as defined in Texas Local Government Code Chapter 284. 
    Wireless service means any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node. 
    Wireless service provider means a person that provides wireless service to the public. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 34-42. - Authorization for use of public right-of-way. 
(a)  The City Administrator, supervisor, or their designee is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. The City Administrator, supervisor or his/her/their designee is authorized to enter upon a construction site for which a permit is granted under this article or, where necessary, upon private property adjacent to the construction site, for purposes of inspection to determine compliance with the permit or this article. 
(b)  The City's authorization or an agreement shall be required to use the public right-of-way, except when clearly preempted by state law. If any state law authorizing use of the public right-of-way is struck down, pre-empted, declared to be invalid or void, in whole or in part, the user relying upon such law for authorization shall seek separate authorization from the City or shall cease using the public right-of-way. 
(c)  After issuance of any permit, the user of the public right-of-way shall be and remain a mere licensee. Neither this ordinance, nor any permit granted under this ordinance, shall constitute an assignment of any of the City's rights to the public right-of-way. 
(d)  This ordinance does not in any way limit the City's right to locate, operate, maintain or remove City equipment or property in the manner that the City deems appropriate. 
(e)  When an agreement is required to use the public right-of-way, a permit for the construction work may not be issued until the agreement is obtained. 
(f)  The city's authorization to a person, provider, service provider, network provider, certificated telecommunications provider, wireless service provider or user does not allow use of third party facilities in the public right-of-way. 
(g)  The City's authorization to use its public right-of-way does not extend to the use of any other City property or facilities. 
(h)  The City may impose additional requirements on the activities of a person, provider, service provider, network provider, certificated telecommunications provider, wireless service provider or user in the public right-of-way to the extent that the regulations are reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 34-43. - Registration and construction permits. 
    No person shall commence or continue with the construction or installation of any facility within the City rights-of-way, except as provided by this article or as provided by other City permits or written agreements with the City. 
(a)  Registration required. All users of the right-of-way must register annually with the City. Registration must be renewed and paid to the City Secretary by January 1st of every year. Registration and permits will be issued in the name of the person who will own the facilities. Registration shall include: 
1.  The name of the user of the right-of-way; 
2.  The name, address, and telephone number of the persons who will be contact person(s) for the user; 
3.  The name(s) and telephone number of an emergency contact who shall be available 24 hours a day; 
4.  The location, including exact coordinates by GPS, of all facilities located in the rights-of-way; and 
5.  A description of each facility located in the rights-of-way. 
(b)  Construction permit required. Unless otherwise provided by this article, no person shall perform any construction or installation of facilities in the rights-of-way without first obtaining a construction permit. The permit will be in the name of the person who will own the proposed facilities. The permit must be completed and signed by a representative of the owner of the proposed facilities. The permit shall state to whom it is issued, location of work, location of proposed facilities, estimated dates and times the work is to take place and any other conditions set out by the City Administrator or his/her designee, or other decision making body when applicable. 
1.  Information required for a permit. The person requesting a permit will provide the City Administrator or his/her designee with documentation describing: 
i.  The proposed, approximate location with GPS coordinates and route of all facilities to be constructed or installed and the applicant's plan for right-of-way construction. 
ii.  Engineering plans provided on a drawing scale not smaller than one inch equals 100 feet unless otherwise approved by the City Administrator. 
iii.  Description of all existing public and private utilities in close proximity to applicant's proposed route. 
iv.  Description of the applicant's proposed installation, such as pipe size, number of interducts, valves, and other related information. 
v.  Description of plans to remove and replace pavement or drainage works in streets. Plans submitted must conform to the City's standard construction requirements, City Code of Ordinances and the City's applicable building codes. 
vi.  Drawings of any bores, trenches, handholes, manholes, switch gear, transformers, pedestals, and similar items including depth. 
vii.  Manholes of the type applicant plans to use or access. 
viii.  Complete legend of drawings submitted by applicant, which may be provided by reference to previously submitted documents. 
ix.  Three sets of engineering plans must be submitted with permit application. 
x.  The construction and installation methods to be employed for the protection of existing facilities, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the right-of-way, and the estimated dates and times work will occur, all of which (methods, dates, and times) are subject to approval of the City Administrator or his/her designee; 
xi.  A traffic control plan per the MUTCD for any proposed traffic routing or proposed lane closures; 
xii.  A stormwater pollution prevention plan and trench safety plan, if applicable; 
xiii.  Three sets of scaled dimensioned drawings of proposed attachments to poles, as well as other proposed equipment associated with the permit application, indicating the spacing from existing curb, public right-of-way line, driveways, sidewalks, light poles, off street pathways, and any other poles or appurtenances, together with an existing aerial and street view of the proposed location; 
xiv.  For installation of any proposed pole, a sectional detail showing the depth of anchor, scaled dimension drawings of the proposed pole, as well as any other proposed equipment associated with the proposed installation, indicating spacing from existing curb, public right-of-way line, driveways, sidewalks, light poles, off street pathways and any other poles or appurtenances; 
xv.  Construction and installation methods to be employed for protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the public right-of-way and the dates and times the work will occur, all of which are subject to approval of the City Administrator, Supervisor, City Engineer or their designee; 
xvi.  For any proposed work that involves installation of facilities that will use radio frequencies, evidence in a form acceptable to the City Administrator, showing that the proposed installation will be compatible with the City's systems and will not cause interference with the City's public safety radio system, traffic signal light system, or other City communications systems or components; 
xvii.  A copy of the certificate issued by the Public Utility Commission for telecommunications, cable service providers, and video service providers; 
xviii.  Proof of compliance with private deed restrictions or other private restrictions where applicable; 
xix.  If the project lies within a highway right-of-way, evidence of a permit from the state or federal authority; 
xx.  If the project lies within property owned by a railroad company, evidence of written authorization from the railroad company; 
xxi.  If the project is for installation of network node facilities and/or network node service poles, a map or document showing the intended network node location and its distance from a designated historic landmark, park, or school, utility pole, node support pole, and other network nodes on a service pole, if any, and depicting the sidewalks, and ramps onto sidewalks required by applicable Codes, TAS, or other law, including the Americans with Disabilities Act, and paved street surface and utility easements; 
xxii.  Proof or a certificate of compliance with all applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission; 
xxiii.  Proof or certification that the proposed facilities will be placed into active commercial service by or for a network provider or user within 60 days after the date the construction and final testing of the facilities is completed as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Chapter 284. An updated certification of active service must be submitted annually, by no later than January 1 st , with or prior to payment of the applicable annual fee(s); and 
xxiv.  Proof of insurance or net worth as required. 
2.  Access to site. All construction and installation in the right-of-way shall be in accordance with the permit for the facilities. The City Administrator or his/her designee shall be provided access to the work and to such further information as may reasonably be required to ensure compliance with the permit. 
3.  Plans at site. A copy of the construction permit and approved engineering plans shall be maintained at the construction site and made available for inspection by the City Administrator, supervisor or his/her/their designee at all times when construction or installation work is occurring. 
4.  Timeliness. All construction or installation work authorized by permit must be completed in the time specified in the construction permit. If the work cannot be completed in the specified time periods, the permit holder may request an extension from the City Administrator or his/her designee. A permit issued under this article is valid for the time period specified by the City Administrator, based upon the estimated time to complete the work. Upon the written request of the permit holder, the City Administrator may grant additional time to complete the work under the permit. If the person receiving the permit fails to act upon the permit within 180 days of issuance, the permit shall be invalid and the person will be required to obtain another permit. 
5.  Approval. Unless otherwise provided by this article, requests for permits shall be approved or disapproved by the City Administrator or his/her designee within a reasonable time of receiving all the necessary information. The City Administrator or his/her designee shall use his/her best efforts to approve or disapprove a request for permit as soon as possible. 
6.  Pre-construction meeting. The City Administrator or user may request a pre-construction meeting. 
(c)  Exception to construction permit requirement. The following activities shall not be required to obtain a permit under this article. 
1.  Emergencies. Emergency responses related to existing facilities may be undertaken without first obtaining a permit; however, the City Administrator must be notified in writing within two business days of any construction related to an emergency response. A reasonably detailed description of the work performed in the right-of-way and an updated map of any facilities moved shall be provided as soon as practicable; 
2.  Routine maintenance. Except as specifically provided otherwise by this article, the installation of facilities necessary to initiate utility, water, wastewater or other service to a customer's property or the repair or maintenance of existing facilities, unless such repair or maintenance requires the breaking of pavement, excavation in the right-of-way, or the closure of a public traffic lane for greater than two hours, are not required to obtain a permit under this article; 
3.  Exempt by law. Maintenance or replacement activities exempt by law from obtaining a permit; 
4.  Existing facilities. The repair, replacement, or maintenance of an existing telephone line, natural gas line, electric line, cable television or telecommunications line, irrigation line, or other existing pipe, cable, or facility lawfully located in the public right-of-way, if the repair, replacement, or maintenance does not require the digging up, breaking up, cutting, excavation, drilling or tunneling under or the removal, modification, or excavation of a public street, sidewalk, water or sewer line, or other City-owned improvement, except as may otherwise be provided in state law; 
5.  Existing vegetation. The repair, replacement, or maintenance of existing trees, shrubs, flowers, grass, vegetation, berms, decorative landscaping, or watering systems that are lawfully located in the public-right-way, if the repair, replacement, or maintenance does not require the digging up, breaking up, cutting, excavation, drilling or tunneling under, or the removal, modification, or excavation, of a public street, sidewalk, water or sewer line, or other City-owned improvement; 
6.  Work for City. Any work performed for the City under a contract with the City; or 
7.  Sign permit work. Any work required to install a sign on a public right-of-way if the applicant has received a sign permit from the City pursuant to Chapter 30 of the City Code of Ordinances and has complied with the requirements of this article. 
(d)  Consolidated permit application. A network provider that will install or collocate multiple network nodes inside the City limits may file a consolidated permit application with the City for no more than 30 network nodes. 
(e)  FCC/PUC documents. Copies of petitions, applications, and reports submitted by the permit holder to the Federal Communications Commission or the Texas Public Utility Commission shall be provided to the City upon request. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 34-44. - Insurance, liability and indemnity. 
(a)  Insurance. An applicant must provide proof of liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00, as approved by the City Administrator or his/her designee. Such requirements may be waived by the City Administrator or his/her designee, if the applicant provides acceptable evidence of self-insurance backed by assets equal to but not less than a net worth in the amount of at least $5,000,000.00 as approved by the City Administrator or his/her designee and/or the City Mayor or his/her designee. 
1.  The coverage provided shall be on an "occurrence" basis and shall include coverage for personal injury, contractual liability, premises liability, medical damages, underground, explosion, and collapse hazards. 
2.  Each policy must include a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is required to notify the City in writing not fewer than 30 days before canceling, failing to renew, or reducing policy limits. 
3.  The applicant shall file the required original certificate of insurance prior to any commencement of work. The certificate shall state the policy number; name of the insurance company; name and address of the agent or authorized representative of the insurance company; name, address and telephone number of insured; policy expiration date; and specific coverage amounts. 
4.  Applicant shall file a surety bond from a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Texas in the amount of $15,000.00 to guarantee the restoration of the right-of-way in the event the applicant leaves a job site in the right-of-way unfinished, incomplete, or unsafe. Such requirement for a surety bond may be waived by the City Administrator or his/her designee upon a showing of financial responsibility by the applicant. 
5.  The applicant agrees to waive its right to subrogation against the City and its officers and employees for bodily injury (including death), property damage, or any other loss. 
6.  The insurance coverage required by this article is considered primary insurance in regard to the City and its officers, employees, and elected representatives. Proof of insurance in the form of an original industry standard certificate of insurance showing the City as an additional insured must be provided to the City Administrator prior to any commencement of work by the applicant. The certificate of insurance must be executed by the insurer or its authorized agent and must state specific coverage, limits, and expiration dates in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
7.  The applicant shall make available to the City Administrator, upon request, a copy of the insurance policy, including any endorsements, riders, and amendments to the policy and any statements respecting coverage under the policy. 
(b)  Liability. A person owning facilities in the public right-of-way is responsible and liable for acts or omissions of its employees, temporary employees, officers, directors, consultants, agents, affiliates, subsidiaries, contractors, and subcontractors involving the installation of all facilities in the public right-of- way as if such acts or omissions were the acts or omissions of the person owning the facilities in the public right-of-way. 
(c)  Indemnity. The following indemnity provisions apply to a service provider, provider, or network provider and are express terms of a permit issued under this article: 
1.  A licensee who is a certificated telecommunications provider as defined in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Chapter 283, as amended, or a network provider as defined in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Chapter 284, as amended, shall provide to the City the indemnity provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 283.057, as amended. 
2.  A licensee, other than a certificated telecommunications provider or network provider described in paragraph 1. of this subsection, expressly agrees to fully and completely defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City and its officers, agents, and employees, against any and all claims, lawsuits, judgments, costs, and expenses for personal injury (including death), property damage or other harm for which recovery of damages is sought, suffered by any person or persons, that may arise out of or be occasioned by any negligent, grossly negligent, wrongful or strictly liable act or omission of the licensee or its agents, employees, or contractors, in the performance of work or activity pursuant to the permit issued under this article, regardless of whether or not the negligence, gross negligence, wrongful act, or fault of the City or its officers, agents or employees, contributes in any way to the damage, injury, or other harm. Expenses shall include any reasonable and necessary attorney's fees and court costs. Nothing in this paragraph may be construed as waiving any governmental immunity available to the City under state law. This provision is solely for the benefit of the licensee and the City and is not intended to create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, in or to any other third party or person. 
The City shall give the permit holder prompt written notice of any claim for which the City seeks indemnification. The permit holder shall have the right to investigate, defend and compromise any such claim. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 34-45. - Relocation, conformance, restoration and removal of facilities. 
A.  Removal or relocation required for city project. 
(a)  Within 90 days after receiving written notice from the City and as allowed by state and federal law, any person owning facilities/network provider located in the public right-of-way must, as directed by the City and at the person's sole cost, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any of the facilities that are in the public right-of-way whenever the City determines that the removal, relocation, change or alteration is necessary: 
1.  For the construction, repair, maintenance, installation, completion, relocation, replacement, or widening of any City improvement, street, facilities, or equipment, in or upon the public right-of-way; or 
2.  The facilities have become obsolete. 
(a1)  This subsection complies with Chapter 284, Section 284.107. 
(b)  Facilities that are not conformed within the 90-day notice period will be deemed abandoned and the City will not be liable for any damage to or destruction or removal of the facilities, or for any interruption or termination of service through the facilities caused by activity of the City described in this section. As allowed by state and federal law, a person owning facilities/network provider located in the public right-of-way must remove its facilities that have been abandoned regardless of whether it receives notice from the City. Removal must be completed immediately if the City notifies the person immediate removal is necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare. 
(c)  The relocation or removal of facilities must comply with state and federal law and this article. The facility owner/network provider understands and acknowledges that the City may require its facilities be removed or relocated from the public right-of-way for the construction, completion, repair, widening, relocation, or maintenance of, or used in connection with, any City construction or maintenance project of a street or public right-of-way to enhance the traveling public's use for travel and transportation. 
(d)  If a person does not remove or relocate its facilities as required under subsection (a) of this section, the City may remove the facilities at the person's sole cost and expense, without further notice to the person. Within 30 days after receiving an invoice from the City, the person shall reimburse the City for its reasonable expenses incurred in the removal or relocation of the facilities. 
B.  Removal required by city for safety and imminent danger purposes. 
(a)  If the City administrator or his/her designee determines that there is imminent danger to the public health, safety and welfare, the City Administrator may immediately disconnect, remove or relocate a facility owner's/network provider's facilities in the public right-of-way at the facility owner's/network provider's sole cost. The facility owner/network provider shall reimburse the City for its reasonable expenses incurred in the removal or relocation of the facilities within 30 days following receipt of an invoice from the City. 
(b)  Facility owner/network provider shall, at its sole cost and expense, promptly disconnect, remove, or relocate the applicable facilities within the time frame and in the manner required by the City Administrator if the City Administrator reasonably determines that the disconnection, removal, or relocation of any part of the facilities (i) is necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, or City property, (ii) the facilities, or portion thereof, is adversely affecting proper operation of streetlights or City property, or (c) facility owner/network provider fails to obtain all applicable licenses, permits, and certifications required by law for its facilities, or use of any location under applicable law in strict accordance with the City's Code of Ordinances, and other applicable laws, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284. 
(c)  The City Administrator shall provide 90 days written notice to the facility owner/network provider before removing facilities or other equipment under this section, unless there is imminent danger to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
C.  Removal or relocation by facility owner/network provider. 
(a)  If a person owning a facility/network provider in the public right-of-way removes or relocates the facility at its discretion, the person shall notify the City in writing not less than ten business days prior to the removal or relocation. A relocation must be performed at the person's sole cost and expense. The person shall obtain all permits required, if any, for the removal or relocation of the person's facilities prior to the removal or relocation. 
(b)  A person owning facilities/network provider in the public right-of-way must restore and repair damage to the public right-of-way caused by the relocation or removal of its facilities within ten calendar days of the removal or relocation at the person' sole cost and expense. The public right-of-way must be restored to substantially the same condition as it was immediately before the removal or relocation, including restoration or replacement of damaged trees, shrubs, or other vegetation. Such repair, restoration and replacement shall be subject to the sole reasonable approval of the City Administrator or his/her designee. 
(c)  A person owning facilities/network provider in the public right-of-way shall remove its facilities when such facilities are abandoned regardless of whether or not it receives notice from the City. Unless the City sends notice that removal must be completed immediately to ensure public health, safety, and welfare, the removal must be completed within 90 days of the facilities being abandoned or within 90 days of receipt of written notice from the City. When facility owner, network provider removes, or abandons permanent structures in the right-of-way, the facility owner, network provider shall notify the City Administrator in writing of such removal or abandonment and shall file with the City Administrator the location and description of each facility removed or abandoned. The City Administrator may require the facility owner, network provider to complete additional remedial measures necessary for public safety and the integrity of the right-of-way. 
(d)  The City will not issue any refunds for amounts paid by a person for a permit or application for the facilities that are removed or relocated. 
D.  Restoration of property. 
(a)  Restoration of affected property required. Users of the right-of-way shall restore property affected by construction in the right-of-way to a condition that is equal to or better than the condition of the property prior to the performance of the work. This includes, but is not limited to, replacing all natural ground cover with an equal or better type of ground cover damaged during work, either by sodding or seeding, as directed by City Administrator. 
(b)  Restoration requirements. Restoration shall be to the reasonable satisfaction of the City Administrator. The restoration shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Installation of all manholes and handholes, as required; 
2.  All bore pits, potholes, trenches, or any other holes shall be covered or barricaded daily; 
3.  Leveling of all trenches and backhoe lines; and 
4.  Restoration of excavation site to City specifications. 
(c)  Locator flags. All locator flags shall be removed during the cleanup process by the permit holder or his/her contractor at the completion of the work. 
E.  No allocation of city funds for removal and storage. The City has no funds appropriated to pay for the cost of any removal or storage of facilities as authorized under this article, and no other monies are allocated. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 34-46. - Stop work orders; denial or revocation of permit; appeals. 
(a)  If a person violates a provision of this article, or applicable codes and ordinances, the City Administrator or his/her designee may issue a written stop work order to the violator directing any work or activity authorized to be done under a permit to cease until the violation is corrected. Upon receiving a stop work order, the permit holder must immediately cause all work authorized under the permit to stop, but may take steps necessary to secure the site. 
(b)  The City Administrator or his/her designee may revoke a permit for a violation of this article. To revoke a permit, the City Administrator or his/her designee must send or deliver written notice of a violation to the permit holder ordering the violation to be corrected within a specified time. If the permit holder fails to correct the violation as directed, the City Administrator or his/her designee may revoke the permit by giving notice to the permit holder in writing. 
(c)  Any person may appeal the denial or revocation of a permit, the interpretation or application of a requirement of this article, the issuance of a stop work order or notice of violation, or other requirement or action imposed under this article by the City Administrator or his/her designee. The appeal must be submitted in writing to the City Administrator or his/her designee within 72 hours of the action being appealed. The City Administrator or his/her designee will promptly review the facts and issue a written determination. 
(d)  The revocation, denial and appeal provisions in this section govern over any other conflicting provision in this Code of Ordinances, except as provided by Chapter 284 provisions found in division 2 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 34-47. - Violations and Penalty. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly construct, place, maintain, or operate any line, wire, pipe, conduit, equipment, pole, structure, or facility in a public right-of-way or other public property for the purpose of providing water, wastewater, electrical, natural gas, or other service for which use of the public right-of-way is not authorized by state law, to any person, without first receiving the consent of the City Administrator or his/her designee. The City may, as a condition of giving its consent, require the person requesting such use to enter into a written agreement with the City containing the conditions under which the use of the public rights-of-way will be permitted. To the extent any provision contained in this Section conflicts with V.T.C.A, Local Government Code, Chapter 284, such provision shall not apply, shall be void and shall be struck from this Section. 
(b)  Except in cases of emergency, it is unlawful for any person to knowingly dig up, break, cut, excavate, drill or tunnel in or on any public right-of-way without first obtaining a right-of-way work permit from the City. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly install or place any facilities in a public right-of-way or make use of the public right-of-way for any purpose not authorized by state law. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly violate a provision of this article. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person doing work under a permit to violate a provision of the permit. 
(f)  It is unlawful for any person to continue work under a permit after receiving a stop work order or receiving notice that a stop work order has been issued or to resume the work or activity until the City Administrator or Supervisor withdraws the stop work order. 
(g)  Each unauthorized use of the public right-of-way or other public property is a separate offense. And each day a violation continues is a separate offense. Any person violating this article, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. A culpable mental state is not required to prove an offense under this article. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 34-48-34-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATED TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS AND NETWORK PROVIDERS 

Sec. 34-50. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to: 
1.  Assist the City in the management of the public rights-of-way; 
2.  Govern the use and occupancy of the rights-of-way by telecommunications and network providers; 
3.  Secure fair and reasonable compensation for the use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way by all persons, providers, users in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner; and 
4.  Assist the City in its efforts to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 34-51. - General terms. 
(a)  Authority required/non-exclusive use. All certificated telecommunications providers and/or network providers must provide evidence that the certificated telecommunications provider and/or network provider has acquired authorization from the Texas Public Utility Commission pursuant to state law, prior to obtaining a permit to use the public right-of-way. The right to use and occupy the public right-of-way shall not be exclusive, and the City shall have the right to exercise its police powers and manage its public right-of-way, based upon all other state or federal laws. The City reserves the right to grant franchises, licenses, easements or permissions to use the rights-of-way within the City to any person as the City, in its sole discretion, may determine to be in the public interest. 
(b)  Permit for installation of wireless facilities. A network provider may not install network nodes or node support equipment in any public right-of-way until a permit to do so has been issued by the City pursuant to the requirements set forth in section 34-43(a)-(e) of this article. 
(c)  Prohibited or restricted areas for wireless facilities in the right-of-way. 
1.  Municipal parks and residential areas. A network provider may not install a new node support pole in a municipal park, unless permission is given by the City Administrator; or in a right-of-way that contains a street that is equal to or less than 50 feet wide, measuring curb-to-curb, and is adjacent to developed or undeveloped single-family residential lots, other multifamily residential area or land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. 
2.  Historic districts and design districts. A network provider must obtain advance written approval from the City before collocating network nodes or installing node support poles in a design district with decorative poles or in an area of the City zoned or otherwise designated as a design district or historic district. As a condition for approval of network nodes or node support poles in design districts with decorative poles or in an historic district, the City shall require reasonable design or concealment measures for the network nodes or node support poles. All network providers must comply with the City's Design Manual for the Installation of Network Nodes and Node Support Poles on file with the City Secretary in the City office. 
(d)  Notification requirements for certificated telecommunications providers and network providers. A certificated telecommunications provider and/or network provider shall notify the City Administrator or his/her designee of any sale, transfer, merger or assignment of the ownership or control of a certificated telecommunications provider's or network provider's business within 30 days of such sale, transfer, merger or assignment. A certificated telecommunications provider and/or network provider shall also maintain and provide current point-of-contact information with the City Administrator or his/her designee at all times during which the certificated telecommunications provider and/or network provider uses the right-of-way. 
(e)  The provisions found in section 34-45 of this article pertaining to relocation, conformance and removal of facilities shall apply to all persons, facility owners, telecommunications providers, network providers, and/or users performing work under this division. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 34-52. - Installation, inspections and construction. 
(a)  Installation. A network provider shall, at its own cost and expense, install the micro network node, network node, node support poles and related ground equipment in a good and workmanlike manner and in accordance with the requirements promulgated by the City in its Design Manual for the Installation of Network Nodes and Node Support Poles, as such may be amended from time to time. Network provider's work shall be subject to the regulation, control and direction of the City Administrator. All work done in connection with the installation, operation, maintenance, repair, modification, and/or replacement of the micro network node, network node, node support poles and related ground equipment shall be in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations of the City, applicable county, the state, and the United States. 
(b)  Inspections. The City Administrator, or his/her designee, may perform visual inspections of any micro network node, network node, node support pole or related ground equipment located in the public right-of-way as the City Administrator deems appropriate without notice. If the inspection requires physical contact with the micro network node, network node, node support poles or related ground equipment, the City Administrator shall provide written notice to the network provider within five business days of the planned inspection. The network provider may have a representative present during such inspection. 
(c)  Construction requirements. Except where otherwise provided by state law, a network provider shall construct and maintain facilities in accordance with the City's Design Manual for the Installation of Network Nodes and Node Support Poles to ensure facilities do not: 
1.  Obstruct, impede, or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way; 
2.  Obstruct the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers; 
3.  Violate applicable codes; 
4.  Violate or conflict with the City's public right-of-way design specifications; or 
5.  Violate the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. 
(d)  Permit limited. A permit provided under this division does not provide authorization for attachment of network nodes on poles and other structures owned or operated by investor-owned electric utilities, as defined by V.T.C.A., Utilities Code, § 31.002, electric cooperatives, telephone cooperatives, as defined by V.T.C.A., Utilities Code, § 162.003, or wireless providers, as defined by V.T.C.A., Utilities Code, § 51.002. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 34-53. - Application review process. 
(a)  Determination of application completeness. The City shall determine whether the permit application is complete and notify the applicant of that determination. The City shall identify the missing information if the City determines that the application is not complete: 
1.  For network nodes and node support poles: no later than 30 business days after the date the City receives the permit application. 
2.  For a transport facility: no later than ten business days after the date the City receives the permit application. 
(b)  Approval or denial of application. The City shall approve or deny a completed application after the date it is submitted to the City: 
1.  For network nodes: No later than 60 business days after the date the City Administrator receives the complete application. 
2.  For node support poles: No later than 150 business days after the date the City receives the complete application. 
3.  For transport facilities: No later than 21 business days after the City receives the complete application. 
(c)  Basis for denial of application. If the City denies an application, it shall document the basis for the denial, including the specific applicable City code provisions or other City rules, regulations, or other law on which the denial is based. The documentation for the denial must be sent by electronic mail to the applicant on or before the date that the City Administrator denies the application. 
(d)  Resubmission of denied application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified in the denial application. 
1.  The applicant has 30 business days from the date the City denies the completed application to cure the deficiencies identified in the denial documentation and resubmit the application without paying an additional application fee, other than any fee for actual costs incurred by the City. 
2.  The City shall approve or deny the resubmitted and completed application after a denial not later than the 90th business day after the date the City receives the resubmitted and completed application. The City's review of the resubmitted application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial documentation. 
3.  Business day means Monday through Friday, excepting local, state or federal holidays. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 34-54. - Exceptions to permit requirement; Notice requirement. 
(a)  A network provider is not required to obtain a construction permit, or pay a rate to the City for: 
1.  Routine maintenance that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; 
2.  Replacing or upgrading a network node or network pole with a node or pole that is substantially similar in size or smaller and that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; or 
3.  The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro network nodes that are strung on cables between existing poles or node support poles in compliance with the National Electrical Safety Code. 
(b)  At least 24-hour advance written notice to the City of work performed under this section is required, including proof that the network provider is acting with approval of a facility/pole's owner; and proof that the size limitations may not in any event exceed the parameters prescribed by this article and the City's Design Manual. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 34-55. - Fees. 
(a)  Network Provider Fees. 
1.  Annual network node user fee/network node rate for right-of-way use. Network providers shall pay the City an annual network node user fee for each location for which network provider has obtained permit(s) for the installation of network nodes, regardless of whether or not a network provider installs network nodes in the public right-of-way. The amount of the annual network node user fee shall be set by resolution in the City's Centralized/Master Fee Schedule. The annual network node user fee payment for the first year at any location begins accruing when the permit is issued and is due 30 days after network provider obtains a permit to install or collocate a network node at the location. 
(i)  The initial annual network node user fee shall be pro-rated for the months remaining in the calendar year after the permit issuance date. 
(ii)  The annual network node user fee for every year after the initial annual network node payment shall be paid in advance on or before January 1st of each calendar year for each network node in the public right-of-way for the next calendar year period. 
(iii)  Annual network node user fee adjustment. The City may adjust the annual network node user fee by an amount equal to one-half the annual change in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers for Texas, as published by the federal Bureau of Labor Statistics. The City shall provide written notice to each network provider of the new rate, and the new rate shall apply to the first payment due to the City on or after the 60th day following the City's notice. 
2.  Annual collocation on city service pole attachment fee. Network providers shall pay the City an annual collocation on City service pole fee for each network node permitted to be collocated on a City service pole for each location for which network provider has obtained permit(s) to co-locate a network node on a service pole, regardless of whether or not a network provider collocates a network node on a service pole. The amount of the annual collocation on City service pole fee shall be set by resolution in the City's Centralized/Master Fee Schedule. Payment for the first year at any service pole location begins accruing when the permit is issued and is due 30 days after network provider obtains a permit to install or collocate a network node at the service pole location. 
(i)  The initial annual collocation on City service pole fee shall be pro-rated for the months remaining in the calendar year after the permit issuance date. 
(ii)  The annual collocation on City service pole fee for every year after the initial annual network node payment shall be paid in advance on or before January 1st of each calendar year for each network node collocated in the public right-of-way for the next calendar year. 
3.  Monthly transport facility user fee. Network providers shall pay the City a monthly transport facility user fee for each network node located in the public right-of-way, which shall be paid on a quarterly basis, in the amount set by resolution in the City's Centralized/Master Fee Schedule, which begins accruing when the permit is issued. This monthly transport facility user fee is in addition to any annual network node user fee/network node annual rental rate for use of the public right-of-way as required by Chapter 284, Section 284.053, as amended. 
4.  Network node application fee. Network provider shall pay the City the application fees set by resolution in the City's Centralized/Master Fee Schedule contemporaneously with the submittal of the application for the permit(s). 
5.  No other fees. The City shall not charge a network provider any other fees or seek payment for any other compensation, other than the fees and compensation provided for in this section as authorized by Chapter 284, as may be amended. 
(b)  Annexation and disannexation. Within 30 days following the date of the passage of any action effecting the annexation of any property to or the disannexation of any property from the City's corporate boundaries, the City agrees to furnish user written notice of the action and an accurate map of the City's corporate boundaries showing, if available, street names and number details. For the purpose of compensating the City under this article, a permit holder shall start including or excluding facilities within the affected area in the permit holder's count of facilities within 30 days of receipt of the City's notice of the annexation or disannexation. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 34-56. - Design manual and certificates of operation. 
(a)  Compliance with design manual. A network provider shall comply with the City's Design Manual for the Installation of Network Nodes and Node Support Poles, as amended. 
(b)  Certificates of operation. 
1.  As part of the application process for the installation of network nodes, the network provider must certify that the proposed network node will be placed into active commercial service by or for a network provider no later than the 60th day after the date the construction and final testing of the network node is completed. 
2.  An updated certification of active service must be submitted annually, by no later than December 31st, with or prior to payment of the applicable annual fee(s). 
3.  If the network provider is not in active commercial service for a period in excess of 60 consecutive days, the equipment will be deemed abandoned and the permit will be revoked. The network provider will be required, within 90 days from notification from the City, to remove the equipment at the network provider's sole expense. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 34-57. - Violations and Penalty. 
    The penalty provisions in section 34-47 of this article shall apply to this division. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 34-58. - Conflicts with other requirements. 
    Where this Division conflicts with any other provision of the City Code of Ordinances, this division shall control. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 9-12-2017) 
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL USERS OF THE CITY'S PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY 

Sec. 34-59. - Additional requirements applicable to all users. 
    The following provisions apply to any person, provider, network provider, telecommunications provider or user performing any construction, installation or other work in the public right-of-way, whether under a permit issued under this article or otherwise: 
(a)  Specifications. All excavations, alterations, backfill, repairs, and other work in or on the public right-of-way must be made in conformance with any written specifications or requirements adopted by the City. The City Administrator, the Supervisor or the City engineer may allow modifications of a specification if unusual circumstances are present, the modifications will comply with the spirit and intent of the specification, and the modification will not adversely affect the public safety or welfare. All work must be performed in a good and workmanlike manner and in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, and rules and regulations. 
(b)  Boring and encasing. If the City Administrator or Supervisor determines it is impractical to excavate within a street, all pipelines, conduits, or other crossings must be bored, tunneled, or drilled under the paved section, and, if required by the City Administrator or Supervisor, the crossings must be encased in a manner approved by the City Administrator or his/her designee. 
(c)  Damage to city streets. Any type of ditching equipment used on City streets must be equipped with street pads. All damage done to public right-of-way and other public property during the work must be repaired by the permit holder to City specifications. If the permit holder fails to make the repairs, the City Administrator may make the repairs and charge the cost to the permit holder. 
(d)  Correction of Defects. If a permit holder fails to properly restore the surface of the public right-of-way or other public property, abandons the work, or fails to correct a hazardous condition after notice to do so, the City Administrator may take any action necessary to restore the right-of-way, complete the work, or correct the hazardous condition at the permit holder's sole expense. 
1.  A permit holder shall restore and repair the rights-of-way from any damage to the rights-of-way, or any facilities located within the rights-of-way, and the property of any third party resulting from permit holder's removal or relocation activities, or any other of permit holder's activities under this article, in strict accordance with the City's Code of Ordinances, and other applicable laws, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284. 
2.  A permit holder shall repair any damage to the rights-of-way, or any facilities located within the rights-of-way, and the property of any third party resulting from permit holder's removal or relocation activities, or any other of permit holder's activities under this article, within ten calendar days following the date of such removal or relocation, at permit holder's sole cost and expense, including restoration of the rights-of-way and such property to substantially the same condition as it was immediately before the date permit holder was granted a permit for the applicable location or did the work at such location (even if the person did not first obtain a permit), including restoration or replacement of any damaged trees, shrubs or other vegetation. Such repair, restoration and replacement shall be subject to the sole, reasonable approval of the City Administrator. 
(e)  Debris on public rights-of-way. During the work, the public right-of-way must be kept clean of excessive rubbish, earth, mud, rock, and other debris, to the satisfaction of the City Administrator. 
(f)  Traffic safety. All work in a public right-of-way or adjacent to a street must be done with barricades, traffic cones, lights, flares, signs, flagmen, and other traffic control devices as specified in the latest edition of the MUTCD of the Texas Department of Transportation. Where the City Administrator or his/her designee believes it is necessary to avoid traffic congestion or for public safety, the City Administrator may require work be done only at certain hours during the day or night. Any excavation in the public right- of-way that is a potential danger to the public must be secured against entry in the manner specified by the City Administrator or his/her designee. 
(g)  Inspection. The City Administrator, Supervisor or their designee and applicable code enforcement officer may inspect the work to determine whether the facilities are being or have been constructed in compliance with this article, applicable codes, other applicable ordinances, and state law. The owner of the facilities must correct work that is not in compliance with the foregoing requirements. 
(h)  As-built maps and records. The facility owner, network provider, or user shall maintain accurate maps and other appropriate records of its facilities as they are actually constructed in the rights-of-way, including, upon request, the use of Auto CAD/GIS digital format. Facility owner, network provider or user will provide additional maps to the City upon request. 
(i)  Ownership. A facility owner's, network provider's or user's facilities erected or placed in or on the public right-of-way shall not be considered to be affixed to or part of the public right-of-way. All such facilities will be and remain the property of the facility owner, network provider and may be removed by the facility owner, network provider at any time, provided that the facility owner, network provider or user must notify the City Administrator prior to any work in the public right-of-way; and removal is performed in strict accordance with all applicable City ordinances, state and federal laws. 
(j)  Tree maintenance. The owner of facilities, network provider or user in the public right-of-way must obtain written permission from the City Administrator before trimming trees hanging over the City's facilities, or its facilities to prevent branches from contacting the City's facilities or its facilities. When directed by the City Administrator, the owner of the facilities, network provider or user shall trim the trees under the supervision and direction of the City's inspector or his/her designee. The City will not be liable for any damages, injuries, or claims arising the owner's actions under this subsection. 
(k)  Graffiti abatement. As soon as practicable but not later than 14 calendar days from receipt of written notice from the City, the owner of facilities, network provider or user in the public right-of-way shall remove all graffiti on its facilities located in the public right-of-way. The foregoing shall not relieve the owner of facilities, network provider or user from complying with any City graffiti or visual blight ordinance or regulation. 
(l)  Drug policy. It is the policy of the City to achieve a drug-free workforce and workplace. The manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession, sale or use of illegal drugs or alcohol by facility owner's, network providers, user's employees, contractors, subcontractors, or vendors while on City premises, including the public rights-of-way, is prohibited. 
(m)  Minimize ground equipment density. In accordance with Chapter 284, Section 284.102(1) to enhance the safety requirements of line of sight of pedestrians, particularly small children, the City Administrator may deny a request for a proposed location if the network provider installs network node ground equipment where existing ground equipment within 300 feet already occupies a footprint of 25 square feet or more. 
(n)  Concealment. Facilities, including but not limited to network node facilities, shall be concealed or enclosed as much as reasonably possible in an equipment box, cabinet, or other unit that may include ventilation openings. External cables and wires hanging off a pole shall be sheathed or enclosed in a conduit, and positioned on the pole in a manner hidden from view of the street to the extent practical, so that wires are protected and not visible or visually minimized to the extent possible in strict accordance with the City's rights-of-way management ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284. 
(o)  Minimize ground equipment concentration. In order to minimize negative visual impact to the surrounding area, and in accordance with Chapter 284, Section 284.102(1) to enhance the safety requirements of line of sight of pedestrians, particularly small children, the City Administrator may deny a request for a proposed location if the network provider installs network node ground equipment where existing ground equipment within 300 feet already occupies a footprint of 25 square feet or more to minimize effect on property values and aesthetics on the area. 
(p)  Allowed colors. Colors in historic districts and historic areas and design districts must be approved by the City Administrator from a palette of approved colors. Unless otherwise provided, all colors shall be earth tones or shall match the background of any structure the facilities are located upon and all efforts shall be made for the colors to be inconspicuous. Colors in areas other than in historic districts and historic areas and design districts shall conform to colors of other installations of telecommunication providers in the immediately adjacent areas. 
(q)  Interference not permitted. A facility owner, network provider or user shall operate all facilities in accordance with all applicable laws, including regulations adopted by the Federal Communications Commission. A facility owner, network provider shall ensure that the operation of its facilities does not cause any harmful radio frequency interference to a Federal Communications Commission-authorized mobile telecommunications operation of the City operating at the time the facilities were initially installed or constructed. On written notice by the City, a facility owner, network provider or user shall take all steps reasonably necessary to remedy any harmful interference. If a facility owner, network provider or user fails to correct any harmful interference within 60 days of written notice, the City may upon 14 day advance written notice revoke any and all permits for the facilities. 
(r)  Cable service not authorized by permit. A permit holder is not authorized to provide cable service as a cable operator in the City under this article, but must first obtain a franchise agreement from the City for that purpose, under such terms and conditions as may be required by law. A permit for the installation, placement, maintenance, or operation of a network node or transport facility under this article shall not confer authorization to provide cable service or video service, as defined by V.T.C.A., Section 66.002, Utilities Code, or information service as defined by 47 U.S.C. Section 153(24), or wireless service as defined by 47 U.S.C. Section 153(53), in the public right-of-way. 
(s)  Signage. Permit holder, facility owner, network provider or user shall post its name, location identifying information, and emergency telephone number in an area on the cabinet of the facility that is visible to the public. Signage required under Chapter 284 shall not exceed four inches by six inches, unless otherwise required by law (e.g. RF ground notification signs) or the City Administrator. Except as required by law or by the utility pole owner, no other signs or advertising shall be posted on the facility, micro network node, network node, node support pole, service pole or utility pole. 
(t)  Permit rights apply to permit holder only. The rights granted by this article inure to the benefit of the permit holder only. The rights granted by permit may not be assigned, transferred, or sold to another person by the permit holder. For the purposes of this article, assignment, transfer or sale means a change of operating control of the permit holder, expressly excepting an assignment or transfer to entities that control, are controlled by or are under common control with permit holder. 
(u)  Deed restrictions. Any person, provider, user, network provider, facility owner installing facilities in a public right-of way shall comply with private deed restrictions and other private restrictions in the area. 
(v)  Courtesy and proper performance. Any person, provider, user, network provider, facility owner shall make citizen satisfaction a priority in using the rights-of-way. The person, provider, user, network provider, facility owner shall train its employees to be customer service-oriented and to positively and politely interact with citizens when dealing with issues pertaining to its facilities in the rights-of-way. The person's, provider's, user's, network provider's, facility owner's employees shall be clean, courteous, efficient, and neat in appearance and committed to offering the highest quality of interaction with the public. If, in the opinion of the City Administrator or his/her designee, the person, provider, user, network provider, facility owner is not interacting in a positive and polite manner with citizens, he or she shall request that person, provider, user, network provider, facility owner to take all remedial steps to conform to these standards. 
(w)  On or before January 1st of each year, or within 30 days of a change in the contact information, an owner of facilities, network provider or user in the public right-of-way must update its contact information, to include the name, address, telephone number and e-mail address of the person to whom the City may provide notices. If the person fails to provide the updated contact information, any notices that are sent shall be considered valid if sent to the name and address of the person on file with the City. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 34-60. - Construction standards applicable to all users. 
(a)  Advance notice required. The City Administrator or his/her designee shall be notified 24 hours in advance that construction is ready to proceed by either the right-of-way user, their contractor or representative, including the name, address, and phone numbers of the contractor performing the actual construction, and the name and telephone number of the individual who will be available at all times during construction. Failure to provide the above information will result in the suspension of the permit until the required information is received. 
(b)  Conformance to other laws. All construction shall be in conformance with all City codes and applicable local, state, and federal laws. 
(c)  Erosion control. Erosion control measures (i.e., silt fence) and advance warning signs, markers, cones, and barricades must be in place before work begins. Permit holder may be required to show proof of EPA approved plans relating to storm water and erosion when applicable or a letter stating such plans are not required. User shall comply with City, state, and federal guidelines regulating storm water management erosion control. Requirements shall include, but not be limited to, silt fencing around any excavation that will be left overnight, silt fencing in erosion areas until reasonable vegetation is established, barricade fencing around open holes, and high erosion areas will require wire backed silt fencing, or straw bales, as appropriate. 
(d)  Lane closures. In the interest of the public safety, the City Administrator or his/her designee may determine that lane closures on collectors, thoroughfares, and streets will be limited to certain hours and/or times of the day. Arrow boards will be required on lane closures, with all barricades, advanced warning signs and thirty-six-inch reflector cones placed according to the specifications of the City Administrator or his/her designee. 
(e)  Workmanship. Users are responsible for the workmanship and any damages caused by a contractor or subcontractor. A responsible representative of the permit holder will be available to City Administrator or his/her designee at all times during construction. 
(f)  Notice of damage. All users shall notify the City Administrator or his/her designee immediately of any damage to other utilities, either City or privately owned. 
(g)  Prior approval required for street or sidewalk cut. Except in an emergency, prior approval must be obtained from the City Administrator or his/her designee when a street or sidewalk cut is required and all requirements of the City shall be followed. Repair of all street and sidewalk removals shall be made promptly to avoid safety hazards to vehicle and pedestrian traffic. 
(h)  Interference prohibited. Newly installed structures shall not interfere with facilities or structures of other users, in particular gravity dependent facilities. 
(i)  Working hours. Except in an emergency, working hours in the rights-of-way are 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Work that needs to be performed after 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday must be approved in advance. Except in an emergency, any work performed on Sunday must be approved at least 24 hours in advance by the City Administrator or his/her designee. Directional boring is permitted only Monday through Friday, unless approved in advance. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 34-61. - Plans of record. 
    Right-of-way users shall provide the City Administrator or his/her designee with "plans of record" within ten days of completion of structures in the right-of-way. The plans shall be provided to the City in the format specified by the City Administrator or his/her designee. Submittal of "plans of record" should be in digital formatting as well as written or in any other format requested by the City Administrator or his/her designee. The requirement to provide "plans of record" may be waived by the City Administrator or his/her designee upon a showing of good cause. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 34-62. - Facility location and conformance with public improvements. 
    Prior to initiating construction of a "City project" in the right-of-way, the City will provide each right-of-way user preliminary project plans at various stages of completion (i.e., 30 percent plans, 60 percent plans, 90 percent plans and final plans). Upon receipt of the first submittal of preliminary project plans (30 percent plans), each right-of-way user shall be responsible for verifying the location of its underground structures in the vicinity of the City's project. In verifying the location of structures as required by this section, each right-of-way user shall compile the information obtained regarding any structures located in the right-of-way that are potentially affected by the City project and shall, within 30 days of receipt of the first submittal of the preliminary project plans, make that information available to the City in a written and verified format acceptable to the City Administrator or his/her designee. Whenever by reasons of widening or straightening of streets, water or sewer line projects, or any other City projects (i.e., install or improve storm drains, water lines, sewer lines) it shall be deemed necessary by the City Council to remove, alter, change, adapt, or conform the underground or overhead structures of a right-of-way user, such alterations shall be made by the owner of the structures at the owner's expense within 45 calendar days from the receipt of written notice to make the alterations, unless a different schedule has been approved by the City Administrator or his/her designee. The owner of the structures shall be responsible for any direct costs incurred by the City, associated with project delays resulting from owner's failure to conform structures within the time limits established by this section. Reimbursement for all costs provided for by this section shall be paid the City within 30 calendar days from the day which the owner receives written notice or an invoice of the costs. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 9-12-2017) 
Sec. 34-63. - Improperly installed facilities or structures. 
(a)  Proper installation required. Facilities or structures in the rights-of-way shall be properly installed, repaired, upgraded and maintained. Facilities or structures shall be considered to be improperly installed, repaired, upgraded, or maintained if: 
1.  The installation, repairs, upgrade, or maintenance endangers people; 
2.  The facilities or structures do not meet the applicable City requirements; 
3.  The facilities or structures are not capable of being located using standard practices; or 
4.  The facilities or structures are not located in the proper place in accordance with the plans approved by the City Administrator or his/her designee. 
(b)  Existing structures. This section shall not apply to facilities or structures installed prior to the effective date of this ordinance unless such facilities or structures are repaired or upgraded. 
(c)  City administrator review of poles. When poles are used, the type of poles, location, depth, upgrades, and other specifications shall be subject to review of the City Administrator or his/her designee, unless otherwise provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 9-12-2017) 
Secs. 34-64-34-65. - Reserved. 
Chapter 36 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of subdivision and property development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212. 

Sec. 36-1. - Authority. 
    This chapter is adopted under the authority of the constitution and laws of the state, including particularly V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 212, and the provisions of the Municipal Annexation Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 43. 
(Code 1981, § 17.1; Ord. of 3-12-1979, § 17.1) 
Sec. 36-2. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly, safe and healthful development of the area within the City, and within the area surrounding the City and to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community. 
(Code 1981, § 17.2; Ord. of 3-12-1979, § 17.2) 
Sec. 36-3. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Definitions not expressly prescribed herein are to be construed in accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices. 
    Alley means a minor public right-of-way, not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    Engineer means the person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Registration Act, as heretofore or hereafter amended, to practice the profession of engineering. 
    Lot means an undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public street and which: 
(1)  Is, or in the future may be offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement; 
(2)  Is designated as a district and separate tract; and 
(3)  Is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat which has been properly filed of record. 
    Pavement width means the portion of a street available for vehicular traffic; where curbs are laid; it is the portion between the faces of curbs. 
    Streets means a public right-of-way, however designated, which provides vehicular access to adjacent land. 
    Subdivider means any person or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as that term is defined herein. Without limitation the term "subdivider" shall include the owner, equitable owner or authorized agent of such owner or equitable owner, of land sought to be subdivided. 
    Subdivision means a division of land within the City limits or in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City, that divides the tract in two or more parts to lay out a subdivision of the tract, including an addition to the City, to lay out suburban, building, or other lots, or to lay out streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts of the tract intended to be dedicated to public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts. A division of a tract under this definition includes a division regardless of whether it is made by using a metes and bounds description in a deed of conveyance or in a contract for a deed, by using a contract of sale or other executory contract to convey, or by using any other method. A division of land under this definition does not include a division of land into parts greater than five acres, where each part has access and no public improvement is being dedicated. 
    Surveyor means a licensed state land surveyor or a registered public surveyor, as authorized by the state statutes to practice the profession of surveying. 
    Utility easement means an interest in land granted to the City, to the public generally, or to a private utility corporation, for installing or maintaining utilities across, over or under land, together with the right to enter thereon with machinery and vehicles necessary for the maintenance of said utilities. 
(Code 1981, § 17.3; Ord. of 3-12-1979, § 17.3) 
Sec. 36-4. - Special provisions. 
(a)  Septic tank permits. No permit shall be issued by the City for the installation of a septic tank upon any lot in any subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, or upon any lot in a subdivision in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
(b)  Building or repair permits. No building or repair permit shall be issued by the City for any structure on a lot in a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, not for any structure on a lot within a subdivision opened after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
(c)  Maintenance by City. The City shall not repair, maintain, install or provide any streets or public utility services in any subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. This subsection (c) shall not apply to streets or public utility services being maintained by the City on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(d)  Utilities. Except insofar as to complete the building of the subdivision the City, utility companies, corporations or individuals shall not sell or supply any water, gas, electricity or sewerage service within a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved or filed for record, nor in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. No such service shall be afforded any subdivision for which no preliminary plat has been filed. 
(e)  Enforcement. In behalf of the City, the City Attorney shall, when directed by the City Council, institute appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this chapter or the standards referred to herein with respect to any violation thereof which occurs within the City, within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City as such jurisdiction as determined under the Municipal Annexation Act, or within any area subject to all or part of the provisions of this chapter. 
(f)  Noncompliance; recordation. If any subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved is opened after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and the City Council shall pass a resolution reciting the fact of such a noncompliance or failure to secure final plat approval, the City Secretary shall, when directed by the City Council, cause a certified copy of such resolution under the corporate seal of the City to be filed in the deed records of the county or counties in which such subdivision or part thereof lies. If full compliance and final plat approval are secured after the filing of such resolution, the City Secretary shall forthwith file an instrument in the deed of records of such county or counties stating that this chapter is no longer violated. 
(Code 1981, § 17.4; Ord. of 3-12-1979, § 17.4) 
Sec. 36-5. - Variances. 
    The City Council may authorize a variance from these regulations when, in its opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In granting a variance, the City Council shall prescribe such conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable in the public interest. 
(Code 1981, § 17.5; Ord. of 3-12-1979, § 17.5) 
Sec. 36-6. - Preliminary conference. 
    Prior to the official filing of a preliminary plat, the subdivider should consult with and present a proposed plan of subdivision to the mayor or the mayor's designate for comments and advice on the procedures, specifications and standards required by the City for the subdivision of land. 
(Code 1981, § 17.6; Ord. of 3-12-1979, § 17.6) 
Sec. 36-7. - Plat requirements and procedure. 
(a)  Filing fees. Each preliminary plat or final plat submitted shall be accompanied by a filing fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time. Both fees shall be applied to replats or a preliminary and final that are submitted at the same time. No action by the City in accepting or approving any plat or plans shall be valid until the filing fee has been paid. This fee shall not be refunded for any plat that is withdrawn or disapproved. 
(b)  Preliminary plat. 
(1)  Following the pre-submission conference required by section 36-6, all persons desiring to subdivide a tract of land into a subdivision as defined in section 36-3 shall first prepare and submit to the City a preliminary plat not less than ten days prior to the date at which formal application for the preliminary plat approval is made to the City Council. 
(2)  The following information on the preliminary plat shall be certified by a state registered professional civil engineer or by a state licensed or registered land surveyor: Seven copies of the preliminary plat showing the general features of the proposed development. This preliminary plat shall be drawn on a scale of 200 feet to the inch or larger (100 feet to the inch preferred) and shall show the following: 
a.  The outline of the tract the plat is proposed to subdivide with principal dimensions. 
b.  The proposed plan of subdivision, showing streets, blocks, lots, alleys, squares, easements, building lines, and parks, with principal dimensions. The preliminary plat shall cover all of the tract intended to be developed, at any time, even though it is intended by the developers or developer to file plats and install improvements for parts of said tract by section or unit. 
c.  The location, width and name of existing streets and any blocks, lots, alleys, easements, building lines and water courses or other natural features in the affected with principal dimensions and any other significant information on all sides for a distance of not less than 200 feet. 
d.  The names of proposed streets. Such names shall conform to the names of existing streets of which they may be or become extensions or otherwise shall not duplicate or conflict with the recognized name of any other street located in the area subject to these regulations. 
e.  The location of existing sewers, water and gas mains and other public utilities, if any. 
f.  A general plan of the stormwater drainage sufficiently detailed to indicate the location of drainage ditches or structures and the direction of flow. 
g.  The name of the proposed subdivision, north point, scale and date. 
h.  The name of the owner or owners and the engineer or surveyor. 
i.  Vicinity sketch or key map at a scale of not more than 800 feet to the inch which shall show all existing subdivisions, streets and tracts of acreage in the area and the general drainage plan, ultimate designation of water and possible storm sewer connections by arrows. 
j.  Typical cross section of the street improvements proposed by the professional engineer. 
k.  Topographical contours of not more than five-foot intervals. 
l.  The original boundary survey of the tract of land to be subdivided, which shall close within one in 10,000 (1:10,000). The original closure calculations for the closure will be furnished with the preliminary plat. Linear dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot; angular dimensions may be shown in bearings. Curved boundaries shall be fully described and all essential information given; circular shall be defined by degree of curve. The subdivision boundary lines be indicated by heavy lines and the computed acreage of the subdivision will be shown on the preliminary plat. 
m.  A number or letter to identify each lot or site and each block. 
n.  A copy of any and all restrictions certified by the subdivider applying to this subdivision only. 
(c)  Processing of preliminary plat. 
(1)  Within 30 days after the preliminary plat is formally filed, the City Council shall conditionally approve or disapprove such plat or conditionally approve it with modifications. If it is conditionally disapproved or conditionally approved with modifications, the City Council shall inform the subdivider of the reasons at the time such action is taken. 
(2)  Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of six months unless reviewed by the City Council in the light of new significant information (whether or not available to the City Council at the time the preliminary plat was approved) which would necessitate a revision of the preliminary plat. If the City Council should deem changes in a preliminary plat as necessary, it shall use the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the installation of streets, water, sewer and other required improvements and utilities and to the preparation of the final or recorded plat. Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute automatic approval of the final plat. 
(Code 1981, § 17.7; Ord. of 3-12-1979, § 17.7) 
Sec. 36-8. - Final plat forms and content. 
(a)  The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as conditionally approved by the City Council incorporating any and all changes, modifications, alterations, corrections and conditions imposed by the City Council. This plat shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, or larger in ink or linen cloth with all figures and letters legible and the whole proper for filing for record in the office of the county clerk. The plat shall be on a 22 inches by 32 inches sheet of linen cloth. 
(b)  The final plat shall also include the following: 
(1)  Owner's Dedication and Acknowledgment. 
THE STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF VAN ZANDT 
    I (We), the undersigned, owner(s) of the land shown on this plat, and designated herein as the ____________ / ____________ / ____________ subdivision to the City of Wills Point, Texas, and whose name is subscribed hereto, hereby dedicate and grant, sell and convey to the use of the City of Wills Point, Texas, forever all streets, alleys, parks, water courses, drains, easements and public places hereon shown for the purpose and consideration therein expressed. 
____________ Owner  
THE STATE OF TEXAS COUNTY OF VAN ZANDT 
    Before me, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared ____________ known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that the person executed the same for the purpose and consideration therein stated. 
    Given under my hand and seal of office this ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
____________ ____________ NOTARY PUBLIC IN AND FOR VAN 
ZANDT COUNTY, TEXAS  
(SEAL) 
(2)  Approval of the City Council. 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF VAN ZANDT 
CITY OF WILLS POINT 
    On this the ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ , this plat is hereby approved by the City Council. 
____________ Mayor  
ATTEST: 
____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
City Secretary 
(3)  Certification of the Survey. 
THE STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF VAN ZANDT 
    I, the undersigned, a (registered professional engineer/public surveyor) in the State of Texas, hereby certify that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made under my supervision on the ground. 
____________ ____________ Registered Professional Engineer or 
Registered Public Surveyor  
(Engineer or Surveyor's Seal) 
In addition to the foregoing the owner shall execute such further documents, including without limitation, deeds of dedication, as the City in its discretion shall desire to effectuate the transfer to the City. 
(c)  The original and seven copies of the final plat shall be submitted. The final plat shall contain all of the following: 
(1)  The plat shall have the title or name by which the subdivision is to be identified, north point, the scale of the map, and the name of the civil engineer or land surveyor responsible. 
(2)  A definite legal description and identification of the tract being subdivided. This description shall be sufficient for the requirements of title examination. The plat shall be a descriptive diagram drawn to scale, and shall show by reference that the subdivision is a particular portion or part of a previously filed plat or recognized grant or partition, which diagram and description shall show as being included in the subdivision, at least all of the smallest unit or the last filed subdivision, plat or grant, out of which the instant subdivision is divided, or so much thereof as is owned by the subdivider. 
(3)  The boundaries of the subdivided property, the location or designation of all streets, alleys, parks and other areas intended to be dedicated or deeded to the public use, with proper dimensions. The boundaries of the subdivision shall be indicated by a heavy line and shall be tied by dimension to the established center line of all existing boundary streets. 
(4)  The location of all adjacent streets and alleys, with their names and the names of adjoining subdivisions with exact location and designation by number of lots and blocks. 
(5)  All lots, block and street boundary lines, with blocks and lots numbered or lettered consecutively. Building lines and easements shall be shown and shall be defined by dimension. The actual width of all streets shall be shown, measured at right angles or radially, where curved. All principal lines shall have the bearing and any deviations from the norm shall be indicated. 
(6)  Accurate dimensions, both linear and angular, of all items on the plat; the boundary survey on the site shall close within one in 10,000 (1:10,000). Linear dimensions shall be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot; angular dimensions may be shown by bearings. Curved boundaries shall be fully described and all essential information given; circular curves shall be defined by actual length of radius and not by degree or curve. Complete dimensional data shall be given on fractional lots. The plat shall denote five-foot contour lines as established from the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey datum. 
(7)  The location and description of all lot and block corners and permanent survey reference monuments. Such corners and monuments shall be of three-quarter inch iron pipe or five-eighths inch iron rod and shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Lot corners shall be 24 inches to 30 inches long with the top of the iron pipe or iron rod set flush with the finished grade of the ground. 
b.  Block corners shall be 24 inches to 30 inches long with the top of the iron pipe or iron rod set flush with finished grade of the ground and shall include the beginning and end of all curves within each block. 
c.  Reference point shall be 24 inches to 30 inches long placed one foot below the surface of the finished ground elevation at suitable locations throughout the subdivision. There shall be at least as many reference points as there are blocks in the subdivision but not less than two, and the distance between successive monuments along any street or reference line shall not be greater than 1,000 feet. Reference points shall be other than and in addition to markers set for blocks or lot corners. 
d.  A certificate of ownership in fee of all land embraced in the subdivision, and of the authenticity of the plat and dedication, signed and acknowledged by all owners of any interest in said land. The acknowledgment shall be in the form required in the conveyance of real estate. Approval and acceptance of all lien holders shall be included. 
e.  A certificate by the responsible surveyor or engineer in charge, duly authenticated, that the plat is true and correct and in accordance with the determination of surveys actually made on the ground. If the surveyor or engineer who prepared the plat did not make the boundary survey, this fact should be noted in the certificate. Also, the certificate should show whether or not the tract is within five miles of the City limits, measured in a straight line from the nearest points in the City limits, unless the information is shown in suitable manner elsewhere on the face of the plat. 
f.  The final plat submitted to the City Council and to be filed for record with the county clerk shall show construction features such as curb lines or public utility lines, including without limitation water, sewer, gas and electrical easements, or other structures not involved in the title covenant, and shall conform with the legal requirements for plats found in V.T.C.A., Property Code § 12.002. 
(Code 1981, § 17.8; Ord. of 3-12-1979, § 17.8) 
Sec. 36-9. - Standards and specifications. 
    No preliminary or final plat shall be approved by the City Council unless they conform to the following standards: 
(1)  Generally. 
a.  Conformity. The subdivision shall conform to the overall plans of the City. 
b.  Provisions for future subdivisions. If tract is subdivided into parcels larger than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged to allow the opening of future streets. 
(2)  Streets. 
a.  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the general plan for the City and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
b.  Where such is not shown in the general plan for the City, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
1.  Provide for the continuation of appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or 
2.  Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the City Council to meeting particular situations where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable. 
c.  Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
d.  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the City in its sole discretion may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting containing in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
e.  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided. 
f.  A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves or arterial and collector streets. 
g.  Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of ten feet or of a greater radius where the City Council may deem it necessary. 
h.  Street right-of-way widths shall be so shown in the general plan for the City and where not shown therein shall be not less than 35 feet from curb to curb, or such other minimums as are required by applicable law. 
i.  Half streets shall be prohibited, unless the City grants an exception. The City may grant an exception if the City determines a half street is essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision, lot or lots or where an existing half street is adjacent to a new subdivision or tract to be platted, then the other half of the street shall be dedicated and platted within the subdivision or tract and an appropriate amount of the street shall be improved by the developer of the new subdivision or tract. Half streets shall comply and conform to all other requirements contained in these subdivision regulations. 
j.  Dead-end streets designed to be so permanently shall not be longer than 500 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least 80 feet. 
k.  Street grades shall be established with due regard being had for topography, contemplated land use, and the existing City drainage plan and facilities in the area surrounding the land to be subdivided. 
l.  The flood design section for roadways shall be designed and must be satisfactory to the City Engineer in the City Engineer's sole discretion. 
m.  Where it is necessary for the best utilization of the street system in any subdivision that crossings over drainageways be provided, the developer shall be required to construct such crossing entirely at the developer's expense if the ultimate bottom width of the drainageway does not exceed 15 feet concrete paved section. If two or more developers own property adjacent to the drainageway, they shall each pay an equal share of the estimated cost of the bridge or crossing. The crossing will then be constructed at such time as all developers involved have deposited their share of the money for the construction. For the purpose of definition, the term "bridge" shall be defined as any structure usually referred to as a concrete box culvert or clear span bridge and shall specifically exclude culvert crossings or other crossings utilizing reinforced concrete or corrugated metal pipe. 
n.  Relation to adjoining street system, where necessary to the neighborhood pattern. Existing streets in adjoining areas shall be continued, and shall be at least as wide as such existing streets and in alignment therewith. This width will not always apply to the paved area. In any event any new streets shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
o.  Projection of streets where adjoining areas are not subdivided. No streets and/or alleys which project onto any land which has not been subdivided shall be permitted unless the City Council gives its approval. 
(3)  Alleys. 
a.  Alleys shall be provided at the discretion of the subdivider. 
b.  Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but, where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe vehicular movement. 
c.  Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but, if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities at the dead-end, as determined by the City. 
(4)  Easements. 
a.  Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least ten feet wide. 
b.  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and such further width for maintenance or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose. Usually this additional width for maintenance will be 20 feet on one side. Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith. 
c.  A drainageway easement must be provided for drainage from subdivision boundary where water flow is concentrated on another's property. This is to be taken care of by the developer. 
(5)  Blocks. 
a.  The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
1.  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of type of use contemplated. 
2.  Requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions. 
3.  Needs for convenient access circulation, control and safety of street traffic. 
4.  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
b.  Block lengths shall not exceed 1,200 feet, nor be less than 300 feet. 
(6)  Lots. 
a.  The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation, and the minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. A 25-foot setback will be shown in all residential areas. 
b.  Lot dimensions shall be either: 
1.  At least 60 feet wide at the building line; or 
2.  No less than 5,400 square feet in all. 
c.  The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide each lot with reasonable access to an existing public street by means of a public street. 
(Code 1981, § 17.9; Ord. of 3-12-1979, § 17.9) 
Sec. 36-10. - Required improvements. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  When a preliminary plat of a subdivision has been approved by the City Council, the developer may submit to the City, or the duly authorized agent of the City, plans and specifications for all improvements pertinent to said subdivision. All plans and specifications for improvements will be prepared by a civil engineer. The engineer shall affix the engineer's seal (with the engineer's signature across the face of the seal) on each sheet of the necessary plans. The City Engineer shall within 30 days of receipt of said plans and specifications approve same if they conform to the requirements of this chapter, or disapprove the same giving the reason therefor in writing to the subdivider. Thereafter when the subdivider has met the objections, if any, the City Engineer shall sign the plans and specifications and forthwith deliver same to the subdivider or the subdivider's agent or the subdivider's engineer. Any plans and specifications submitted in connection with a preliminary plat which may have been conditionally approved as provided in section 36-7(c) are subject to the final determination of the conditions of such approval. 
(2)  Before beginning any construction of the improvements outlined in this section on proposed roadways or public utilities pertaining to any subdivision coming under the provisions of this chapter, five complete sets of plans and specifications of such construction, in the form of plats, sketches or other satisfactory written descriptions, shall be filed with the City Engineer. These shall show such features as roadways, cross-sections and longitudinal slope for drainage, full description of proposed pavement or street improvement, its grade and slope, dimensions and specifications concerning public utilities to be installed showing proposed position on the ground, specifications of materials and construction, and profile maps of all sanitary and storm sewers showing both ground surface and flow lines, and any other pertinent information of similar nature. 
(3)  Improvements shall be installed within all of the area of any subdivision or portion thereof given final approval and filed or to be filed for record. 
(4)  All improvements shall be designed and constructed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and no construction shall be commenced until this chapter is so complied with. 
(b)  Minimum standards. The following minimum standards for improvements shall be agreed to and complied with in each subdivision or addition before final approval of a plat by the City Council. 
(1)  Pavement thickness. All streets shall be constructed of at least six inches of compacted rock with a seal coat of asphalt on top. This requirement shall be met for the entire width of the street, from curb to curb. Widths of all subdivision streets, including standard two-foot curb and gutter, shall not be less than 35 feet wide from curb to curb. 
(2)  Curb and gutter. Combined monolithic curb and gutters shall be constructed on each side of each street within the boundaries of each subdivision any portion of which is within the City limits; excepting, however, that any subdivision, which is wholly outside the City limit line, may have ditches with side slopes not steeper than one on five (1:5) where curb and gutter elimination and specified side slopes will improve the drainage on such subdivision. Additional street right-of-way will be dedicated to provide space for the ditch sections on each side. The curb and gutters shall be a four-inch rolled curb of concrete and shall have a minimum section of ten inches in depth at the back of the curb, six inches in depth at the flow line of the gutter and seven inches in depth in the outer edge of the gutter, and be 24 inches in width and may be varied in section to fit particular conditions involved, and it shall not be prohibited to use a roll-type curb and gutter conforming to the minimum section set out above on residential streets designed for elimination of "cut-out" driveways for individual lots. 
(3)  Sidewalks. Where sidewalks are constructed for a subdivision they shall be continuous and not less than three feet in width and not less than four inches in thickness. Said sidewalks shall be at least one foot from the property line within the street right-of-way. 
(4)  Storm sewers. Concrete storm sewers shall be constructed by the subdivider so that they will be adequate to comply with section 36-9(2)m. The storm sewers shall be of such material and construction so that they will not only carry the storm water but will also support both dead and live loads imposed on the pipe and structure. 
(5)  Water installations. 
a.  All subdivisions within the City shall have a water system designed by an engineer and installed by the subdivider and shall be a part of the water distribution system of the City. The layout shall be designed to form a loop system. No (as per following subsections) main shall be smaller than six inches. The pipe in the system shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate water for commercial, industrial, domestic requirements as well as a fire flow meeting the specifications of the state board of insurance. All water lines shall be located in the parkway area between the back of the curb and a line five feet from the property line toward the street. Normally this utility will be located 71/2 feet off of the property line. 
b.  Standard fire hydrants shall be installed by the subdivider as a part of the water distribution system in accordance with the size and location requirements of the state board of insurance. All necessary appurtenances will be installed as a part of the water system. Valves shall be located so that the system can be isolated in cases of breaks in the mains. Generally the pattern of two valves will be used in a "T" intersection of pipes and three valves used at the cross. Each fire hydrant lead will have a valve located near the fire hydrant. All taps for a corporation cock fitting for a service will be made while the system is under full operating pressure. Connections where other than a tapped connection are used will be provided with an appropriate fitting. After the water system is completed, except for corporation cocks, the systems will be tested under a hydrostatic pressure of 150 psi for an adequate time to be sure no leaks exist. All leaks will be repaired during the test period. 
(6)  Sewage collection system. All subdivisions shall connect with the existing system of the City except when the City Engineer determines that such connection will require unreasonable expenditure. 
a.  A complete collection system shall be designed by an engineer and shall be constructed by the subdivider. The system shall be of sufficient size to care for the flow of sewage from the area including a proper allowance for infiltration. Minimum size for mains shall be six inches and the design flow shall not be less than two feet per second. Manholes shall be provided at junctions and angles of all sewer lines with a maximum spacing of 500 feet between manholes throughout the system. A cleanout shall be provided at the end of a line only when this line will never be extended to an additional area. If a line has possibilities of being extended, a manhole shall be constructed with proper construction for the extension. "Y's" shall be placed in the system where two lines connect. 
b.  Sanitary sewer lines shall be constructed in the easement or alley provided in the rear or side of all lots. The sewer lines will not be constructed in the paved area of the street except to cross at the least possible angle with a line perpendicular to the center line of the street. 
(7)  Taps, meters, etc. In order to properly protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City, all taps, meter services and meter sets on existing public utility water lines of the City must be made and installed under the supervision and direction of the water and wastewater superintendent. 
(8)  Materials to be used. All materials used in the storm sewer, sanitary sewer and water systems for the subdivision will be of the quality materials approved by the water and wastewater superintendent. 
(9)  Provision for future extension. Where it shall be determined by the City Engineer that larger or deeper mains or lines are required in order to provide for the future extension of the sewer and/or water utility system beyond the limits of the subdivision in question, the City shall assume the responsibility for any additional cost involved. In the event City funds are not currently available to pay for such larger or deeper mains or lines as may be required, arrangements shall be made for the developer to install these improvements and be reimbursed by the City. 
(c)  Final plans. Upon the completion of construction of any such utility or improvement, one set of reproducible tracings of complete final plans, dated, signed and certified by the engineer in charge shall be filed with the City showing all features as actually installed, including materials, size, location, depth shown by elevation, numbers, ends of lines, connections, "Y's", valves, storm sewer drains, inlets and any other pertinent items. The utility department of the City shall make no connections to such utilities until the foregoing has been complied with. 
(Code 1981, § 17.10; Ord. of 3-12-1979, § 17.10) 
Sec. 36-11. - Responsibility for payment of installation cost. 
(a)  After the final plat has been approved and before any utilities are installed, the engineer for the subdivider shall complete preliminary engineering detail to determine the requirements for the utility installations. The subdivider shall then require the engineer to develop plans and specifications for adequate systems. These plans and specifications will have the approval of the City Engineer prior to the awarding of the contract to a contractor satisfactory to the City. All of the costs for engineering and the construction contracts to provide complete systems will be borne by the subdivider with no reimbursement from the City. 
(b)  In addition to the water and sewer main extensions, a tap charge shall be required for both water and sewer in the amounts as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time, these amounts to be paid by the developer and/or owner at the time the meter is set and the service is rendered to the property. Service connections shall not be made until all utilities and drainage contracts have been completed and are in the acceptable condition. 
(c)  The City shall have the right of inspection of the construction of any facilities within the subdivision at any time during construction until final acceptance. Copies of all laboratory reports shall be furnished the City upon receipt of these reports from the testing laboratory. When the water, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and streets are complete and acceptable to the City they shall become the property of the City and the subdivider or builder shall have no right or title in same, but the City shall maintain said lines at its own expense. 
(Code 1981, § 17.11; Ord. of 3-12-1979, § 17.11) 
Sec. 36-12. - Parks and other public uses. 
    Suitable sites for parks, playgrounds, schools or other public requirements should be carefully considered. Attention is called to the advantages, on a large tract, of dedicating a reasonable percent of the property for such use. 
(Code 1981, § 17.12; Ord. of 3-12-1979, § 17.12) 
Sec. 36-13. - Conflict with other ordinances. 
    Wherever the standards and specifications in this chapter conflict with those contained in another ordinance, the most stringent or restrictive provision shall govern. 
(Code 1981, § 17.13; Ord. of 3-12-1979, § 17.13) 
Chapter 38 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 1 et seq.; finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SALES AND USE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal Sales and Use Tax Act, V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 321. 

Sec. 38-19. - Sales tax on gas and electricity. 
    The City by majority vote of the City Council, hereby votes to retain the taxes authorized by the Municipal Sales and Use Tax Act, V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 321, on the receipts from the sale, production, distribution, lease, or rental of, and the use, storage, or other consumption of gas and electricity for residential use, as authorized by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.105. 
(Code 1981, § 13.2; Ord. of 3-10-1979) 
Sec. 38-20. - Taxation of telecommunication services. 
(a)  A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the City. For purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed. 
(b)  The rate of the tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the City for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the state legislature. 
(c)  The City Secretary forwarded to the state comptroller by United States registered mail a copy of the ordinance from which this article is derived along with a copy of the minutes of the City Council's vote and discussion on the ordinance as required by state law. 
(d)  The section from which this article is derived became effective as of October 1, 1987. 
(e)  This article is to be liberally construed to achieve its remedial purposes. 
(Code 1981, § 13.3; Ord. of 7-13-1987) 
State Law reference- Authority of municipality to impose tax on the sale of telecommunications services, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.210. 
Secs. 38-21-38-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY TAXES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Property Tax Code, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 1.01 et seq. 

Sec. 38-44. - Freeport goods. 
    The City elects to tax that tangible personal property described in article VIII, section 1-j(a), Texas Constitution and V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11-251, which would otherwise be exempt. 
(Code 1981, § 13.30; Ord. of 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 38-45. - Goods-in-transit personal property. 
    All such goods-in-transit personal property as defined by the amendments to V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.253 under Senate Bill 1, shall be, and are hereby declared to be, taxable by the City of Wills Point, Texas for tax year 2012 and for every year thereafter, all as provided for and in accordance with V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.253. 
(Ord. No. 07-16, 12-13-2007; Ord. No. 11-09, § 2, 12-13-2011) 
Sec. 38-46. - Countywide equalization. 
    The City has countywide equalization in that the City, the Wills Point School Board and the City of Edgewood, combine all of their respective votes to nominate one person to the county board of equalization. 
Secs. 38-47-38-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOTEL/MOTEL TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Hotel occupancy tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 156; municipal hotel occupancy taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 351. 

Sec. 38-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consideration means the cost of the room in a hotel only if the room is ordinarily used for sleeping, and not including the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy. 
    Hotel means a building in which members of the public obtain sleeping accommodations for consideration. The term includes a hotel, motel, tourist home, tourist house, tourist court, lodginghouse, inn, roominghouse, or bed and breakfast. The term does not include: 
(1)  A hospital, sanitarium, or nursing home; or 
(2)  A dormitory or other housing facility owned or leased and operated by an institution of higher education or a private or independent institution of higher education as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Education Code § 61.003, used by the institution for the purpose of providing sleeping accommodations for persons engaged in an educational program or activity at the institution. 
    Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room in a hotel if the room is one which is ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant is other than a permanent resident as hereinafter defined. 
    Occupant means anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has a right to use or possess any room in a hotel under lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement, other than a permanent resident as hereinafter defined. 
    Permanent resident means any occupant who has the right to use or possess a room in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days, so long as there is no interruption of payment for the period. 
    Quarterly period means the regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of April, May, and June; the second quarter being the months of July, August and September; the third quarter being the months of October, November and December; the fourth quarter being the months of January, February and March. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 1, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 38-67. - Tax levied; amount; exceptions; exemptions; refunds. 
(a)  Levied. There is hereby levied a tax of seven percent of the price paid for a room in a hotel on every occupant who, under a lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract, or agreement, pays for the use or possession or for the right to the use or possession of a room that is in a hotel, costs $2.00 or more each day, and is ordinarily used for sleeping. The price of a room in a hotel does not include the cost of food served by the hotel and the cost of personal services performed by the hotel for the occupant except those services related to the cleaning and readying of the room for possession. 
(b)  Exception. No tax shall be imposed upon a permanent resident. 
(c)  Exemptions. Exemptions are as follows: 
(1)  A United States governmental entity described in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.103(a) is exempt from the payment of tax authorized by this article. 
(2)  A state officer or employee of an agency, institution, board or commission of the state, other than an institution of higher education for whom a special provision or exception to the general rate of reimbursement under the General Appropriations Act applies and who is provided with photo identification verifying the identity and exempt status of the occupant, is exempt from the payment of the tax authorized by this article. 
(3)  Diplomatic personnel who present a tax exemption card issued by the United States Department of State are exempt from the payment of the tax authorized by this article. 
(d)  Requirements for exemptions. The right to use or possess a room in a hotel is exempt from taxation under this article if the person required to collect the tax receives, in good faith from a guest, an exemption certificate stating qualification for one of the exemptions above. The exemption must be supported by the documentation required under rules adopted by the state comptroller and the City. 
(e)  Refunds. Refunds may be made as follows: 
(1)  The state, or an agency, institution, board, or commission of the state, other than an institution of higher education, shall pay the tax imposed by this article but is entitled to a refund of the tax paid. 
(2)  A state officer of employee of an agency, institution, board, or commission of the state, other than an institution of higher education, who is entitled to reimbursement for the cost of lodging and for whom a special provision or exception to the general rate of reimbursement under the General Appropriations Act is not applicable shall pay the tax imposed by this article, but the state governmental entity with whom the occupant is associated is entitled to a refund of the tax paid. 
(f)  Requirements for refunds. To receive a refund of tax paid under this section, the governmental entity entitled to the refund must file a refund claim on a form provided by the City and containing the information required by the City. The state comptroller by rule shall prescribe the form that must be used and the information that must be provided. A governmental entity may file a refund claim with the City under this article only for each calendar quarter for all reimbursements accrued during that quarter. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 2, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 38-68. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax levied by this article and report and pay the tax to the City in accordance with all requirements and procedures set forth in this article. 
(b)  The hotel operator shall be entitled to one percent of the hotel occupancy tax revenues collected as reimbursement for the operator's administrative costs for collecting the tax. However, as herein provided, this reimbursement may be forfeited at the discretion of the City if the hotel operator fails to timely pay over the tax or timely file a report as required by the City or file a false report with the City. 
(c)  If a person who is liable for the payment of a tax under this article is the owner of a hotel and sells the hotel, the collection procedures on the purchase of a hotel that are set forth in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.0041 shall be followed by all parties to the transaction. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 3, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 38-69. - Quarterly reports to City Secretary. 
(a)  On the last day of the month following each quarterly period (beginning the last day of the month following the second quarterly period of calendar year 2007), every person required to collect the tax imposed hereby shall file a report with the City Secretary showing: 
(1)  The price paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter; 
(2)  The amount of the tax collected on such occupancies; and 
(3)  Any other information the City Secretary may reasonably require. 
(b)  Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. 
(c)  The report shall be in a form prescribed by the City Secretary. The City Secretary is hereby authorized and directed to do all such things necessary or convenient to carry out the terms of this article. The City Secretary shall have the authority to request and receive within a reasonable time documentation for information contained in the report to the City by the hotel. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 4, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 38-70. - Rules and regulations of the City Secretary; access to books and records. 
    The City Secretary shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are reasonable and necessary to effectively collect the tax levied hereby, and shall upon reasonable notice have access to books and records necessary to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article, and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 5, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 38-71. - Penalties. 
(a)  If any person shall fail to file a report as required herein or shall file a false report or shall fail to pay to the City Secretary the tax as imposed herein when said report or payment is due, such person shall pay an amount equal to five percent of the tax due as penalty, and after the first 30 days, he shall pay an additional five percent of such tax. However, such penalty shall never be less than $1.00. Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of ten percent per annum beginning 60 days from the due date. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, including hotel operators who fail to collect the tax, fail to file a return, file a false return, or who are delinquent in their tax payment, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 6, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 38-72. - Additional penalties; additional authorization to bring suit; attorney's fees. 
(a)  The City is hereby authorized to take the following actions against any person required to collect the tax imposed and pay the collection over to the City and who has failed to file a report, or filed a false report, or failed to pay the tax when due: 
(1)  The City may require the forfeiture of any revenue the City allowed the hotel operator to retain pursuant to section 38-68 as reimbursement for the operator's administrative costs for collecting the tax; 
(2)  The City Attorney is authorized to bring suit against any such person, which suit may seek to collect such tax not paid or to enjoin such person from operating a hotel in the City until the tax is paid or the report is filed or both, as applicable, as provided by the court's order; and/or 
(3)  The City Attorney is authorized to seek any other remedies provided by state law. 
(b)  In addition to the amount of any tax owed and any other penalties authorized by this section, a person is liable to the City for all reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the City in enforcing this article against the person and in collecting any tax owed by the person under this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 7, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 38-73. - Use of revenue derived from levy of hotel occupancy tax. 
(a)  The revenue derived from any hotel occupancy tax imposed and levied by this article may be used only to promote tourism and the convention center and hotel industry, and that use is limited to the following: 
(1)  The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operation, and maintenance of convention center facilities or visitor information centers (as such are defined in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001); 
(2)  The furnishing of facilities, personnel, and materials for the registration of convention delegates or registrants; 
(3)  Advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to attract tourists and convention delegates or registrants to the City or its vicinity; 
(4)  The encouragement, promotion, improvement, and application of the arts, including instrumental and vocal music, dance, drama, folk art, creative writing, architecture, design and allied fields, painting, sculpture, photography, graphic and craft arts, motion pictures, radio, television, tape and sound recording, and other arts related to the presentation, execution, and exhibition of these major art forms; 
(5)  Historical restoration and preservation projects or activities or advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to encourage tourists and convention delegates to visit preserved historic sites or museums: 
a.  Which are at or in the immediate vicinity of the convention center facilities or visitor information centers; or 
b.  Which are located elsewhere in the City or its vicinity that would be frequented by tourists and convention delegates; and 
(6)  Expenses, including promotion expenses, directly related to a sporting event in which the majority of participants are tourists who substantially increase economic activity at hotels and motels within the City or its vicinity. 
(b)  Revenue derived from the hotel occupancy tax shall be expended only in a manner which directly enhances and promotes tourism and the convention and hotel industry as hereinbefore delineated. Such revenue shall not be used for general revenue purposes or general governmental operations of the City which are not directly related to promoting the hotel and convention industry or tourism in the City. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 8, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 38-74. - Allocation of revenue. 
    Allocations of the hotel occupancy tax revenue by the City for the purposes set out by section 38-73 must comply with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 351. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 9, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 38-75. - Administrative requirements; accountability; keeping of records. 
(a)  The City Council may, by contract, delegate to a person, including another governmental entity or a private organization, the management or supervision of programs and activities funded with revenue from the hotel occupancy tax. The City Council shall approve in writing in advance the annual budget of the person to which it delegates those functions, and shall require the person to make periodic reports to the City Council at least quarterly listing the expenditures made by the person of revenue from the hotel occupancy tax. 
(b)  The entity must maintain the revenue provided by the City from the tax in a separate account established for that purpose and may not commingle that revenue with any other money. 
(c)  The City may not delegate to any person or entity the management or supervision of its convention and visitors programs and activities funded with the revenue from the hotel occupancy tax other than by contract as provided herein. 
(d)  The approval by the City Council of the annual budget of the person or entity to which these functions are delegated creates a fiduciary duty in the person or entity with respect to the revenue provided by the City to the person or entity under the contract. 
(e)  A person or entity with whom the City contracts to conduct such authorized activities shall maintain complete and accurate financial records of each expenditure of hotel occupancy tax revenue made by the person or entity and, on request of the City Council or other authorized person, shall make the records available for inspection and review. 
(f)  Hotel occupancy tax revenue may be spent for day-to-day operations, supplies, salaries, office rental, travel expenses, and other administrative costs only if those administrative costs are incurred directly in the promotion and servicing of expenditures authorized under section 38-74. If a City or other public or private entity that conducts an activity authorized under this section conducts other activities that are not authorized under this section, the portion of the total administrative costs of the entity for which hotel occupancy tax revenue may be used may not exceed the portion of those administrative costs actually incurred in conducting the authorized activities. 
(g)  Hotel occupancy tax revenue may not be spent for travel for a person to attend an event or conduct an activity the primary purpose of which is not directly related to the promotion of tourism and the convention and hotel industry or the performance of such person's job in an efficient and professional manner. 
(h)  The City shall maintain a record that accurately identifies the receipt and expenditure of all revenue derived from the hotel occupancy tax, and the City shall comply with all requirements for keeping such records as set forth in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.108. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, § 10, 3-12-2007) 
Secs. 38-76-38-93. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DELINQUENT TAXES 

Sec. 38-94. - Bearing of expenses. 
    It shall be the declared policy of this City tax unit that the expenses of maintaining records on delinquent taxes owed to the unit and of collecting such taxes, now an unfair burden on the general revenue and the taxpayers who pay on time, should be borne instead by the delinquent properties and their owners who are responsible for causing such expenses; and to effectuate this policy, the unit hereby orders that such costs be charged against the delinquent properties and their owners as authorized collection expenses as herein provided, and the same are hereby made a part of the tax liens against the delinquent property to which each such cost is attributable. 
(Code 1981, § 13.10; Ord. of 2-14-1977) 
Sec. 38-95. - Annual charge for collection. 
    Whenever any delinquent taxes owed to this tax unit are collected, by suit or otherwise, the unit's tax assessor-collector shall charge a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time for each year listed on each receipt issued for such tax payments, this charge to be an authorized collection expense and collected at the time of payment of the delinquent taxes. 
(Code 1981, § 13.11; Ord. of 2-14-1977) 
Sec. 38-96. - Charges for affidavit. 
    Whenever any accounts for delinquent taxes owed to this tax unit are placed in the hands of its tax attorney for collection, the unit's tax assessor-collector shall furnish all affidavits, certified copies of records of the unit's tax office and such other evidence as may be in the unit's tax assessor-collector's possession by virtue of such office and are requested by the unit's tax attorney, and the assessor-collector shall collect a cost or charge as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time for each affidavit, each certified copy of records and any other item of evidence furnished upon request, this cost to be an authorized collection expense which shall be collected at the time of payment of the delinquent taxes, before or after suit. 
(Code 1981, § 13.12; Ord. of 2-14-1977) 
Sec. 38-97. - Costs for certified copies. 
    Whenever certified copies of records of other governmental agencies are needed for preparing, filing and/or prosecuting suits and claims for delinquent taxes and these are obtained by or for the unit's tax attorney, the actual costs charged for such certified copies by the governmental agencies furnishing them shall be authorized collection expenses and shall be collected at the time of payment of the delinquent taxes, before or after suit. 
(Code 1981, § 13.13; Ord. of 2-14-1977) 
Sec. 38-98. - Attorney expenses. 
    The unit's designated tax attorney, whether a salaried lawyer employed by the unit or an attorney retained under a delinquent tax collection contract, shall assist, by suit or otherwise, in the collection of delinquent taxes owed to the unit, and to recover such costs, the unit shall be entitled to and shall collect an authorized collection expense of 15 percent of the delinquent taxes and penalty (including any interest owed) due on each delinquent property at the time of collection, before or after suit and/or foreclosure sale; the minimum amount to be charged under this section to be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time. 
(Code 1981, § 13.14; Ord. of 2-14-1977) 
Secs. 38-99-38-124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PROPERTY REDEVELOPMENT AND TAX ABATEMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Property Redevelopment and Tax Abatement Act, V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 312. 

Sec. 38-125. - Findings. 
    The City, after conducting such public hearing and having heard such evidence and testimony has made the following findings and determinations based on the evidence and testimony presented to it: 
(1)  That the public hearing on establishment of a reinvestment zone has been properly called, held and conducted and that notice of such hearing has been published as required by law and mailed to all taxing units overlapping the territory inside the proposed reinvestment zone; 
(2)  That the City has jurisdiction to hold and conduct this public hearing on the establishment of a reinvestment zone pursuant to V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 312.201; 
(3)  That establishment of the proposed reinvestment zone within the boundaries described in exhibit A on file in the office of the City Secretary will result in benefits to the City, its residents and property owners; and 
(4)  That the land located within the reinvestment zone meets the criteria set forth in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 312.202, in that it is reasonably likely as a result of the designation to contribute to the retention and expansion of primary employment and to attract major investment in the zone that would be a benefit to the property and that would contribute to the economic development of the City. 
(Code 1981, § 19.2; Ord. No. 97-1, § 19.2, 1-13-1997) 
Sec. 38-126. - Reinvestment zone established. 
    That the City hereby creates and establishes the reinvestment zone described by metes and bounds in exhibit A on file in the office of the City Secretary and declares that said reinvestment zone is eligible for commercial-industrial tax abatement. 
(Code 1981, § 19.3; Ord. No. 97-1, § 19.3, 1-13-1997) 
Chapter 40 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 40-1. - Speed limit within fire limits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or cause to be driven any vehicle within the fire limits at a greater rate of speed than the posted speed limit. 
(Code 1981, § 14.1; Ord. of 6-11-1984) 
State Law reference- Authority of municipality to alter speed limits, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.356. 
Sec. 40-2. - Prohibition. 
    The use of any motor brake (Jake brake) within the City is prohibited. 
(Code 1981, § 14.1A; Ord. No. 02-08) 
Sec. 40-3. - Turning in fire limits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make any turn within the fire limits at a greater rate of speed than that which is reasonable and prudent. It shall be unlawful for any person to cross any street intersection or alley or to turn any corner in the said fire limits at a greater rate of speed than that which is reasonable and prudent. It shall be unlawful for any person to turn in or across any street within the fire limits except at the intersection of streets or streets and alleys. At all intersections where there are signs or markers placed showing the direction traffic is to take, all turns shall be around said markers beyond the center of the intersection. 
(Code 1981, § 14.2; Ord. of 6-11-1984) 
Sec. 40-4. - Traffic keeping to right at Rose Monument. 
    All traffic at the Rose Monument must keep to the right of the monument. The roadway is a two-lane divided road from Commerce Street to Farm Market Road 47. 
(Code 1981, § 14.3; Ord. of 11-7-1922) 
Sec. 40-5. - Criteria for skates, skateboards, bicycles, and other sorts of toy vehicles. 
    All persons shall comply with the following: 
(1)  No person upon roller skates, skateboards, bicycles or riding in or by means of any coaster, sled, toy wagon, scooter or similar device shall go upon any sidewalk within the central business district of the City. 
(2)  The central business district is defined as follows: 
    Beginning at the intersection of O'Neal Street and S. Fourth Street and proceeding northward along the east side of Fourth Street to the intersection of North Street, then westward along the north side of North Street to the intersection with N. Sixth Street, thence south along the west side of Sixth Street, continuing southward on Pecan Ave. to the intersection with W. O'Neal Street, thence eastward along the north side of O'Neal Street to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1981, § 14.10; Ord. No. 03-03) 
Sec. 40-6. - One-way streets. 
(a)  The direction of motor vehicles traveling on the following described streets shall be limited to one-way traffic during certain hours of each day during the school year as follows: 
Road or Street Direction of One-Way Travel Hours of One-Way Travel Manning Lane, entire street East to West 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. 
and 
2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Thompson Drive, entire street West to East 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. 
and 
2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.  
(b)  No person shall be charged with violating the provisions of this section by reason of driving upon the roads designated for one-way traffic during the designated hours of each day during the school year unless appropriate signs are posted on such streets. 
( Ord. No. 13-03, § 2, 9-10-2013 ) 
Sec. 40-7. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, § 14.11; Ord. No. 03-03) 
Secs. 40-8-40-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPEED LIMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of municipality to alter speed limits, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.356. 

Sec. 40-31. - State Highway 64. 
(a)  The City Council, having received the recommendation of the state highway department concerning the rates of speed that should be applicable on State Highway 64 after careful engineering and traffic investigation, and having determined after careful study that the maximum speed rates shall be established as herein set forth: 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive any motor or other vehicle upon the following portions of U.S. 64 in the City at speeds in excess of those prescribed, which said portions of U.S. 64 and speed rates allowed thereon shall be as follows: 
(1)  On State Highway No. 64 from U.S. Highway No. 80 to a point 0.20 miles southeast of U.S. Highway No. 80 the maximum rate of speed shall be 30 miles per hour in a northwesterly direction and 45 miles per hour in a southeasterly direction. 
(2)  On State Highway 64 from a point 0.20 mile southeast of U.S. Highway 80 to the present City limit the maximum rate of speed shall be 45 miles per hour 
(3)  On the west leg of State Highway 64 (or Old State Highway No. 64) from U.S. Highway 80 to a point 0.17 miles Southeast of U.S. Highway 80 the maximum rate of speed shall be 45 miles per hour in a southeasterly direction. 
(Code 1981, § 14.20; Ord. of 10-7-1952; Ord. No. 11-01, § 1, 12-11-2010) 
Sec. 40-32. - U.S. Highway 80. 
(a)  The City Council having made an engineering and traffic investigation concerning the maximum reasonable and prudent speed rate to apply to certain sections of the streets, highways, avenues, and other public places in said City and having received the recommendation of the state highway department concerning the rates of speed that should be applicable in said areas and having determined the maximum speed rates shall be established as hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to operate or drive any motor or other vehicle upon the following portions of streets, highways, avenues, and public places in the City at speeds in excess of those prescribed, which said portions of streets rates allowed therein shall be as follows: 
(1)  On U.S. Highway 80 from present west Wills Point City limit to a point 0.879 mile east the maximum rate of speed shall be 55 miles per hour. 
(2)  On U.S. Highway 80 from a point 0.200 mile east of west Wills Point City limit to a point 0.530 mile east of the west City limit, the maximum rate of speed shall be 35 miles per hour when the school zone lights are flashing and 55 miles per hour all other times. 
a.  On U.S. Highway 80 from a point 0.879 mile east of west Wills Point City limit to a point 1.085 miles east of the west City limit, the maximum rate of speed shall be 50 miles per hour. 
b.  On U.S. Highway 80 from a point 1.085 mile east of west City limit to a point 1.460 miles east of west City limit, the maximum rate of speed shall be 45 miles per hour unless signed for school crossing. If so signed, the maximum rate of speed shall be 30 miles per hour. 
c.  On U.S. Highway 80 from a point 1.460 mile east of present west City limit to a point 1.710 mile east of Wills Point present west City limit, the maximum rate of speed shall be 30 miles per hour. 
d.  On U.S. Highway 80 from a point 1.710 mile east of present west City limit to a point 2.220 miles east of present west City limit, the maximum rate of speed shall be 40 miles per hour. 
e.  On U.S. Highway 80 from a point 2.220 miles east of present west City limit to a point 2.653 miles east of present west City limit, the maximum rate of speed shall be 45 miles per hour. 
f.  On U.S. Highway 80 from a point 2.563 miles east of present west City limit to a point 2.903 miles east, the maximum speed shall be 55 miles per hour. 
(Code 1981, § 14.21; Ord. of 9-5-1967; Ord. No. 98-04) 
Sec. 40-33. - F.M. 47. 
(a)  The City Council having made an engineering and traffic investigation concerning the maximum reasonable and prudent speed rates to apply to certain sections of the streets, received the recommendation of the state highway department concerning the rates of speed that should be applicable in said areas and having determined, the maximum speed rates shall be established as hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to operate or drive any motor vehicle upon the following portions of streets, highways, avenues, and public places in the City at speeds in excess of those prescribed, which said portions of streets and speed rates allowed thereon shall be as follows: 
(1)  On F.M. 47 from the north City limit to 0.751 mile south, the maximum rate of speed shall be 50 miles per hour. 
(2)  On F.M. 47 from 0.751 mile south of the north City limit to 1.001 miles south of the north City limit, the maximum rate of speed shall be 45 miles per hour. 
(3)  On F.M. 47 from 1.001 miles south of the north City limit to a point 1.451 miles south of the north City limit, said point being the junction with U.S. 80, the maximum rate of speed shall be 30 miles per hour. 
(4)  On F.M. 47 from the junction with U.S. 80 to 0.407 mile south, the maximum rate of speed shall be 30 miles per hour. 
(5)  On F.M 47 from 0.407 mile south of the junction with U.S. 80 to a point 0.889 mile south of the junction with U.S. 80, said point being the south City limit, the maximum rate of speed shall be 45 miles per hour. 
(Code 1981, § 14.22) 
Sec. 40-34. - F.M. 751. 
(a)  On F.M. 751 from the Wills Point north City limit to point 0.633 mile south of the Wills Point north City limit, the maximum rate of speed shall be 55 mph. 
(b)  On F.M. 751 from a point 0.633 mile south of the Wills Point north City limit to a point 0.933 mile south of the Wills Point north City limit, said point being the intersection of F.M. 47, the maximum rate of speed shall be 45 mph. 
(Code 1981, § 14.23; Ord. of 5-10-1993) 
Sec. 40-35. - F.M. 2965. 
    Beginning at the intersection with U.S. Hwy. 80 to 0.062 mile to the school zone, then 0.205 mile to the end of school zone, the maximum rate of speed on F.M. 2965 shall be 25 mph when school zone lights are flashing and 40 miles per hour all other times to the City limit. 
(Code 1981, § 14.24; Ord. No. 2000-01) 
Sec. 40-36. - Certain streets. 
(a)  On Blakely Street from U.S. Hwy. 80 south to Lynellen Street, the maximum rate of speed shall be 15 miles per hour. 
(b)  On Tiger Drive from U.S. Hwy. 80 to Terrace Drive, the maximum rate of speed shall be 15 miles per hour. 
(c)  On Terrace Drive to Henderson Street, the maximum rate of speed shall be 15 miles per hour. 
(d)  On Lillian Street, the maximum rate of speed shall be 15 miles per hour. 
(e)  On Thompson Drive, the maximum rate of speed shall be 15 miles per hour. 
(f)  On Monning Lane, the maximum rate of speed shall be 15 miles per hour. 
(Code 1981, § 14.26; Ord. of 2-8-1988) 
Sec. 40-37. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, § 14.27; Ord. of 2-8-1988) 
Secs. 40-38-40-62. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate parking, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(2). 

Sec. 40-63. - Parking on Highway 80. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle or trailer of any type on Highway 80: 
(1)  For any period of time on any of the areas where parking is prohibited as defined below; or 
(2)  For a period of more than two hours within any consecutive 12-hour period on any of the areas where parking is limited to two hours as defined below. 
(b)  The term "areas where parking is prohibited" means those portions of the respective roads, streets and highways located within the City's corporate limits identified in the table below. 
Road, Street or Highway Area Where Parking Is Prohibited Farm to Market Road 2965 Anywhere along either side of the road U.S. Highway 80 Anywhere west of Mary Street to the western City limits, on either side of the highway Anywhere east of Wills Street to Houston Street on the north side of the highway Anywhere east of E. South Commerce to the eastern City limits on either side of the highway State Highway 64 Anywhere, on either side of the highway Farm to Market Road 47 (south) Anywhere southwest of South Fourth Street to the City limits, on both sides of the road North Fourth Street Anywhere north of High Street and south of the intersection of Farm to Market Roads 751 and 47 (North), on either side of the street Farm to Market Road 751 Anywhere on either side of the road Farm to Market Road 47 (north) Anywhere on either side of the road  
(c)  The term "areas where parking is limited to two hours" means those portions of the respective roads, streets and highways located within the City's corporate limits identified below. 
Road, Street or Highway Area Where Parking Is Prohibited or Limited U.S. Highway 80 East of Mary Street and west of Wills Street on the north side of the highway  
(Code 1981, § 14.1) 
Sec. 40-64. - Parking of heavy trucks. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Heavy truck means any and all truck tractors, van trailers, semitrailers, house trailers and/or any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of property, whose body weight or whose rated or licensed combined body and load weight exceeds 12,000 pounds. 
(b)  No parking within residential districts of the City. It shall be unlawful to stop, park or leave any heavy truck, as such term is defined in this section, upon any public street, alley, parkway, boulevard or public place within the residential districts of the City (which are designated as R-1 and R-2 and defined in chapter 48, article I) except as otherwise permitted under section 40-65. 
(c)  Police authorized to move or impound. Whenever any officer of the police force shall find a vehicle stopped, parked, or left within an R-1 or R-2 district in violation of the provisions of this section, such officer shall be and is authorized to move such vehicle or have such vehicle removed and impounded at the expense of the owner or operator thereof. 
(d)  Signs; failure to post. The chief of police shall cause certain roads within the City, as determined by the chief of police to be those roads most often used by heavy trucks, to be clearly signposted to give notice of the provisions of this section. No person shall be charged with violating the provisions of this article by reason of parking a heavy truck within the residential districts of the City until appropriate signs are posted. 
(e)  Weigh-in; prima facie proof. The chief of police and each City police officer shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of any vehicle parked within the residential districts of the City that said officer has probable cause to believe is a heavy truck to proceed to a public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining whether this article has been complied with, and such person's failure or refusal to proceed as required shall be prima facie proof that the vehicle is a "heavy truck," as defined in this section. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 40-65. - Exception to parking restrictions. 
    Nothing in this article shall prohibit a motor vehicle or trailer in an area where parking is either prohibited or limited to two hours to remain for a reasonable period of time in connection with any emergency, accident, equipment failure, or loading or unloading provided the owner or operator acts diligently to repair and remove the motor vehicle or trailer. 
(Code 1981, § 14.31; Ord. No. 03-09; Ord. No. 07-10, 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 40-66. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, § 14.32; Ord. No. 03-09; Ord. No. 07-10, 7-10-2007) 
Sec. 40-67. - Parking for persons with disabilities. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Disability means a condition in which a person has: 
a.  Mobility problems that substantially impair the person's ability to ambulate; 
b.  Visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye with correcting lenses; or 
c.  Visual acuity of more than 20/200 but with a limited field of vision in which the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle of 20 degrees or less. 
(2)  Disabled parking placard means a placard issued under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 681.002, as amended, special license plates issued under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 504.201 or a license plate or device, tab, sticker, placard, card, or permit that bears the international symbol of access issued by another state, or by a state or province of a foreign country, to the owner or operator of a vehicle for the transportation of a person with disabilities. 
(3)  Parking space designated specifically for persons with disabilities shall mean a parking space or parking area designated specifically for persons with disabilities by the City, by private property owner or by a person who owns or controls private property used for parking; and includes any space which has markings or a sign which gives notice to a reasonable person that the parking space is intended for the exclusive use of vehicles transporting persons with disabilities regardless of whether the means of designating the parking space or area comply with this section, or with state or federal law. A parking space or area for persons with disabilities includes striped or otherwise designated space adjacent to the actual parking area, which is intended for use as an access aisle. 
(4)  International Symbol of Access means the symbol adopted by Rehabilitation International in 1969 at its Eleventh World Congress on Rehabilitation of the Disabled. 
(b)  Designation of parking spaces. 
(1)  The City, a private property owner or a person who controls private property used for parking may designate one or more parking spaces or a parking area for the exclusive use of vehicles transporting persons with disabilities. 
(2)  The City must conform to the standards and specifications adopted by the commissioner of licensing and regulation under Section 5(i), Article 9102, Texas Revised Statutes, as amended, and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 as amended, that relate to parking space identification and dimensions when designating a parking space or area for persons with disabilities. A private property owner or person who controls private property used for parking may designate a parking space or area without conforming to those standards and specifications, unless required to conform by law. 
(3)  The City, a private property owner or a person who controls private property used for parking must erect and maintain appropriate signage as required by law. 
(4)  Parking spaces designated specifically for persons with disabilities may be used by vehicles displaying a white on blue shield disabled parking placard, license plates issued under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 504.201 or 504.202, or a white on red shield disabled parking placard. 
(c)  Unlawful parking in designated space and obstructing ramps; presumptions; reciprocity. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to park, stand, or stop a vehicle not displaying a disabled parking placard so that any portion of the vehicle is in any part of a parking space designated specifically for persons with disabilities. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any person to park, stand, or stop a vehicle that displays a disabled parking placard so that any portion of the vehicle is in any portion of a parking space designated specifically for persons with disabilities if the person is neither temporarily or permanently disabled nor transporting a temporarily or permanently disabled person. 
(3)  It is unlawful for any person to park, stand, or stop a vehicle not displaying a disabled parking placard so that the vehicle blocks or obstructs any inclined ramp, access aisle or other architectural improvement designed to aid persons with disabilities that has been signed, striped, posted, or in any other way designated so that a person of ordinary intelligence would know that it has been designed or designated as a ramp or aisle used by or for the benefit of disabled persons. 
(4)  It is unlawful for any person to lend a disabled parking placard issued to the person to another person who uses the disabled parking placard in violation of this section. 
(5)  In a prosecution under this section, it is presumed and prima facie evidence that the registered owner of the vehicle is the person who left the vehicle parked, standing, or stopped at the time and place the offense occurred. 
(6)  This section applies to a parking space designated specifically for persons with disabilities on public and private property that is designated in compliance with the identification requirements referred to in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 681.009(b). 
(7)  For enforcement purposes of this section, the City recognizes the designation of any vehicle used to transport persons with disabilities when the vehicle is so designated by any state of the United States or by a state or province of a foreign country, in accordance with the laws of that state or country. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the vehicle was marked for the transportation of persons with disabilities in accordance with the laws of the state or country in which the vehicle is registered or in accordance with the laws of the state or country where the registered owner resides provided that the vehicle was in fact transporting a person(s) with disabilities. 
(d)  Conflicts. If any of the standards or regulations in this section conflict with state or federal law, the more restrictive standard or regulation shall apply unless otherwise pre-empted by state or federal law. 
(e)  Penalty. 
(1)  A person who violates a provision of this section commits a misdemeanor offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(2)  An offense under this section is punishable by a fine of not less than $250.00 or more than $500.00, unless an enhancement penalty is imposed and fined because of a prior conviction(s) for an offense under this section as provided for in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 681.011(h) through (k), as amended. 
(3)  Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this section. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, § 2, 4-12-2011) 
State Law reference- Privileged parking, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 681.001 Definitions; disabled parking placard, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 681.002-681.004; parking privileges: Persons with Disabilities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 681.006-007; designation of parking spaces by political subdivision or private property owner, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 681.009; offenses relating to parking spaces for person with disabilities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 681.011. 
Secs. 40-68-40-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HEAVY TRUCKS 

Sec. 40-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Heavy truck means any and all truck tractors, van trailers, semitrailers, livestock trailers, house trailers and/or any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of property, whose body weight or whose rated or licensed combined body and load weight exceeds 20,000 pounds. 
    Roads designated for no heavy trucks. Each of the following roadways are hereby designated as roads designated for no heavy trucks: 
(1)  That section of South 5th Street located between U.S. Highway 80 and Texas State Highway 47; 
(2)  That section of Pecan Avenue located between U.S. Highway 80 and Texas State Highway 47; and 
(3)  That section of Mary Street located between U.S. Highway 80 and Pecan Avenue. 
(4)  That section of E. North Commerce Street located between N. 4th Street and Lybrand Street; 
(5)  That section of E. South Commerce Street located between Houston Street (also known as U.S. Highway 80) and Hatch Street; and 
(6)  Any and all public streets within the residential districts of the City, which shall include the "R-1" One-Family Dwelling District, the "R-2" Duplex and Apartment District, and the "B-1" Neighborhood Business District as defined in the City's zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 1, 5-15-2007; Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 13-02, § 2, 4-9-2013 ) 
Sec. 40-92. - No trucks on designated roads. 
    No heavy truck shall be operated over or along the roads designated for no heavy trucks. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 2, 5-15-2007; Ord. No. 07-08, § 2, 6-11-2007) 
Sec. 40-93. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not prohibit: 
(a)  Operation on street of destination. The operation of heavy trucks where necessary to conduct business at a destination point within the roads designated for no heavy trucks. This shall include heavy trucks traveling to and from a location for the purpose of providing repair or maintenance service, loading or unloading goods, wares, or merchandise, provided such heavy trucks are operated over the shortest practical route, and if the operators of such heavy trucks have in their immediate possession evidence of the local destination and point of origin. 
(b)  Emergency vehicles. The operation of emergency vehicles upon the roads designated for no heavy trucks. 
(c)  Public utilities. The operation of heavy trucks owned or operated by the City, public utilities or any contractor or materialman, while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements or street utilities within the roads designated for no heavy trucks. 
(d)  Public service vehicles. The operation of heavy trucks for public service use, such as garbage pickup, street repair and water service. 
(e)  Detoured trucks. The operation of heavy trucks upon the roads designated for no heavy trucks if at any time such section is officially established as a temporary detour due to construction or other traffic problems on Highway 80, Highway 47 or other public roadway or street within the City. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 5-15-2007; Ord. No. 07-08, § 3, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 13-02, § 2, 4-9-2013 ) 
Sec. 40-94. - Signs. 
    The chief of police shall cause the roads designated for no heavy trucks to be clearly signposted to give notice of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 4, 5-15-2007; Ord. No. 07-08, § 4, 6-11-2007) 
Sec. 40-95. - Failure to post. 
    No person shall be charged with violating the provisions of this article by reason of operating a heavy truck upon the roads designated for no heavy trucks unless appropriate signs are posted on such street(s). 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 5, 5-15-2007; Ord. No. 07-08, § 5, 6-11-2007; Ord. No. 13-02, § 2, 4-9-2013 ) 
Sec. 40-96. - Weigh-in; prima facie proof. 
    The chief of police and each City police officer shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of any vehicle proceeding over the roads designated for no heavy trucks that said officers has probable cause to believe is a heavy truck to proceed to a public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining whether this article has been complied with, and such person's failure or refusal to proceed as required shall be prima facie proof that the vehicle is a "heavy truck," as defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 6, 5-15-2007; Ord. No. 07-08, § 6, 6-11-2007) 
Sec. 40-97. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties of section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 2, 5-15-2007; Ord. No. 07-08, § 2, 6-11-2007) 
Secs. 40-98-40-121. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - USE OF WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICES IN CERTAIN LOCATIONS 

Sec. 40-122. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article the following definitions shall apply: 
    Hands-free device means speakerphone capability or a telephone attachment or other piece of equipment, regardless of whether permanently installed in the motor vehicle, that allows use of the wireless communication device without use of either of the operator's hands. 
    School crossing zone shall mean a reduced-speed zone designated on a street by the City to facilitate safe crossing of the street by children going to or leaving a public or private elementary or secondary school during the time the reduced speed limit applies as provided in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.302(13). 
    Wireless communication device shall mean a device that uses a commercial mobile service, as defined by 47 U.S.C. section 332. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 2, 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 40-123. - Use of wireless communication device in school zones. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided below, it shall be unlawful for a person to use a wireless communication device while operating a motor vehicle in a school crossing zone, as designated pursuant to this article, on official school days, during the hours when the school crossing zone is in effect, and when a school crossing zone sign and a sign providing notice of the prohibition of use of a wireless communication device in a school crossing zone are posted in place. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall not apply if: 
(1)  The vehicle is stopped; or 
(2)  The wireless communication device is used with a hands-free device. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution of an offense under subsection (a) that: 
(1)  The wireless communication device was used to make an emergency call to: 
a.  An emergency response service, including a rescue, emergency medical or hazardous material response service; 
b.  A hospital; 
c.  A fire department; 
d.  A health clinic; 
e.  A medical doctor's office; 
f.  An individual to administer first aid treatment; or 
g.  A police department; or 
(2)  A sign required by section 40-124 was not posted at the entrance to the school crossing zone at the time of an offense committed in the school crossing zone. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  An operator of an authorized emergency vehicle using a wireless communication device while acting in an official capacity; or 
(2)  An operator who is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission while operating a radio frequency device other than a wireless communication device. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 2, 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 40-124. - Signs. 
    A sign shall be attached to the existing signage which provides notice of a school crossing zone that: 
(1)  The use of a wireless communication device is prohibited in the school crossing zone; and 
(2)  The operator is subject to a fine if the operator uses a wireless communication device in a school crossing zone. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 2, 9-8-2009) 
Sec. 40-125. - Offense. 
(a)  A person who violates a provision of this article, or who fails to perform an act required of that person by this article, commits a misdemeanor offense. 
(b)  An offense under this article is punishable by a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
(c)  Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, § 2, 9-8-2009) 
Chapter 42 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- V.T.C.A., Utilities Code ch. 1 et seq.; jurisdiction and powers of municipality over electric utilities, V.T.C.A., Utilities Code ch. 33; water and utilities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 401 et seq.; charges by City to utility companies for use public ways, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 182.025. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CUSTOMER USE OF CITY SERVICES 

Sec. 42-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City means the City of Wills Point, Texas, or any duly authorized person acting on its behalf. 
    Garbage means solid waste from, but not limited to, the preparation, cooking, and disposal of food and from the handling of or storage and sale of products. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Services means water, sewer, garbage disposal or any other services made available by the City. 
    Sewage means a combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Water lines means a water distribution line, either upon private property of private individuals or upon the property of the City, and is controlled by the City. 
(Code 1981, § 15.50; Ord. No. 06-01) 
Sec. 42-20. - Mandatory water connections. 
(a)  Every residential and business establishment within the City limits which is situated within 100 feet of a public water main shall forthwith be connected thereto and maintained so that such main shall be the only connection used by such establishment. Such connection shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Code. This mandatory water connection shall not be applicable to storage buildings or similar structures which have no toilet facilities. 
(b)  Failure to connect to a public water main, as provided in subsection (a) of this section, within ten days following receipt of a written notice from the City to make such connection shall, unless delay is caused by war, strikes, insurrection or acts of God, be a violation and shall be penalized as set forth by this article. Each day of violation shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 15.51; Ord. No. 06-01) 
Sec. 42-21. - Mandatory sewer connections. 
    Every building used for human habitation or occupancy abutting on a street or alley in which there is a public sewer, or within 100 feet of a public sewer, shall be connected thereto by the owner of the premises in the most direct manner possible and with a separate connection for each house or building. It shall be unlawful for any person occupying or inhabiting a building to which section 42-20 is applicable to dispose of any human excreta except in a sanitary water-flushed closet. 
(Code 1981, § 15.52; Ord. No. 06-01) 
Sec. 42-22. - Application for water and sewer service. 
    Written application shall be made for water and sewer service furnished by the City upon forms furnished therefor. Such application shall state the name and address of the applicant, type of utility service desired, and such other information as the City may request. 
(Code 1981, § 15.53; Ord. No. 06-01) 
Sec. 42-23. - Utility deposits. 
(a)  Any person hereafter desiring City utility services and/or subscribing to City garbage collection services shall deposit with the City as a guarantee of payment for these utility services and/or garbage collection services, the amounts as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time. Utility deposits shall be refunded only when a customer discontinues all services and only after the City has deducted from the customer's deposit amount for any unpaid balances due to the City. 
(b)  A reconnect fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time will be charged to all customers requesting the City to reconnect utility services to their residence, commercial business, and/or any other dwelling, building or establishment during after-hours. The term "after-hours" means before 8:00 a.m. and after 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, and all day, any time of the day on weekends and holidays. 
(Code 1981, § 15.54; Ord. No. 06-01; Ord. No. 08-02, 1-7-2008) 
Sec. 42-24. - Water service rates. 
    A schedule of rates or charges for water services furnished by the City shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time. 
(Code 1981, § 15.55; Ord. No. 06-01) 
Sec. 42-25. - Sewer service rates. 
    A schedule of rates or charges for sewer services furnished by the City shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time. 
(Code 1981, § 15.56; Ord. No. 06-01) 
Sec. 42-26. - Utility billing procedure. 
    All water, sewer and garbage charges for services rendered shall be billed and collected monthly and shall be paid by the 15th day of the month. Water, sewer and garbage collection service shall appear on one statement or bill, shall be considered as one bill, although separately itemized. Failure to pay one or more of these service charges shall constitute failure of paying the bill. If the bill is not paid by the due date, an additional penalty as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time shall be added as a late charge. A bill not paid by the 25th day of the month shall be subject to service being discontinued by turning off the water meter. 
(Code 1981, § 15.57; Ord. No. 06-01; Ord. No. 07-14, § 2, 9-11-2007) 
Sec. 42-27. - Multiple users on single meters. 
    In all cases of multiple residential, business or mercantile, or mixed occupancy where more than one dwelling unit or business is serviced by a single meter, there shall be an additional charge as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time. 
(Code 1981, § 15.58; Ord. No. 06-01) 
Sec. 42-28. - Connections and/or reconnections of utility services. 
(a)  A transfer fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time shall be charged for connecting and disconnecting a water service from one location to another within the service area. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized employee of the City, to tamper with any water meter; or in any manner to injure any meter; or the manipulate or attempt to manipulate any meter in any manner so as to affect its registration or measurement of water. 
(c)  Should water service be discontinued for nonpayment a surcharge as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time shall be required in addition to payment of account in full to activate water service. 
(d)  The amounts to be charged and collected by the City for connection to the water mains and sanitary sewer system shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time. 
(Code 1981, § 15.59; Ord. No. 06-01; Ord. No. 07-14, § 1, 9-11-2007; Ord. No. 08-09, § 1, 9-9-2008) 
Sec. 42-29. - Installation, ownership and maintenance. 
(a)  All water and sanitary sewer service lines shall be installed by employees of the City under the supervision of the public works director or by a contractor authorized by the City. Such water installation shall include the metered water service line from the water main to the water meter, the nonmetered water service line shall include from the water main to the property line and the sanitary sewer service line from the sewer main to the property line. 
(b)  All water meters shall be installed, relocated and removed by employees of the City. 
(c)  The City shall own and maintain all metered water service lines from the water main to the meter and shall own and maintain the water meter. 
(d)  The property owner shall own and maintain all metered water lines on the property side of the water meter. 
(e)  The City shall own and maintain the valve at the water main on all non-metered water service lines. 
(f)  The property owner shall own and maintain all non-metered water lines on the property side of the valve at the water main. 
(g)  The property owner shall own and maintain the sanitary sewer service line from the property side of the sewer main. 
(Code 1981, § 15.60; Ord. No. 06-01) 
Sec. 42-30. - Penalty clause. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, § 15.63; 06-01) 
Secs. 42-31-42-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-49. - Unlawful acts. 
    All the following acts shall be unlawful: 
(1)  To uncover the public sewer line or branch thereof unless by consent and under the supervision of the City Plumbing Inspector or Water and Wastewater Superintendent. 
(2)  To fail or refuse to connect with the sewer, when legally required, all washstands in a house or yard within the sanitary district, or to allow any slops, wash or waste of any kind to flow over the pavement or under the pavement into the streets or alleys. 
(Code 1981, § 9.60; Ord. of 12-7-1948) 
Sec. 42-50. - Responsibility of owner and plumber. 
    The property owner or plumber or both shall be held responsible for any injuries the plumber shall cause to such connection. 
(Code 1981, § 9.61; Ord. of 12-7-1948) 
Sec. 42-51. - Injury to sewer system. 
(a)  No person or corporation shall deposit any garbage off a dead animal, or filth or any substance having a tendency to obstruct the flow or sewage in any manhole, lamp-hole, flush tank or sewer opening. 
(b)  The City, by and through its mayor, shall have the power to stop or prevent from discharging into the public sewer, any private drain or house connection, through which substances are discharged which are liable to injure the sewers or to obstruct the flow of the sewage, or to interfere with the operation of the septic tank. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to obstruct or in any way injure any of the pipes, drains, or works or machinery belonging to or connected with the sewer system of the City, or to place any substance whatever into any sink or water closet, bath tub, vessels, drains, or other receptacles belonging to or connected with said sewer system which may obstruct or injure same. 
(Code 1981, § 9.62; Ord. of 12-7-1948) 
Sec. 42-52. - Trenching back filling and connecting. 
    The house sewer trench shall be dug so as to meet the public sewer at the position of the "Y" branch located by the City Plumber or Water and Wastewater Superintendent. Proper barriers and lights must be maintained on the banks of the trench to guard the public against accident during progress of work. In backfilling, the earth shall be carefully rammed or flooded so as to keep the pipes in proper position and avoid settling and no stone shall be used in filling until there has been a depth of two feet of fine earth or gravel placed over a pipe. 
(Code 1981, § 9.63; Ord. of 12-7-1948) 
Sec. 42-53. - Plumber's license and bond. 
(a)  Any person desiring to do business as a plumber in connection with the sewer system of the City shall file, in the office of the City Secretary, a petition giving the name of the applicant and the applicant's place of business and asking to be licensed as a plumber. Said petition must be signed by the applicant and two disinterested responsible citizens of the City vouching for the business capacity and reputation of the applicant, that the applicant is a master of the applicant's trade and willing to be governed in all respects by the rules and regulations which are or may be adopted by this City. 
(b)  Each applicant shall execute and deposit in the office of the City Secretary with the application, a bond payable to the City in the sum as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time, with a responsible surety company, authorized to do business in the state as surety to protect and save the City against all conditions, loss or damage occasioned by the negligence of the applicant in failing to properly execute and protect all work done by the applicant or the applicant's employees or under the applicant's direction or supervision, and from all damage occasioned by or arising in any manner from any such work by said applicant or said applicant's employees, or under said applicant's direction or supervision which is not caused by the negligence of the said City or its agents or employees; and that the applicant will replace and restore any sidewalk, pavement or street service over any opening that said applicant may have made to as good state and condition as said applicant found it and keep and maintain the same in good order and condition to the satisfaction of the City, for the period of six months next thereafter; that the applicant therein will keep and observe all ordinances at any time enacted by said City relating in any way to plumbing work; and that said applicant will pay all fines imposed for violation of any such ordinances or any of these rules and regulations. Said bond shall be approved by the mayor of said City and may be sued on by said City in any court of competent jurisdiction. Said bonds shall run for a period of one year and be renewed at the expiration of same, and no plumbing work shall be done by, and no permits shall be issued to any master plumber who has no such bond in full force and effect. 
(c)  Upon the approval of said bond, the mayor shall issue a plumber's license to the applicant. No license shall be transferred. 
(d)  Before the license is issued, the applicant shall pay to the City Secretary, to be deposited in the City Treasury, a license fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time. Fees for renewals taken out within 30 days after the expiration of the bond of a plumber shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time. 
(e)  The City Secretary shall keep a record of all persons to whom plumbers licenses have been issued and the date of expiration of each license. 
(Code 1981, § 9.64; Ord. of 12-7-1948) 
Sec. 42-54. - Duties of water and wastewater superintendent. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of the City Water and Wastewater Superintendent. Said officer shall be appointed by the City Council of said City, and shall hold office until a successor is appointed and qualified, and shall be removable at any time at the will of the City Council. Said officer shall, before qualifying, be required to give bond in the amount as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time, with two or more good and sufficient sureties, payable to the mayor and the mayor's successors in office, conditioned that said officer will faithfully account for and pay into the City Treasury all funds coming into the hands of the City Water and Wastewater Superintendent by virtue of said office. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the City Water and Wastewater Superintendent to issue all permits for plumbing work in connection with the sewer system, to inspect and pass upon all such plumbing, to inspect such plumbing already in use or being constructed which the City Water and Wastewater Superintendent may have reason to believe is imperfect or out of repair, and by written order to the owner or agent in charge of any building or premises where any such imperfect plumbing work may be located, or to the plumber in charge of the construction of same, stop the construction or use of same until same shall have been properly constructed or repaired; and the City Water and Wastewater Superintendent shall have the power to enter any house or premises in said City at any time between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. to inspect any such plumbing. The City Water and Wastewater Superintendent shall investigate all alleged violations of this article or any plumbing ordinance of this City reported to the City Water and Wastewater Superintendent; shall file complaints against all whom the City Water and Wastewater Superintendent may have reason to believe are guilty of such violations; and shall perform such other services as may be required by the City Council. It shall also be the duty of said City Water and Wastewater Superintendent to collect for the City all inspection, installation, and service fees required by this article. 
(Code 1981, § 9.65; Ord. of 12-7-1948) 
Sec. 42-55. - Opening of sewer mains. 
    Whenever it is necessary, where there is no "Y" at a point at which it is desired to make connection, the main or any lateral in any street or alley of the City may be opened and a saddle connection made, but the water and wastewater superintendent must in every case be present and direct the opening, the saddling, and the covering and tamping. 
(Code 1981, § 9.67; Ord. of 12-7-1948) 
Sec. 42-56. - Permit for connections. 
    No person shall complete any plumbing of any character or repair any plumbing work, or any extensions to plumbing, or change the location of any plumbing fixture, except as hereinafter prescribed, in said City, until such person has received a permit to do the same from the City Water and Wastewater Superintendent describing the character of the plumbing work or repairing proposed to be done, together with the exact location of the same, the number and location of street openings, if any, and the number, name and character of the plumbing fixtures to be repaired or put in; provided that no such application need be made and no permit issued for repairs or leaks in pipes, traps or cocks, opening up waste or supply pipes, traps or drains, in replacing any broken fixture or water pipes. 
(Code 1981, § 9.68; Ord. of 12-7-1948) 
Sec. 42-57. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, § 9.83; Ord. of 12-7-1948) 
Secs. 42-58-42-87. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WASTEWATER COSTS AND CLASSES 

Sec. 42-88. - Definitions and adopted terms. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of 20 degrees Celsius. 
    Conventional pollutant means those pollutants that are generally biodegradable and readily handled within normal concentration ranges by conventional treatment processes. Conventional pollutants specifically include biochemical oxygen demand, total suspended solids, fecal coliform, pH, oil, and grease. 
    Domestic wastewater means the liquid waste normally originating in quarters inhabited or frequented by human beings and may include human excreta, bathwater, kitchen wastes (with or without properly shredded garbage), and laundry waste. 
    Industrial users means any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of a publicly owned treatment work which discharges more than the equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day of sanitary wastes as defined in 40 CFR 35.905 of the Code of Federal Rules and Regulations. 
    Nonconventional pollutants means all other pollutants which are not specifically identified as either conventional or toxic and includes such pollutants as chemical oxygen demand (COD), phosphorus, sulfates, chlorides, etc. 
    Nonresidential customers means all other customers receiving wastewater service and includes, but is not limited to, commercial establishments, churches, schools, nursing homes, and hospitals. 
    Normal wastewater concentrations means wastewater having characteristics generally associated with typical domestic wastewater and shall have the following limits: 
BOD, 5 days @ 20 C 225 mg/l (max.) Chlorine demand 15 min. 68 F 25 mg/l (max.) Suspended Solids 250 mg/l (max.) Hydrogen ion concentration (pH) 5.0 to 9.0 Free oil and grease 10 mg/l (max.) Oil and grease, total 100 mg/l (max.) Temperature 125 F (max.) NH-N 30 mg/l (max.)  
    Objectionable pollutant means those toxic and non-conventional pollutant causing an increase in the cost of managing the effluent of sludge of the treatment waste. Suggested maximum limits for some objectionable pollutants are defined in the sewer use regulations. 
    Operation and maintenance (O and M) costs means those costs associated with the necessary operational requirements of a wastewater treatment facility and collection system including replacement. 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. 
    Prohibited pollutants means any toxic or nonconventional pollutants that would cause problems in the adequate treatment of the wastewater and would be required to be removed prior to any discharge into the wastewater system. 
    Replacement means expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance of the treatment works during its service life. 
    Residential customers means those customers living in homes, apartments, townhouses and trailers. 
    Suspended solids (SS) means solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which are largely, removable by a laboratory filtration device. 
    Toxic pollutants means those pollutants which have been designated as toxic under section 307 of the 1977 Clean Water Act, including all additions to the list. 
    User charge means a charge levied on users of a treatment works for the user's proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance of such works. 
(b)  Other terms. Terms not otherwise defined herein shall be as adopted in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
(Code 1981, § 9.22; Ord. of 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 42-89. - User charges. 
(a)  Customers with normal wastewater contributions. In cases where wastewater characteristics contributed by users are below or near the normal wastewater concentrations and do not contain any objectionable pollutants, the user's charges are to be based on their estimated volume contribution. The individual customer charges will be based on the following: 
User Charge Formula 
    Cu = Cb + (Ct/Vt) Vu 
Where: 
    Cu = A user's monthly charge for wastewater service. 
    Cb = A user's share of monthly costs not related to operation and maintenance of wastewater collection and treatment system. 
    Ct = Total operation and maintenance of lift stations and wastewater treatment facilities. 
    Vt = Total annual volume contribution from all users. Vt is the total annual volume of wastewater received by the treatment facility. For the first year of operation of the plant, 0.400 million gallons per day flow will be used. At the end of the first year, the actual flow measured at the plant shall be used. 
    Vu = The total volume of water used by the sewer customer for that month less the 1,500 gallons included in the base rate. 
(b)  Surcharge for excessive pollutant concentrations. Determination of excessive pollutant concentrations. The water and wastewater superintendent will be responsible for determining which users have sewage with excessive pollutant concentrations. Users who have effluent that exceeds normal loading are responsible for self monitoring. The water and wastewater superintendent will determine the users who are liable for surcharges either by individual testing or by using industry standards. If a user disputes the surcharge, the burden of proof will be upon the user to show that the effluent meets normal loading characteristics. 
(c)  Conventional pollutants. In the event that conventional pollutant concentrations from a user exceed the normal range of strength of domestic wastewater a surcharge shall be levied. The use of such a surcharge would be necessary if a user discharging a wastewater has a higher range of strength, and is located within the City, and desires to have wastewater treatment service. The surcharge would be levied by the following formula. 
    Cs = [Bc(b) + Sc(s)l x Vu 
    Where: 
    Cs = Surcharge for sewage of excessive strength 
    Bc = O and M cost for treatment of a unit of BOD 
    b = Concentration of BOD from a user above a base level of 225 mg/l 
    Sc = O and M cost for treatment of a unit of suspended solids (SS) 
    s = Concentration of SS from a user above a base level of 250 mg/l 
    Vu = Volume concentration from a user per unit of time 
(d)  Nonconventional pollutants. In the event that objectionable pollutants or other non-conventional pollutants are discharged into the system and cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or sludge of the treatment works, the City shall take action to determine such cost and levy a surcharge to that user. 
(Code 1981, § 9.23; Ord. of 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 42-90. - User charge policy requirements. 
(a)  General requirements. The user charge system shall be revised accordingly to accomplish the following: 
(1)  Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance costs among the users and user classes as required herein; 
(2)  Generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and maintenance costs necessary for the proper operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the treatment and collection system works; and 
(3)  Apply excess revenues collected from users or a class of users to the costs and operation and maintenance fund, and adjust the rate accordingly in the following year. 
(b)  Review period. It shall be the policy of the City to review the user charge system not less than every two years to insure that the general requirements of this section are met. It also shall be the policy of the City to review all user rate structures not less than every two years to insure a fair distribution of costs. 
(c)  Notification. It shall be the policy of the City that each user be notified in conjunction with a regular bill of the sewer rate and that portion of the sewer bill which is attributable to the operation and maintenance of the wastewater treatment and collection facilities. 
(d)  Complaints. It shall be the policy of the City to formally review complaints of sewer charges to a user at any regularly scheduled City Council meeting upon adequate notice. 
(Code 1981, § 9.24; Ord. of 12-11-1989) 
Secs. 42-91-42-107. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SEWER USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 42-108. - Purpose and policy. 
    This division sets forth uniform requirements for users of the wastewater collection and Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) for the City and enables the City to comply with all applicable state and federal laws including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403). 
( Ord. No. 12-03, § 1, 7-10-2012 ) 
Sec. 42-109. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approving authority means the City Administrator or the City Administrator's duly authorized representative. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of 20 degrees Celsius. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal (also called house lateral and house connection). 
    Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand. 
    Control manhole means a manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
    Control point means a point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
    Discharge includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit, or suffer any of these acts of omissions. 
    DO means dissolved oxygen. 
    Garbage means animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
    Industrial waste means waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct from normal wastewater. 
    Industrial waste charge means the charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the City's sewerage system. 
    MCL means maximum contaminant level. 
    Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means the same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    Normal domestic wastewater means wastewater excluding industrial wastewater discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 250 mg/l and BOD is not more than 225 mg/l. 
    Overload means the imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity. 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. 
    Public sewer means pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use, subject to control by the City. 
    Sanitary sewer means a public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which storm water, surface water, groundwater, and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, wastewater, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24 hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Standard Methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
    Storm sewer means a public sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed. 
    Stormwater means rainfall or any other form of precipitation. 
    Suspended solids (SS) means solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which are largely, removable by a laboratory filtration device. 
    TSS means total suspended solids. 
    Trap means a device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances. 
    Unpolluted wastewater means water containing: 
(1)  No free or emulsified grease of oil; 
(2)  No acids or alkalis; 
(3)  No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water; 
(4)  No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution; 
(5)  No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases; 
(6)  Not more than an insignificant amount in mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD, as determined by the Texas Water Commission; and 
(7)  Color not exceeding 50 units as measured by the Platinum-Cobalt method of determination as specified in Standard Methods. 
    Waste means rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural or industrial activity. 
    Wastewater means a combination of the water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. 
    Wastewater facilities includes all facilities for collection, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes. 
    Wastewater service charge means the charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal wastewater. 
    Wastewater treatment plant means any City-owned facilities, devices, and structures used for receiving, processing and, treating wastewater, industrial waste, and sludges from the sanitary sewers. 
    Watercourse means a natural or manmade channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1981, § 9.30; Ord. of 7-18-1972, revised 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 12-03, § 1, 7-10-2012 ) 
Sec. 42-110. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes may: 
(1)  Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities; 
(2)  Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or 
(3)  Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent. 
(b)  All discharges shall conform to requirements of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 9.31; Ord. of 7-18-1972, revised 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 42-111. - Prohibited chemical discharges. 
(a)  No discharge to public sewers may contain: 
(1)  Cyanide greater than 1.0 mg/l; 
(2)  Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply; 
(3)  Chlorides in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l; 
(4)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; or 
(5)  Substances causing an excessive chemical oxygen demand (COD). 
(b)  No waste or wastewater discharged into public waters may contain: 
(1)  Strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not; 
(2)  Fats, wax, grease of oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 650 Celsius); 
(3)  Objectionable or toxic substances, exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the approving authority for such materials; or 
(4)  Obnoxious, toxic, or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the provisions of section 42-110. 
(c)  No waste, wastewater, or other substance may be discharged into public sewers, which has a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 9.0, or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel at the wastewater facilities. 
(d)  All waste, wastewater, or other substance containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide, or other taste-and-odor producing substances, shall conform to concentration limits established by the approving authority. After treatment of the composite wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by state, federal, or other agencies with jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters. 
(Code 1981, § 9.32; Ord. of 7-18-1972, revised 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 12-03, § 1, 7-10-2012 ) 
Sec. 42-112. - Hazardous metals and toxic materials. 
(a)  No discharges may contain concentrations of heavy metals greater than amounts specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The maximum allowable concentrations of hazardous metals, in the terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), for discharge to inland waters, and determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with Standard Methods are: 
HEAVY METAL LIMITS 
Not to Exceed Daily 
(mg/l) Metal Average Composite Grab Sample Arsenic 0.1 0.2 0.3 Barium 1.0 2.0 4.0 Cadmium 0.05 0.1 0.2 Chromium 0.5 1.0 5.0 Copper 0.5 1.0 2.0 Lead 0.5 1.0 1.5 Manganese 1.0 2.0 3.0 Mercury 0.005 0.005 0.01 Nickel 1.0 2.0 3.0 Selenium 0.05 0.1 0.2 Silver 0.05 0.1 0.2 Zinc 1.0 2.0 6.0  
(NOTE: These concentration parameters and rules governing same are promulgated under authority of Texas Water Commission Rule 156.19 and V.T.C.A., Water Code §§ 5.130-5.132). 
(c)  No other hazardous metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from the approving authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes, and other applicable provisions. 
(d)  Prohibited hazardous materials include, but are not limited to: 
Antimony 
Beryllium 
Bismuth 
Cobalt 
Fungicides 
Herbicides 
Molybdenum 
Pesticides 
Rhenium 
Strontium 
Tellurium 
Tin 
Uranyl ion 
(Code 1981, § 9.33; Ord. of 7-18-1972, revised 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 42-113. - Particulate size. 
(a)  No person may discharge garbage or other solids into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than one-half inch in any dimensions are prohibited. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater. 
(Code 1981, § 9.34; Ord. of 7-18-1972, revised 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 42-114. - Stormwater and unpolluted drainage. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers: 
(1)  Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage; 
(2)  Unpolluted cooling water; 
(3)  Unpolluted industrial process waters; or 
(4)  Other unpolluted drainage. 
(b)  In compliance with the Texas Water Quality Act and other statutes, the approving authority may designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in subsection (a) of this section may be discharged. 
(Code 1981, § 9.35; Ord. of 7-18-1972, revised 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 42-115. - Temperature. 
    No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius), or any substance which causes the temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at rate of ten degrees Fahrenheit of more per hour, or a combined total increase of plant influent temperature to 110 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Code 1981, § 9.36; Ord. of 7-18-1972, revised 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 42-116. - Radioactive wastes. 
(a)  No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the approving authority. 
(b)  The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations, regulations for discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers. 
(Code 1981, § 9.37; Ord. of 7-18-1972, revised 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 42-117. - Impairment of facilities. 
(a)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing: 
(1)  Obstruction to the flow in sewers; 
(2)  Interference with the operation of treatment processes of facilities; or 
(3)  Excessive loading of treatment facilities. 
(b)  Discharges prohibited by subsection (a) of this section include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l including, but not limited to, materials which exert or cause concentrations of: 
a.  Fuller's earth; 
b.  Lime slurries; and 
c.  Lime residues; 
(2)  Dissolved solids greater than 750 mg/l, including but not limited to: 
a.  Sodium chloride; and 
b.  Sodium sulfate; 
(3)  Excessive discoloration including, but not limited to: 
a.  Dye wastes; and 
b.  Vegetable tanning solutions; or 
(4)  BOD, COD, or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity. 
(c)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may: 
(1)  Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers; 
(2)  Overload skimming and grease handling equipment; 
(3)  Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment processes due to the non-amenability of the substance to bacterial action; or 
(4)  Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities. 
(d)  No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which: 
(1)  Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the process and facilities employed; or 
(2)  Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(e)  The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may: 
(1)  Impair the treatment process; 
(2)  Cause damage to collection facilities; 
(3)  Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; or 
(4)  Render the effluent unfit for stream disposal or industrial use. 
(f)  No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (a) of this section if present in sufficient quantity or size including, but not limited to: 
ashes slops petroleum products cinders wood rags sand unground garbage chemical residues mud whole blood paint residues straw paunch manure bulk solids shavings hair and fleshing feathers metal entrails tar glass plastics paper products  
(Code 1981, § 9.38) 
Sec. 42-118. - Compliance with existing authority. 
(a)  Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sanitary system shall be used by all persons discharging: 
(1)  Wastewater; 
(2)  Industrial waste; 
(3)  Polluted liquids; or 
(4)  Unpolluted waters or liquids. 
(b)  Unless authorized by the State Water Commission, no person may deposit or discharge any waste included in subsection (a) of this section on public or private property in or adjacent to any: 
(1)  Natural outlet; 
(2)  Watercourse; 
(3)  Storm sewer; 
(4)  Water well; or 
(5)  Other area within the jurisdiction of the City. 
(c)  The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state and local governments. 
(Code 1981, § 9.39; Ord. of 7-18-1972, revised 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 42-119. - Approving authority requirements for industrial waste. 
(a)  Industrial pretreatment objectives: 
(i)  To protect the City's wastewater treatment facility and sanitary sewer system from pollutants, which may cause interference with treatment plant operations; 
(ii)  To prevent introducing pollutants into the sanitary sewer system and wastewater treatment facility that could cause pass through of untreated pollutants to receiving waters; 
(iii)  To manage pollutant discharges into the sanitary sewer system and wastewater treatment facility to improve opportunities for reuse of wastewater and residuals (sewage sludge); and, 
(iv)  To prevent introducing pollutants into the sanitary sewer system and wastewater treatment facility that could cause worker health or safety concerns, or pose a potential endangerment to the public or the environment. 
If industrial waste discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters; create a hazard to life or health; or create a public nuisance, the approving authority shall require: 
(1)  Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers as follows: 
a.  BOD5 (5 days)-MCL is 200 mg/l. 
b.  TSS-MCL is 15 mg/l. 
c.  DO-Minimum acceptable level is 4 mg/l. 
d.  pH-Minimum allowable is 5.0 and maximum allowable is 9.0. 
e.  Ammonia nitrogen-MCL is 20.0 mg/l. 
(2)  Control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and 
(3)  Payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The approving authority shall reject wastes when it determines that a discharge or proposed discharge does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 9.40; Ord. of 7-18-1972, revised 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 12-03, § 1, 7-10-2012 ) 
Sec. 42-120. - Approving authority review and approval. 
(a)  If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall review and approve design and installation of equipment and processes. 
(b)  The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other laws. 
(c)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow equalizing, or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities in effective operation condition at such person's own expense. 
(Code 1981, § 9.41; Ord. of 7-18-1972, revised 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 42-121. - Requirements for traps. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  This section shall apply to all Industrial Users, Nonresidential Customers, and Users of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW), as defined in Division 2, Section 42.88, Division 3, Section 42-109, and Section 42-121.001 of this section. 
(2)  Grease traps or grease interceptors shall not be required for residential users. 
(b)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  Facilities generating fats, oils, or greases because of food manufacturing, processing, preparation, or food service shall install, use, and maintain appropriate grease traps or interceptors as required in section 42-121(b) of this section. These facilities include but are not limited to restaurants, food manufacturers, food processors, hospitals, hotels and motels, prisons, nursing homes, and any other facility preparing, serving, or otherwise making any foodstuff available for consumption. 
(2)  No user may intentionally or unintentionally allow the direct or indirect discharge of any petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, mineral oil, or any fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin into the POTW system in such amounts as to cause interference with the collection and treatment system, or as to cause pollutants to pass through the treatment works into the environment. 
(3)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall at such person's own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
a.  Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority; 
b.  Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready accessibility for cleaning and inspection; and 
c.  Maintain the trap in effective operating condition. 
(Code 1981, § 9.42; Ord. of 7-18-1972, revised 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-14-2017) 
Sec. 42-121.001. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et. seq. 
    BOD means the value of the five-day test for biochemical oxygen demand, as described in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water & Wastewater." 
    COD means the value of the test for chemical oxygen demand, as described in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water & Wastewater." 
    EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Fats, oils, and greases (FOG) means organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as "grease" or "greases." 
    Generator means any person who owns or operates a grease trap/grease interceptor, or whose act or process produces a grease trap waste. 
    Grease trap or interceptor means a device designed to use differences in specific gravities to separate and retain light density liquids, waterborne fats, oils, and greases prior to the wastewater entering the sanitary sewer collection system. These devices also serve to collect settleable solids, generated by and from food preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection system. Grease traps and interceptors are also referred to herein as "grease traps/interceptors." 
    Grease trap waste means material collected in and from a grease trap/interceptor in the sanitary sewer service line of a commercial, institutional, or industrial food service or processing establishment, including the solids resulting from de-watering processes. 
    Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any non-domestic source. 
    Interference means a discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal, or is a cause of a violation of the city's TPDES permit. 
    pH means the measure of the relative acidity or alkalinity of water and is defined as the negative logarithm (base 10) of the hydrogen ion concentration. 
    POTW or publicly owned treatment works means a treatment works which is owned by a state or City of Wills Point as defined by section 502(4) of the Clean Water Act. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes all sewers, pipes and other conveyances that convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. The term also means the municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. For purposes of this division, the terms "sanitary sewer system" and "POTW" may be used interchangeably. 
    TCEQ means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, and its predecessor and successor agencies. 
    Transporter means a person who is registered with and authorized by the TCEQ to transport sewage sludge, water treatment sludge, domestic septage, chemical toilet waste, grit trap waste, or grease trap waste in accordance with V.T.C.A., tit. 30 Texas Administrative Code § 312.142. 
    TSS means the value of the test for total suspended solids, as described in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water & Wastewater." 
    User means any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the city, who contributes, causes or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into the POTW, including persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile sources. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-14-2017) 
Sec. 42-121.002. - Installation and maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Installation and maintenance requirements. 
(1)  Installations. 
a.  New facilities. Food processing or food service facilities which are newly proposed or constructed, or existing facilities which will be expanded or renovated to include a food service facility, where such facility did not previously exist, shall be required to design, install, operate and maintain a grease trap/interceptor in accordance with locally adopted plumbing codes or other applicable ordinances. Grease traps/interceptors shall be installed and inspected prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
b.  Existing facilities. Existing grease traps/interceptors must be operated and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and in accordance with these model standards, unless specified in writing and approved by the POTW. 
c.  All grease trap/interceptor waste shall be properly disposed of at a facility in accordance with federal, state, or local regulation. 
(2)  Cleaning and maintenance. 
a.  Grease traps and grease interceptors shall be maintained in an efficient operating condition at all times. 
b.  Each grease trap pumped shall be fully evacuated unless the trap volume is greater than the tank capacity on the vacuum truck in which case the transporter shall arrange for additional transportation capacity so that the trap is fully evacuated within a 24-hour period, in accordance with V.T.C.A., 30 Texas Administrative Code § 312.143. 
(3)  Self-cleaning. 
a.  Grease trap self-cleaning operators must receive approval from the POTW annually prior to removing grease from their own grease trap(s) located inside a building, provided: 
1.  The grease trap is no more than 50 gallons in liquid/operating capacity; 
2.  Proper on-site material disposal methods are implemented (e.g. absorb liquids into solid form and dispose into trash); 
3.  The local solid waste authority allows such practices; 
4.  Grease trap waste is placed in a leak proof, sealable container(s) located on the premises and in an area for the transporter to pump-out; and 
5.  Detailed records on these activities are maintained. 
b.  Grease trap self-cleaning operators must submit a completed self-cleaning request to the POTW for approval. The written request shall include the following information: 
1.  Business name and street address; 
2.  Grease trap/interceptor operator name, title, and phone number; 
3.  Description of maintenance frequency, method of disposal, method of cleaning and size (in gallons) of the grease trap/interceptor; and 
4.  Signed statement that the operator will maintain records of waste disposal and produce them for compliance inspections. 
c.  Self-cleaners must adhere to all the requirements; procedures and detailed record keeping outlined in their approved application, to ensure compliance with this division. A maintenance log shall be kept by self-cleaning operators that indicates, at a minimum, the following information: 
1.  Date the grease trap/interceptor was serviced; 
2.  Name of the person or company servicing the grease trap/interceptor; 
3.  Waste disposal method used; 
4.  Gallons of grease removed and disposed of; 
5.  Waste oil added to grease trap/interceptor waste; and 
6.  Signature of the operator after each cleaning that certifies that all grease was removed, disposed of properly, grease trap/interceptor was thoroughly cleaned, and that all parts were replaced and in operable condition. 
d.  Violations incurred by grease trap self-cleaners will be subject to enforcement action including fines and/or removal from the self-cleaner program. 
(4)  Cleaning schedules. 
a.  Grease traps and grease interceptors shall be cleaned as often as necessary to ensure that sediment and floating materials do not accumulate to impair the efficiency of the grease trap/interceptor; to ensure the discharge is in compliance with local discharge limits; and to ensure no visible grease is observed in discharge. 
b.  Grease traps and grease interceptors subject to these standards shall be completely evacuated a minimum of every 90 days, or more frequently when: 
1.  Twenty-five percent or more of the wetted height of the grease trap or grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or greases; or 
2.  The discharge exceeds BOD, COD, TSS, FOG, pH, or other pollutant levels established by the POTW; or 
3.  If there is a history of noncompliance. 
c.  Any person who owns or operates a grease trap/interceptor may submit to the POTW a request in writing for an exception to the 90-day pumping frequency of their grease trap/interceptor. The POTW may grant an extension for required cleaning frequency on a case-by-case basis when: 
1.  The grease trap/interceptor owner/operator has demonstrated the specific trap/interceptor will produce an effluent, based on defensible analytical results, in consistent compliance with established local discharge limits such as BOD, TSS, FOG, or other parameters as determined by the POTW, or 
2.  Less than 25 percent of the wetted height of the grease trap or grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or greases. 
d.  In any event, a grease trap and grease interceptor shall be fully evacuated, cleaned, and inspected at least once every 180 days. 
(5)  Manifest requirements. 
a.  Each pump-out of a grease trap or interceptor must be accompanied by a manifest to be used for record keeping purposes. 
b.  Persons who generate, collect and transport grease waste shall maintain a record of each individual collection and deposit. Such records shall be in the form of a manifest. The manifest shall include: 
1.  Name, address, telephone, and commission registration number of transporter; 
2.  Name, signature, address, and phone number of the person who generated the waste and the date collected; 
3.  Type and amount(s) of waste collected or transported; 
4.  Name and signature(s) of responsible person(s) collecting, transporting, and depositing the waste; 
5.  Date and place where the waste was deposited; 
6.  Identification (permit or site registration number, location, and operator) of the facility where the waste was deposited; 
7.  Name and signature of facility on-site representative acknowledging receipt of the waste and the amount of waste received; 
8.  The volume of the grease waste received; and 
9.  A consecutive numerical tracking number to assist transporters, waste generators, and regulating authorities in tracking the volume of grease transported. 
c.  Manifests shall be divided into five parts and records shall be maintained as follows: 
1.  One part of the manifest shall have the generator and transporter information completed and be given to the generator at the time of waste pickup. 
2.  The remaining four parts of the manifest shall have all required information filled out completely and signed by the appropriate party before distribution of the manifest. 
3.  One part of the manifest shall go to the receiving facility. 
4.  One part shall go to the transporter, who shall retain a copy of all manifests showing the collection and disposition of waste. 
5.  One copy of the manifest shall be returned by the transporter to the person who generated the wastes within 15 days after the waste is received at the disposal or processing facility. 
6.  One part of the manifest shall go to the local authority. 
d.  Copies of manifests returned to the waste generator shall be retained for five years and be readily available for review by the POTW. 
(6)  Alternative treatment. 
a.  A person commits an offense if the person introduces, or causes, permits, or suffers the introduction of any surfactant, solvent or emulsifier into a grease trap. Surfactants, solvents, and emulsifiers are materials which allow the grease to pass from the trap into the collection system, and include but are not limited to enzymes, soap, diesel, kerosene, terpene, and other solvents. 
b.  It is an affirmative defense to an enforcement of subsection 106-152(f)(1) that the use of surfactants or soaps is incidental to normal kitchen hygiene operations. 
c.  Bioremediation media may be used with the POTW's approval if the person has proved to the satisfaction of the POTW that laboratory testing which is appropriate for the type of grease trap to be used has verified that: 
1.  The media is a pure live bacterial product which is not inactivated by the use of domestic or commercial disinfectants and detergents, strong alkalis, acids, and/or water temperatures of 160/F (71/C). 
2.  The use of the media does not reduce the buoyancy of the grease layer in the grease trap and does not increase the potential for oil and grease to be discharged to the sanitary sewer. 
3.  The use of the bioremediation media does not cause foaming in the sanitary sewer. 
4.  The BOD, COD, and TSS discharged to the sanitary sewer after use of the media does not exceed the BOD, COD, and TSS which would be discharged if the product were not being used and the grease trap was being properly maintained. pH levels must be between five and 11. 
d.  All testing designed to satisfy the criteria set forth in subsection 105-152(f)(3) shall be scientifically sound and statistically valid. All tests to determine oil and grease, TSS, BOD, COD, pH, and other pollutant levels shall use appropriate tests which have been approved by the Environmental Protection Agency and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality and which are defined in Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 136 or V.T.C.A., tit. 30 Texas Administrative Code § 319.11. Testing shall be open to inspection by the POTW, and shall meet the POTW's approval. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-14-2017) 
Sec. 42-121.003. - Schedule of penalties. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever is such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punishable by a fine. 
(b)  If the POTW determines that a generator is responsible for a blockage of a collection system line the generator shall owe a civil penalty of $1,000.00 for the first violation, $1,500.00 for a second violation, and $2,000.00 for the third violation within a two-year period. Continuous violations shall result in an increase in penalty by $500.00 and may also result in termination of services. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be subject to a written warning for the first violation, a $1,000.00 civil penalty for the second violation, a $1,500.00 civil penalty for the third violation, and a $2,000.00 civil penalty for the fourth violation within a two-year period. Consistent violations will result in a $500.00 increase in civil penalty and may result in termination of service. 
(d)  No penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state. Each day, or fractional part of a day, any violation of this Code or any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-14-2017) 
Sec. 42-121.004. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or provision of this division, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall to any extent be held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, void or unconstitutional, the remaining sections, subsections, clauses, phrases and provisions of this division, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall remain in full force and effect and shall in no way be affected, impaired or invalidated. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-14-2017) 
Sec. 42-121.005. - Effectiveness. 
    This division shall become effective upon its passage and publication. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 2-14-2017) 
Sec. 42-122. - Requirements for building sewers. 
    Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall, at such person's own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Install an accessible and safely located control manhole; 
(2)  Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation sampling and measurement of the waste; 
(3)  Install safety equipment and facilities (ventilation, steps, etc.) where needed; 
(4)  Maintain the equipment and facilities. 
(Code 1981, § 9.43; Ord. of 7-18-1972, revised 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 42-123. - Sampling and testing. 
(a)  Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods reflecting the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb, and property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite sample from all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether grab samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls. Where applicable, 16-hour, eight-hour or some other period may be required. Periodic grab samples are used to determine pH and oil and grease levels. 
(b)  Examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by this article shall be: 
(1)  Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods"; 
(2)  Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control point authorized by the approving authority. 
(c)  BOD and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling, except to detect unauthorized discharges. 
(d)  The approving authority shall determine which users or classes of users may contribute wastewater which is of greater strength than normal domestic wastewater. All users or classes of users so identified shall be sampled for flow BOD, TSS and pH at least annually. 
(e)  The City may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, BOD, and suspended solids, if necessary. Flow may alternately be determined by water meter measurements if no other flow device is available and no other source of raw water is used. 
(Code 1981, § 9.44) 
Sec. 42-124. - User charge system. 
(a)  The City has promulgated a separate ordinance regulating the method to fairly distribute the operation and maintenance cost among the users. The user charge system will determine the rates to be paid by the users with periodic adjustments. 
(b)  When discharges of any waste into the City sewer system are approved by the approving authority, the City or its authorized representative shall enter into an agreement or arrangement providing: 
(1)  Terms of acceptance by the City; 
(2)  Payment by the person making the discharge, in accordance with the user charge system as mentioned in subsection (a) of this section; 
(3)  Sewer connection procedures and requirements shall be in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code as promulgated by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials; 
(4)  A sewer application approved with connection fee paid; and 
(5)  Construction of sewer connections shall be approved by City inspectors prior to sewer use. 
(c)  Each user of the wastewater treatment system will be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with a regular sewer bill, of the rate and that portion of user charges or ad valorem taxes which are attributable to the operation and maintenance of the wastewater treatment system. 
(d)  The City will apply excess revenues collected from a class of users to the cost of operation and maintenance attributable to that class for the next year and adjust the rates accordingly. 
(Code 1981, § 9.45) 
Sec. 42-125. - Savings clause. 
    A person discharging wastes into public sewers prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may continue without penalty so long as the person: 
(1)  Does not increase the quantity or decrease the quality of discharge without permission of the approving authority; 
(2)  Has discharged the waste at least six months prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived; and 
(3)  Applies for and is granted a permit no later than 150 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Code 1981, § 9.46) 
Sec. 42-126. - Conditions or permits. 
(a)  The City may grant a permit to discharge to persons meeting all requirements of the savings clause provided that the person: 
(1)  Submit an application within 120 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived on forms supplied by the approving authority; 
(2)  Secure approval by the approving authority of plans and specifications for the facilities when required; 
(3)  Has complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements including but not limited to, provisions for: 
a.  Payment of charges; 
b.  Installation and operation of the facilities and of pretreatment facilities, if required; 
c.  Sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength when directed by the City; and 
(4)  Provides a sampling point, when requested by the City, subject to the provisions of this ordinance and approval of the approving authority. 
(b)  A person applying for a new discharge shall: 
(1)  Meet all conditions of subsection (a) of this section; and 
(2)  Secure a permit prior to discharging any waste. 
(Code 1981, § 9.47; Ord. of 7-18-1972, revised 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 42-127. - Power to enter property. 
(a)  The water and wastewater superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this article. 
(b)  Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security, and fire protection. 
(c)  Except when caused by negligence or failure of City residents to maintain safe conditions, the City shall indemnify the City residents against loss or damage to the City resident's property caused by City employees; liability claims and demands for compensation due to personal injury or property damage to a City resident's property caused by City employees; and liability claims and demands for compensation due to personal injury or property damage asserted against the City residents as a result of the City's sampling operation. 
(d)  The water and wastewater superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter all private properties through which the City holds a negotiated easement for the purposes of: 
(1)  Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling or repair; 
(2)  Maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within the easements; and 
(3)  Conducting any other authorized activity. All activities shall be conducted in full accordance with the terms of the negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(e)  No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire into any processes including those of metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond those having direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public sewers. 
(Code 1981, § 9.48; Ord. of 7-18-1972, revised 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 42-128. - Authority to disconnect service. 
(a)  The City may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect a customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals which may damage the sewer lines or treatment process are released to the sewer potentially causing accelerated deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the City that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to the City's system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the City as normal domestic treatment; or 
(3)  The customer: 
a.  Discharges waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority; 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment system; 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due; or 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers in violation of sections 42-110 through 42-117. 
(b)  If service is disconnected pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section, the City shall: 
(1)  Disconnect the customer; 
(2)  Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all pertinent information; and 
(3)  Continue disconnection until such time as the customer provides pretreatment/additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the objectionable characteristics from the wastes. 
(Code 1981, § 9.49; Ord. of 7-18-1972, revised 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 42-129. - Notice. 
    The City shall serve persons discharging in violation of this article with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. 
(Code 1981, § 9.50; Ord. of 7-18-1972, revised 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 42-130. - Continuing prohibited discharges. 
    No person may continue discharging in violation of this article beyond the time limit provided in the notice. 
(Code 1981, § 9.51; Ord. of 7-18-1972, revised 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 42-131. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who continues prohibited discharges is subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(b)  In addition to proceeding under authority of subsection (a) of this section, the City is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharges. 
(Code 1981, § 9.52; Ord. of 7-18-1972, revised 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 42-132. - Failure to pay. 
    In addition to sanctions provided by this article, the City is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the other ordinances of the City for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. 
(Code 1981, § 9.53; Ord. of 7-18-1972, revised 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 42-133. - Penalty for criminal mischief. 
    The City may pursue all criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes and ordinances against a person negligently, willfully or maliciously causing loss by tampering with or destroying sewers or treatment facilities. 
(Code 1981, § 9.54; Ord. of 7-18-1972, revised 12-11-1989 ) 
Secs. 42-134-42-164. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICITY 

Sec. 42-165. - State jurisdiction over rates, operations and services. 
    The City Council does hereby elect to have the public utility commission of the state exercise exclusive original jurisdiction over electric utility rates, operations, and services within the existing and future incorporated limits of the City. 
(Code 1981, § 15.12; Ord. of 3-12-1984 ) 
Sec. 42-166. - Jurisdiction within municipality. 
    The City Council hereby expressly retains the exclusive original jurisdiction over the rates, operations, and services of water and sewer utilities within the existing and future incorporated limits of the City. 
(Code 1981, § 15.12A; Ord. of 3-12-1984) 
Sec. 42-167. - Effective date. 
    The ordinance from which this article is derived became effective, and the public utility commission of the state shall exercise the exclusive original jurisdiction over said electric utility rates, operations, and services on and after March 12, 1984. 
(Code 1981, § 15.13; Ord. of 3-12-1984) 
Sec. 42-168. - Provider registration form. 
(a)  The City Council hereby adopts the Retail Electrical Provider Registration Form, on file in the office of the City Secretary and incorporated herein by reference. 
(b)  Each retail electrical provider, as defined by state law, who provides retail electric service in the City shall file a completed retail electrical provider registration form with the City Secretary. 
(Code 1981, § 15.13A; Ord. No. 02-02) 
Secs. 42-169-42-189. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CABLE TV REGULATIONS 

Sec. 42-190. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Affiliated programmer means a programmer with an ownership interest of five percent or more including general partnership interests, direct ownership interests, and stock interests in a corporation where such stockholders are officers or directors or who directly or indirectly own five percent or more of the outstanding stock, whether voting or nonvoting. Such interests include limited partnership interests of five percent or greater. 
    Basic service tier means and at a minimum includes all signals of domestic television broadcast stations provided to any subscriber (except a signal secondarily transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such station, regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the cable system), any public, educational, and governmental programming required by the franchise to be carried on the basic tier, and any additional video programming signals or service added to the basic tier by the cable operator. 
    Cable operator means any person who: 
(1)  Provides cable service over a cable system within the City under a franchise issued by the City, and who directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system; or 
(2)  Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
    Cable programming service means and includes any video programming provided over a cable system, regardless of service tier, including installation or rental of equipment used for the receipt of such video programming, other than: 
(1)  Video programming carried on the basic service tier as defined in this section; 
(2)  Video programming offered on a pay-per-channel or per-program basis; or 
(3)  A combination of multiple channels of pay-per-channel or pay-per-program video programming offered on a multiplexed or time-shifted basis so long as the combined service: 
a.  Consists of commonly-identified video programming; and 
b.  Is not bundled with any regulated tier of service. 
    Commission means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Small system means a cable television system that serves fewer than 1,000 subscribers. The service area of a small system is determined by the number of subscribers that are served by a system's principal headend, including any other headends or microwave receive sites that are technically integrated to the system's principal headend. 
(Code 1981, § 15.71; Ord. of 10-11-1993) 
Sec. 42-191. - Information to be provided by cable operator on monthly subscriber bills. 
    A cable operator must provide the following information to subscribers on monthly bills: 
(1)  A statement substantially the same as the following: 
    "The basic service tier rates and related equipment and installation charges are regulated by the City. If you have any questions or comments regarding these rates, you may call or write the City at [address and telephone number]"; and 
(2)  The FCC community unit identifier for the cable system. 
(Code 1981, § 15.72; Ord. of 10-11-1993) 
Sec. 42-192. - Negative option billing. 
    A cable operator shall not charge a subscriber for any service or equipment that the subscriber has not affirmatively requested by name. This provision, however, shall not preclude the addition or deletion of a specific program from a service offering, the addition or deletion of specific channels from an existing tier of service, or the restructuring or division of existing tiers of service that do not result in a fundamental change in the nature of an existing service or tier of service, provided that such change is otherwise consistent with applicable regulations. A subscriber's failure to refuse a cable operator's proposal to provide such service or equipment is not an affirmative request for service or equipment. A subscriber's affirmative request for service or equipment may be made orally or in writing. 
(Code 1981, § 15.73; Ord. of 10-11-1993) 
Sec. 42-193. - Subscriber bill itemization. 
(a)  Cable operators may identify as a separate line item of each regular subscriber bill the following: 
(1)  The amount of the total bill assessed as franchise fee. 
(2)  The amount of the total bill assessed to satisfy any requirements imposed on the cable operator by the franchise agreement to support public, educational, or governmental channels or the use of such channels. 
(3)  The amount of any other fee, tax, assessment, or charge of any kind imposed by any governmental authority or the transaction between the operator and the subscriber. In order for a governmental fee or assessment to be separately identified under this section, it must be directly imposed by a governmental body on a transaction between a subscriber and an operator. 
(b)  The charge identified on the subscriber bill as the total charge for cable service should include all fees and costs itemized pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1981, § 15.74; Ord. of 10-11-1993) 
Sec. 42-194. - Rates for the basic service tier. 
(a)  Basic service tier rates. 
(1)  Basic service tier rates are subject to regulation by the City in order to ensure that they are in compliance with the requirements of 47 USC 543. Rates that are demonstrated, in accordance with this article, not to exceed the initial permitted per-channel charge or the subsequent permitted per-channel charge as described in subsections (b) and (c), respectively, of this section or the equipment charges as specified in section 42-195, will be accepted as in compliance. 
(2)  The maximum monthly charge per subscriber for the basic service tier offered by a cable operator shall consist of a permitted per-channel charge multiplied by the number of channels on the tier, plus a charge for franchise fees. The maximum monthly charges for the basic service tier shall not include any charges for equipment or installations. Charges for equipment and installations are to be calculated separately pursuant to section 42-195. 
(b)  Initial permitted per-channel charge. 
(1)  For purposes of this section, the initial date of regulation for the basic service tier shall be the date on which the City gives written notice to the cable operator that: 
a.  The City has been certified by the commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier; and 
b.  The ordinance from which this article is derived was adopted by the City. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, rates described as "in effect on the initial date of regulation" or "in effect on September 30, 1992," shall be the rates charged to subscribers for service received on that respective date. 
(3)  The permitted per-channel charge on the initial date of regulation shall be, at the election of the cable operator, either: 
a.  A charge determined pursuant to a cost-of-service proceeding; or 
b.  The charge specified in subsections (b)(3)b.1-3 of this section, as applicable: 
1.  If the operator's per-channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in effect on the date of initial regulation is equal to or below the benchmark per-channel charge, as adjusted forward for inflation from September 30, 1992, to the date of initial regulation, then the permitted per-channel charge shall be the per-channel charge in effect on the date of initial regulation, adjusted for equipment. 
2.  If: 
(i)  The operator's per-channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in effect for the date of initial regulation is above the benchmark per-channel charge, as adjusted forward for inflation from September 30, 1992, until the initial date of regulation; and 
(ii)  The operator's per-channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in effect on September 30, 1992, was above the benchmark per-channel charge, then the permitted per-channel charge is nine-tenths of the per-channel charge in effect on September 30, 1992, but no lower than the benchmark per-channel charge, additionally adjusted for inflation from September 30, 1992, to the initial date of regulation, for equipment, and for any changes in the number of channels offered on the basic service tiers. 
3.  If: 
(i)  The operator's per-channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in effect on the date of initial regulation is above the benchmark per-channel charge, as adjusted forward for inflation form September 30, 1992, until the initial date of regulation; and 
(ii)  The operator's per-channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in effect on September 30, 1992, was below the benchmark per-channel charge, then the permitted per-channel charge is the benchmark rate per channel adjusted for inflation from September 30, 1992, to the initial date of regulation, for equipment, and for any changes in the number of channels offered on the basic service tier. 
(c)  Subsequent permitted per-channel charge. After the initial date of regulation, the permitted channel charge for the basic service tier shall be, at the election of the cable operator, either: 
(1)  A per-channel rate determined pursuant to a cost-of-service showing; or 
(2)  The prior permitted per-channel charge previously approved by the City, adjusted for inflation and external costs in accordance with the price cap requirements set forth in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Price cap requirements. 
(1)  Inflation adjustments. Permitted per-channel charges for the basic service tier may be adjusted periodically on account of inflation. Adjustments to permitted per-channel charges on account of inflation shall be based on changes in the Gross National Product Price Index (GNP-PI) published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis of the United States Department of Commerce. 
(2)  External costs. Permitted per-channel charges for the basic service tier may also be adjusted for changes in external costs measured on a per-channel per-subscriber basis. To the extent external cost increases are greater or less than the GNP-PI for the relevant period, the per-channel charge will be adjusted accordingly. Per-channel charges may be increased if external costs other than franchise fees increase at a rate less than inflation. Permitted per-channel charges also shall be decreased on account of external costs to the extent such costs decrease from previous levels. 
a.  Categories. External costs shall consist of costs in the following categories: 
1.  State and local taxes applicable to provision of cable television service; 
2.  Franchise fees; 
3.  Costs of complying with franchise requirements, including costs of providing public, educational, and governmental access channels as required by the City; 
4.  Retransmission consent fees; and 
5.  Programming costs. 
b.  The permitted per-channel charge for the basic service tier shall be adjusted on account of programming costs and retransmission consent fees only for programming or broadcast signals offered on that tier. 
c.  The permitted per-channel charge shall not be adjusted for costs of retransmission consent fees or charges in those fees incurred prior to October 6, 1994. 
d.  The starting date for adjustments on account of external costs for the basic service tier shall be the initial date of regulation or 180 days from September 1, 1993, if the initial date of regulation occurs on or after 180 days from September 1, 1993. 
e.  Changes in franchise fees shall not result in an adjustment to permitted per-channel charges, but rather shall be calculated separately as part of the maximum monthly charge per subscriber for the basic service tier. 
f.  Adjustments to permitted per-channel charges on account of increases in costs of programming obtained from affiliated programmers shall be the lesser of actual increases or the previous permitted rate level increased by the amount of inflation. 
g.  Adjustments to permitted per-channel charges on account of increases in costs of programming shall be further adjusted to reflect any revenues received by the operator from the programmer. 
(Code 1981, § 15.75; Ord. of 10-11-1993) 
Sec. 42-195. - Rates for equipment and installation used to receive the basic service tier. 
(a)  Scope. 
(1)  The equipment regulated under this section consists of all equipment in a subscriber's location that is used to receive the basic service tier, regardless of whether such equipment is additionally used to receive other tiers of regulated programming service and/or unregulated service. Such equipment shall include, but is not limited to: 
a.  Converter boxes; 
b.  Remote control units; 
c.  Connections for additional television receivers; and 
d.  Other cable home wiring. 
(2)  Subscriber charges for such equipment shall not exceed charges based on actual costs in accordance with the requirements set forth below. 
(b)  Unbundling. A cable operator shall establish separate rates for remote control units, converter boxes, other customer equipment, installation, and additional connections separate from the standard rates for the cable basic service tier programming. A cable operator shall not bundle costs for equipment and installation with the costs for cable programming. 
(c)  Equipment basket. A cable operator shall establish an equipment basket, which will include all costs associated with providing customer equipment and installation under this section. Equipment basket costs shall be limited to the direct material and labor costs of providing, leasing, installing, repairing, and servicing customer equipment, as determined in accordance with the cost accounting and cost allocation requirements of section 42-196. The equipment basket shall not include general administrative overhead, including general marketing expenses. The equipment basket may include a reasonable profit. 
(d)  Hourly service charge. A cable operator shall establish charges for equipment and installation using the hourly service charge (HSC) methodology. The HSC shall equal the operator's annual equipment basket costs, excluding the purchase cost of customer equipment, divided by the total person hours involved in installing, repairing, and servicing customer equipment during the same period. The purchase cost of customer equipment shall include the cable operator's invoice price plus all other costs incurred with respect to the equipment until the time it is provided to the customer. The HSC is calculated according to the following formula: 
HSC = EB - CE H  
Where: 
EB = annual equipment basket cost; 
CE = annual purchase cost of all customer equipment; and 
H = person-hours involved in installing and repairing equipment per year. 
(e)  Installation charges. Installation charges shall be either: 
(1)  The HSC multiplied by the actual time spent on each individual installation; or 
(2)  The HSC multiplied by the average time spent on a specific type of installation. 
(f)  Remote charges. Monthly charges for rental of a remote control unit shall consist of the average annual unit purchase cost of the type of remote leased, including acquisition price and incidental costs such as sales tax, financing and storage up to the time it is provided to the customer, added to the product of the HSC times the average number of hours annually repairing or servicing a remote, divided by 12 to determine the monthly lease rate for a remote according to the following formula: 
Monthly Charge = UCE + (HSC X HR) 12  
Where: 
HR = average hours repair per year; and 
UCE = average annual unit cost of remote. 
Separate charges shall be established for each significantly different type of remote control unit. 
(g)  Other equipment charges. The monthly charges for rental of converter boxes and other customer equipment shall be calculated in the same manner as for remote control units. Separate charges shall be established for each significantly different type of converter box and each significantly different type of other customer equipment. 
(h)  Additional connection charges. The costs of installation and monthly use of additional connections shall be recovered as charges associated with the installation and equipment cost categories, and at rate levels determined by the actual cost methodology presented in subsections (e), (f) and (g) of this section. An operator may recover additional programming costs and the costs of signal boosters on the customer's premises, if any, associated with the additional connection as a separate monthly unbundled charge for additional connections. 
(i)  Charges for equipment sold. A cable operator may sell customer premises equipment to a subscriber. The equipment price shall recover the operator's cost of the equipment, including costs associated with storing and preparing the equipment for sale up to the time it is sold to the customer, plus a reasonable profit. An operator may sell service contracts for the maintenance and repair of equipment sold to subscribers. The charge for a service contract shall be the HSC times the estimated average number of hours for maintenance and repair over the life of the equipment. 
(j)  Promotions. A cable operator may offer equipment or installation at charges below those determined under subsections (e) through (g) of this section, as long as those offerings are reasonable in scope and in relation to the operator's overall offerings in the equipment basket and not unreasonably discriminatory. Operators may not recover the cost of a promotional offering by increasing charges for other equipment basket elements, or by increasing programming service rates above the maximum monthly charge per subscriber prescribed by this article. As part of a general cost-of-service showing, an operator may include the cost of promotions in its general system overhead costs. 
(k)  Franchise fees. Equipment charges may include a properly allocated portion of franchise fees paid to the City. 
(Code 1981, § 15.76; Ord. of 10-11-1993) 
Sec. 42-196. - Cost accounting and cost allocation requirements. 
(a)  Applicability. The requirements of this section are applicable for purposes of rate adjustments on account of external costs and for cost-of-service showings. 
(b)  Generally accepted accounting principles. Cable operators shall maintain their accounts in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, except as otherwise directed by the City. 
(c)  Accounts required. Cable operators shall maintain accounts in a manner that will enable identification of appropriate costs and application of the City's cost assignment and allocation procedures, to cost categories necessary for rate adjustments due to changes in external costs, and for cost-of-service showings. Such categories shall be sufficiently detailed and supported to permit verification and audit against the company's accounting records. 
(d)  Accounting level. Except to the extent indicated below, cable operators shall aggregate expenses and revenues at either the franchise, system, regional, or company level in a manner consistent with practices of the operator as of April 3, 1992. However, in all events, cable operators shall identify at the franchise level their costs of franchise requirements, franchise fees, local taxes, and local programming. 
(e)  Cost allocation requirements. 
(1)  For purposes of establishing expenses at the franchise level, cable operators shall allocate expenses and revenues aggregated at higher levels to the franchise level based on the ratio of the total number of subscribers served at the franchise level to the total number of subscribers served at the higher level. 
(2)  Except to the extent indicated below, all categories of costs allocated to, or identified at, the franchise level shall be allocated to the basic service tier based on the ratio of channels in the basic tier to the total number of channels offered in the franchise area, including nonregulated and leased commercial access channels. These costs shall be allocated to each tier of cable programming services based on the ratio of channels in that tier to the total number of channels offered in the franchise area. 
(3)  Costs of programming and retransmission consent fees, however, shall be allocated only to the tier on which the programming or broadcast signal at issue is offered. 
(4)  Costs of franchise fees shall be allocated among equipment and installations, program service tiers and subscribers in a manner that is most consistent with the methodology of assessment of franchise fees by the City. 
(5)  Cost of public, educational, and governmental access channels carried on the basic tier shall be directly assigned to the basic service tier where possible. 
(f)  Common costs. Expenses which cannot be assigned to any single expense or service category shall be described as common costs. Common costs shall be allocated to expense categories as follows: 
(1)  Wherever possible, common costs are to be allocated to service cost categories based on direct analysis of the origin of the costs themselves. 
(2)  When direct analysis is not possible, common costs shall, if possible, be allocated to service cost categories based on an indirect, cost-causative linkage to other costs directly assigned or allocated to the service cost category. 
(3)  When neither direct nor indirect measures of cost allocation can be found, common costs shall be allocated to each service cost category based on the ratio of all costs directly assigned and attributed to a service cost category over total costs directly assignable and attributable. 
(g)  Unrelated expenses and revenues. Cable operators shall exclude from cost categories used to develop rates for the provision of basic service tier and equipment, any direct or indirect expenses and revenues not related to the provision of such services. Common costs of providing basic service tier and equipment, and unrelated activities shall be allocated between them in accordance with subsection (f) of this section. 
(h)  Part-time channels. In situations where a single channel is divided on a part-time basis and is used to deliver service associated with different tiers or with pay per-channel or pay-per-view service, a reasonable and documented allocation of that channel between services shall be required along with the associated revenues and costs. 
(Code 1981, § 15.77; Ord. of 10-11-1993) 
Sec. 42-197. - Costs of franchise requirements. 
(a)  The costs of satisfying franchise requirements to support public, educational, and governmental channels shall consist of the sum of: 
(1)  All per-channel costs for the number of channels used to meet franchise requirements for public, educational, and governmental channels; 
(2)  Any direct costs of meeting such franchise requirements; and 
(3)  A reasonable allocation of general and administrative overhead. 
(b)  The costs of satisfying any other requirement under the franchise shall consist of the direct and indirect costs, including a reasonable allocation of general and administrative overhead. 
(Code 1981, § 15.78; Ord. of 10-11-1993) 
Sec. 42-198. - Charges for customer changes. 
(a)  This section shall govern charges for any changes in service tiers or equipment provided to the subscriber that are initiated at the request of a subscriber after initial service installation. 
(b)  The charge for customer changes in service tiers effected solely by coded entry on a computer terminal or by other similarly simple methods shall be a nominal amount, not exceeding actual costs, as defined in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  The charge for customer changes in service tiers or equipment that involve more than coded entry on a computer or other similarly simple method shall be based on actual cost. The actual cost charge shall be either the HSC, as defined in section 42-195, multiplied by the number of person-hours needed to implement the change, or the HSC multiplied by the average number of person-hours involved in implementing customer changes. 
(d)  A cable operator may establish a higher charge for changes effected solely by coded entry on a computer terminal or by other similarly simple methods, subject to approval by the City, for a subscriber changing service tiers more than two times in a 12-month period, except for such changes ordered in response to a change in price or channel line-up. If a cable system adopts such an increased charge, the cable system must notify all subscribers in writing that they may be subject to such a charge for changing service tiers more than the specified number of times in any 12-month period. 
(e)  Downgrade charges that are the same as, or lower than, upgrade charges are evidence of the reasonableness of such downgrade charges. 
(f)  For 30 days after notice of re-tiering or rate increases, a customer may obtain changes in service tiers at no additional charge. 
(Code 1981, § 15.79; Ord. of 10-11-1993) 
Sec. 42-199. - Notification of proposed rate increase. 
(a)  A cable operator shall provide written notice to a subscriber of any increase in the price to be charged for the basic service tier or associated equipment at least 30 working days before any proposed increase is effective. The notice shall include a provision stating that protests to such prices may be filed with the City at 120 N. 5th St. P.O. Box 505, Wills Point, TX 75169. The notice shall include a statement that such protests must be filed with the City no later than 30 working days after the notice is received by the subscriber. 
(b)  In addition to the notice required in subsection (a) of this section, the cable operator shall give the City a minimum of 30 working days advance written notification of any changes in rates for cable programming service or associated equipment. 
(Code 1981, § 15.80; Ord. of 10-11-1993) 
Sec. 42-200. - Initiation of review of basic cable service and equipment rates. 
    A cable operator shall file its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment with the City within 30 working days of receiving written notification from the City that the City has been certified by the commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier. 
(Code 1981, § 15.81; Ord. of 10-11-1993) 
Sec. 42-201. - City review of basic cable rates and equipment costs. 
(a)  After a cable operator has submitted to the City for review its existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment costs, or a proposed increase in these rates (including increases in the baseline channel charge that results from reductions in the number of channels in a tier), the existing rates will remain in effect or the proposed rates will become effective after 30 working days from the date of submission to the City; provided, however, that the City may toll this 30-day deadline for an additional time by issuing a brief written order as described in subsection (d) of this section within 30 days of the rate submission explaining that it needs additional time to review the rates. The City may, at any time, require the cable operator to produce additional information, including proprietary information, that the City deems necessary in order to make a rate determination. If proprietary information is provided, the provisions of section 42-202 hereof will apply to such information. 
(b)  Upon receipt by the City, the cable operator's submittal shall be available for public inspection and copying. Comments on the submittal by interested persons may be submitted in writing or orally at a City Council meeting held at any time during the initial 30-day review period. Written comments shall be addressed to the City Administrator, and must be received prior to the end of the 30-day review period. 
(c)  If a cable operator submits a proposed rate increase for review that appears to exceed the presumptively reasonable level and does not include a cost-of-service showing to justify the rate, the City will permit the cable operator to cure this deficiency and submit a cost-of-service showing. 
(d)  Deadline extensions. 
(1)  If the City is unable to determine, based upon the material submitted by the cable operator, that the existing or proposed rates are within the permitted basic service tier charge or actual cost of equipment as defined in sections 42-194 and 42-195, or if a cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing pursuant to sections 42-196 and 42-203, seeking to justify a rate above the basic service tier charge as defined in sections 42-194 and 42-195, the City may toll the 30-day deadline in subsection (a) of this section to request and/or consider additional information or to consider the comments from interested parties as follows: 
a.  For an additional 90 days in cases not involving cost-of-service showings; or 
b.  For an additional 140 days in cases involving cost-of-service showings. 
(2)  The order tolling the effective date of the proposed rate shall explain why the City could not make the necessary determination, and it shall also provide the cable operator an opportunity to cure any deficiencies in its original filing. 
(3)  During the additional time periods provided in this subsection (d), comments from interested persons may be submitted in writing, as provided in subsection (b) of this section, or orally during at least one City Council meeting during the period of abatement. 
(e)  If the City has availed itself of the additional 90 or 140 days permitted in subsection (c) of this section, and has taken no action within these additional time periods, then the proposed rates will go into effect at the end of the 90- or 140-day periods, or existing rates will remain in effect at such times, subject to refunds if the City subsequently issues a written decision disapproving any portion of such rates; provided, however, that in order to order refunds, the City must have issued a brief written order to the cable operator by the end of the 90- or 140-day period permitted in subsection (c) of this section directing the operator to keep an accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the rate in issue and on whose behalf such amounts were paid. 
(Code 1981, § 15.82; Ord. of 10-11-1993) 
Sec. 42-202. - Proprietary information. 
(a)  If the City has required the cable operator to produce proprietary information under the provisions of this article, the cable operator may submit therewith a request that such information not be made routinely available for public inspection. A copy of the request shall be attached to and shall cover all of the materials to which it applies and all copies of those materials. If feasible, the materials to which the request applies shall be physically separated from any materials to which the request does not apply. If this is not feasible, the portion of the materials to which the request applies shall be identified. 
(b)  Each such request shall contain a statement of the reasons for withholding the materials from inspection and of the facts upon which those reasons are based. If the request is that the materials be withheld from inspection for a limited period of time, that period shall be specified. 
(c)  Casual requests which do not comply with the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) of this section will not be considered. 
(d)  Upon receipt of a request in compliance with subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the City will not grant routine public access to the materials. A letter to that effect will be placed in a public file in lieu of the materials withheld from public inspection. 
(e)  If a written request for the materials is received by the City pursuant to the Public Information Act (formerly the Open Records Act), V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 552, the City will notify the person providing the materials of the request for the materials. If the person providing the materials requests the City to do so, the City will request an opinion from the state attorney general, pursuant to the Public Information Act, regarding the public availability of the materials. If the person providing the materials does not request the City to request an opinion from the Attorney General, the City may, at its option, either request such an opinion or provide the materials to the public. 
(f)  If the attorney general issues an opinion or letter ruling requiring the City to make the materials available to the public, the materials will be made available for public inspection. 
(g)  If no request for confidentiality is submitted, the City assumes no obligation to consider the need for non-disclosure. 
(Code 1981, § 15.83; Ord. of 10-11-1993) 
Sec. 42-203. - Burden of proof. 
(a)  A cable operator has the burden of proving that its existing or proposed rates for basic service and associated equipment comply with 47 USC 543, and sections 42-194 and 42-195. 
(b)  For an existing or a proposed rate for basic service tier or associated equipment that is within the permitted tier charge and actual cost of equipment as set forth in sections 42-194 and 42-195, the cable operator must submit the appropriate FCC form to the City. 
(c)  For an existing or a proposed rate for basic service tier that exceeds the permitted tier charge as set forth in sections 42-194 and 42-195, the cable operator must submit to the City a cost-of-service showing to justify the proposed rates. The cost-of-service showing must be in conformance with accounting and cost allocation requirements as adopted and amended by the commission for cable system operators. 
(Code 1981, § 15.84; Ord. of 10-11-1993) 
Sec. 42-204. - Small systems. 
(a)  Option 1. 
(1)  A small system, as defined in section 42-190, may certify that the small system's initial rates for basic service and associated equipment comply with section 42-194. A certification by a small system under this section shall be filed with the City within 30 working days of receiving written notification from the City that the City has been certified by the commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier. The certification shall be in writing, shall be signed by the general manager of the system, and shall be verified. 
(2)  Such certification shall be subject to verification by the City on its own motion or upon complaint by a subscriber. The City may request additional information from the operator in order to verify the certification. In the event proprietary information is requested by the City, the provisions of section 42-202 shall control the availability of such information to the public. 
(3)  As used in this section, the term "initial rates" shall mean those rates charged by the small system operator on the date on which the City gives written notice to the cable operator that: 
a.  The City has been certified by the commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier; and 
b.  The ordinance from which this article is derived as adopted by the City. 
(4)  If the City determines that the small system's certification is in error, it shall so notify the small system operator and shall require the small system to comply with all filing requirements for non-small systems in this article. 
(5)  Subsequent rate filings by a small system operator shall comply in all respects with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Option 2: 
(1)  A small system, as defined in section 42-190, may certify that the small system's rates for basic service and associated equipment, and subsequent rate increases, comply with section 42-194. A certification by a small system under this section for its initial rates shall be filed with the City within 30 working days of receiving written notification from the City that the City has been certified by the commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier; certifications for subsequent rate increases shall be filed with the City at the same time that notice is given to the small system's subscribers of the proposed rate increase, in conformance with section 42-199. All certifications shall be in writing, shall be signed by the general manager of the system, and shall be verified. 
(2)  Such certification shall be subject to verification by the City on its own motion or upon complaint by a subscriber. The City may request additional information from the operator in order to verify the certification. In the event proprietary information is requested by the City, the provisions of section 42-202 shall control the availability of such information to the public. 
(3)  If the City determines that the small system's certification is in error, it shall so notify the small system operator and shall require the small system to comply with all filing requirements for non-small systems in this article. 
(Code 1981, § 15.85; Ord. of 10-11-1993) 
Sec. 42-205. - Written decision. 
(a)  The City shall issue a written decision in a ratemaking proceeding whenever it disapproves an initial rate for the basic service tier or associated equipment in whole or in part, disapproves a request for a rate increase in whole or in part, or approves a request for an increase in whole or in part over the objections of interested parties. The City is not required to issue a written decision that approves an unopposed existing or proposed rate for the basic service tier or associated equipment. 
(b)  Public notice shall be given of any written decision required in subsection (a) of this section, by making the text of any written decision available to the public, and by publication of the decision one time in the official newspaper of the City. 
(Code 1981, § 15.86; Ord. of 10-11-1993) 
Sec. 42-206. - Reduction of rates; prescription of rates. 
(a)  The City may order a cable operator to implement a prospective reduction in basic service tier or associated equipment rates where necessary to bring rates into compliance with the standards set forth in sections 42-194 and 42-195. 
(b)  The City may prescribe a reasonable rate for the basic service tier or associated equipment after it determines that a proposed rate is unreasonable. 
(Code 1981, § 15.87; Ord. of 10-11-1993) 
Sec. 42-207. - Refunds. 
(a)  The City may order a cable operator to refund to subscribers that portion of previously paid rates determined by the City to be in excess of the permitted tier charge or above the actual cost of equipment, unless the operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing which justifies the rate charged as reasonable. Before ordering a cable operator to refund previously paid rates to subscribers, the City shall give the operator notice and opportunity to comment. The operator's opportunity to comment upon the proposed refunds may be at any meeting of the City Council during the City's period of review of the operator's rates. If the City has extended its review period under section 42-201, and has issued an accounting order under section 42-201(e), then the operator, prior to refunds being ordered, may request an opportunity to appear before the City Council to comment upon the proposed refunds. 
(b)  An operator's liability for refunds is limited to a one-year period, except that an operator that fails to comply with a valid rate order issued by the City shall be liable for refunds commencing from the effective date of such order until such time as it complies with such order. 
(c)  The refund period shall run as follows: 
(1)  From the date the operator implements a prospective rate reduction back in time to be applied retroactively for a maximum of one year; and/or 
(2)  From the date the City issues an accounting order pursuant to section 42-201(d), and ending on the date the operator implements a prospective rate reduction ordered by the City. 
(d)  The cable operator, in its discretion, may implement a refund in the following manner: 
(1)  By returning overcharges to those subscribers who actually paid the overcharges, either through direct payment or as a specifically identified credit to those subscribers' bills; or 
(2)  By means of a prospective percentage reduction in the rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment to cover the cumulative overcharge. This shall be reflected as a specifically identified, one-time credit on prospective bills to the class of subscribers that currently subscribe to the cable system. 
(e)  Refunds shall include interest computed at applicable rates published by the Internal Revenue Service for tax refunds and additional tax payments. 
(Code 1981, § 15.88; Ord. of 10-11-1993) 
Sec. 42-208. - Governing law; venue. 
    This article shall be construed under and in accordance with the laws of the state and City codes to the extent that such codes are not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United States or the state. All obligations of the parties hereunder are performable in the county. In the event that any proceeding is brought to enforce the terms of this article, the same shall be brought in the county. 
(Code 1981, § 15.90; Ord. of 10-11-1993) 
Sec. 42-209. - Compliance with open meetings act. 
    It is hereby officially found and determined that the meeting at which the ordinance from which this article is derived was passed was open to the public as required by law and that public notice of the time, place, and purpose of said meeting was given as required, in accordance with V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 551. 
(Code 1981, § 15.91; Ord. of 10-11-1993) 
Secs. 42-210-42-226. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RELOCATION OF UTILITIES 

Sec. 42-227. - Notice from City Administrator. 
    Where relocation of utilities located within the streets, alleys and rights-of-way of the City is required for construction of street, drainage, sanitary sewer, water, or other public water improvements and such requirements are determined by the City Administrator, then the City Administrator shall give written notice to the owner of such utilities concerning the required relocation and shall include a description of the plans and improvements to be performed by the City, the manner and relocation of the utilities and the number of days within which such relocation of utilities shall be completed. 
(Code 1981, § 15.40; Ord. of 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 42-228. - Extension of time. 
    The City Administrator may, upon request from the utility and for good and reasonable cause, grant an extension of time for completion of the required relocation. Delays beyond the control of the utility, such as riots, strikes, war, insurrection or acts of God, shall be the only acceptable excuse for delay in this relocation. Should the utility fail to accomplish the required relocation work within the specified time, or extensions granted thereto, then the City Administrator shall give written notice to the utility that it has failed to comply with the terms of this article and the notice issued to relocate in accordance therewith and, should such failure continue for ten days subsequent to the mailing of the written notice, then the utility shall be subject to the penalty provided for in section 42-231. 
(Code 1981, § 15.41; Ord. of 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 42-229. - Appeal to City Administrator. 
    The utility provider to whom notice is given by the City Administrator to relocate its utility shall have ten days from the date that such notice is given in which to file a written appeal with the City Administrator, which notice shall specify in detail the provisions of the notice to relocate which are objectionable to the utility provider, and the City Administrator shall subsequently arrange for a hearing upon such notice of appeal. The decision of the City Administrator shall be given to the utility provider in writing within five business days from the date of the hearing and the utility provider shall abide by the City Administrator's decision. 
(Code 1981, § 15.42; Ord. of 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 42-230. - Charges for City work. 
    In the event that the utilities are not relocated within the specified time, or any extensions granted thereto, subsequent to notice of failure to comply as above provided, then the City may, at its option subsequent to written notice of the intention of the City to do so, remove and relocate such utilities and incur no liability for damages to property or for severance, discontinuance or interruption in service to the customer thereof, and the cost of such work shall be charged by the City to the utility provider whose facilities are so removed and relocated. 
(Code 1981, § 15.43; Ord. of 5-8-1973) 
Sec. 42-231. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, § 15.44; Ord. of 5-8-1973) 
Secs. 42-232-42-251. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 42-252. - Findings. 
(a)  The Federal Trade Commission adopted rules pertaining to identity theft prevention pursuant to the red flags rule ("rule") that implements sections 114 and 315 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003 requiring creditors to adopt an identity theft prevention program ("program") on or before November 1, 2009; 
(b)  The red flags rule defines creditor to include all utility companies and the City owns and provides utility services and/or accepts payments for municipal utility services and is therefore classified as a creditor; 
(c)  The City has developed an identity theft prevention program for use with the City's utility services, City personnel recommend the program and City Council has reviewed the program and believe it complies and implements the red flags rule and other requirements outlined by the Federal Trade Commission. The particular policies, procedures and requirements contained in the City's program shall be established by resolution of the City Council; and 
(d)  The City Council finds that it is in the public interest to approve the program. 
(Ord. No. 09-06, § 1, 10-13-2009) 
Sec. 42-253. - Definitions. 
    Covered account. Under the rule, a "covered account" is: 
(1)  Any account the utility offers or maintains primarily for personal, family or household purposes, that involves multiple payments or transactions; and 
(2)  Any other account the utility offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the utility from identity theft. 
    Creditors . The rule defines creditors "to include finance companies, automobile dealers, mortgage brokers, utility companies, and telecommunications companies. Where nonprofit and government entities defer payment for goods or services, they, too, are to be considered creditors." 
    Identifying information is defined under the rule as "any name or number that may be used, alone or in conjunction with any other information, to identify a specific person," including: name, address, telephone number, Social Security number, date of birth, government-issued driver's license or identification number, alien registration number, government passport number, employer or taxpayer identification number, unique electronic identification number, computer's internet protocol address, or routing code. 
    Program. The identity theft prevention program for the City. 
    Program administrator . The director of public works/utility director is the program administrator for the program. 
    Utility. The utility is the utility department for the City. 
(Ord. No. 09-06, § 1, 10-13-2009) 
Sec. 42-254. - Implementation of the identity theft prevention program. 
    All policies, procedures and requirements of the identity theft prevention program shall be implemented as required by law and will be established and amended, as necessary, by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 09-06, § 1, 10-13-2009) 
Sec. 42-255. - Creation of identity theft committee. 
    The City hereby creates an identity theft committee that is responsible for developing, implementing and updating the identity theft prevention program. The committee must have at least three members and will be chaired by the program administrator who may be the head of the utility or his or her appointee. Two or more other individuals will be appointed by the program administrator to comprise the remainder of the committee membership. 
(Ord. No. 09-06, § 1, 10-13-2009) 
Chapter 44 - VAN ZANDT COUNTY REGIONAL AIRPORT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Obligations for municipal airports, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 1503; municipal and county zoning authority around airports, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 241; aviation, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 21 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 44-1-44-3. - Reserved. 
Sec. 44-4. - Aircraft hangar rentals. 
    Aircraft hangar rentals shall be permitted under the terms and conditions of the hangar lease agreement (the "Agreement"), along with the Van Zandt County Regional Airport Rules and Regulations, which both shall govern aircraft hangar rental or termination thereof by the City of Wills Point, Texas, acting by and through its authorized Operator, Wills Point Economic Development Corporation, hereinafter referred to as "Lessor." 
    The Agreement shall be in effect for a minimum period of one year, at the discretion of the lessor, but in no event or under any circumstances shall the agreement exceed 40 years. 
    Waiver Of Liability. Lessee shall expressly waive any liability and agrees to hold lessor, together with lessor's employees, officers, agents and assigns, harmless from any damage to lessor's property, including stored aircraft and/or other stored property, whether arising from lessee's negligence, including but not limited to, unauthorized activities in the hangar, the storage of flammable materials in the hangar, and/or other aircraft other than fuel and oil in the aircraft tanks. Neither the City of Wills Point nor its operator, the Wills Point Economic Development Corporation, shall be liable to a lessor or lessor's employees, agents, servants, customers, invitees, or to any other person whomsoever, for any injury to persons or damages to property on or about the leased premises or any adjacent area owned by the City of Wills Point or its operator, the Wills Point Economic Development Corporation. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 5-9-2017) 
Sec. 44-5. - Aircraft hangar rental fees. 
    The aircraft hangar rental fee shall be as currently established in the hangar lease agreement or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 5-9-2017) 
Secs. 44-6-44-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - JOINT AIRPORT ZONING BOARD 

Sec. 44-19. - Creation. 
    Subject to like provisions being made by the commissioners' court of the county, by proper order, duly promulgated and entered on its minutes, and as authorized by the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.014, there is hereby created a joint airport zoning board, to be known as the Wills Point-Van Zandt County Joint Airport Zoning Board, which shall have the powers and exercise the duties set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 241.011, 241.012. 
(Code 1981, § 11.60; Ord. of 3-14-1980) 
Sec. 44-20. - Composition. 
    The Wills Point-Van Zandt County Joint Airport Board shall be composed of five members, two to be appointed by the City and two members to be appointed by the commissioners' court of the county. The fifth member shall be elected by a majority of the members so appointed and said fifth member shall serve as chairperson of the said Wills Point-Van Zandt County Joint Airport Zoning Board. 
(Code 1981, § 11.61; Ord. of 3-14-1980) 
Secs. 44-21-44-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATIONS 

Sec. 44-44. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Airport means Van Zandt County Regional Airport. 
    Airport elevation means the established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area measured in feet from mean sea level. 
    Airport hazard means any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs the air space required for the flights of aircraft or which obstructs or interferes with the control or tracking and/or data acquisition in the landing, taking off or flight at an airport, or at any installation or facility relating to flight, and tracking and/or data acquisition of the flight craft; hazardous interfering with or obstructing such landing, taking off or flight of aircraft or which is hazardous to or interferes with tracking and/or data acquisition pertaining to flight and flight vehicles. 
    Airport hazard area means any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard might be established if not prevented as provided in this article. 
    Airport reference point means the point established as the approximate geographic center of the airport landing area and so designated. 
    Approach surface means a surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in section 44-46. In plan the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 
    Approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical zones means the zones set forth in section 44-45. 
    Board of adjustment means a board consisting of five members appointed by the City Council as provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.032. 
    Conical surface means a surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
    Hazard to air navigation means an obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace. 
    Height. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this article and shown on the zoning map, the data shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
    Horizontal surface means a horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which plane coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 
    Joint airport zoning board means a board consisting of five members, two members appointed by the City Council and two members appointed by the commissioners' court of the county. The four members so appointed shall elect a fifth member, the chairperson. 
    Landing area means the surface area of the airport used for the landing, take-off or taxiing of aircraft. 
    Nonconforming use means any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this article or amendment thereto. 
    Obstruction means any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in section 44-46. 
    Primary surface means a surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; but when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. The width of a primary surface is 250 feet for utility runways having only visual approaches. 
    Runway means a defined area on an airport prepared for landing and take-off of aircraft along its length. 
    Structure means an object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by humans, including, but not limited to, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission lines. 
    Transitional surfaces means these surfaces extend outward at 90-degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. 
    Tree means any object of natural growth. 
    Visual runway means a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures. 
    Utility runway means a runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less. 
(Code 1981, § 11.40; Ord. of 9-10-1980; Ord. No. 17-07, § 1, 5-9-2017) 
Sec. 44-45. - Zones. 
    In order to carry out the provisions of this article, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transition surfaces, horizontal surface and conical surfaces as they apply to Van Zandt County Regional Airport. Such zones are shown on a zoning map consisting of one sheet, prepared by the Texas Aeronautics Commission, Austin, Texas and dated February 4, 1980, which is on file in the office of the City Secretary and made a part hereof by reference. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
(1)  Approach zones. Approach zone is established beneath the approach surface at the end of runway 17/35 on Wills Point Municipal Airport for visual landings and take-offs. The inner edge of the approach zone shall have a width of 250 feet which coincides with the width of the primary surface at a distance of 200 feet beyond each end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet beyond each end of the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(2)  Transition zones. Transition zones are hereby established beneath the transition surface adjacent to each runway and approach surface as indicated on the zoning map. Transition surfaces, symmetrically located on either side of runways, have variable widths as shown on the zoning map. Transitional surfaces extend outward and upward at right angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of 7:1 from the sides of the primary surface and from the sides of approach surfaces. 
(3)  Horizontal zone. The area beneath a horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of runway 17/35 and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. 
(4)  Conical code. The area beneath the conical surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20:1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
(Code 1981, § 11.41; Ord. of 9-10-1980) 
Sec. 44-46. - Height limitations. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this article to a height in excess of the applicable height limit limitations that are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
(1)  Approach zones-One foot in height for each 20 feet in horizontal distance beginning at the end of and at the elevation of the primary surface and extending to a point 5,000 feet from the end of the primary surface. 
(2)  Transition zones-Slope seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport elevation which is 523 feet above mean sea level. 
(3)  Horizontal zone-Established at 150 feet above the airport elevation, or a height of 673 feet above mean sea level. 
(4)  Conical zone-Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation. 
(5)  Excepted height limitations-Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the growth, construction or maintenance of any tree or structure to a height up to 35 feet above the surface of the land. 
(Code 1981, § 11.42; Ord. of 9-10-1980) 
Sec. 44-47. - Use restrictions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this article in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
(Code 1981, § 11.43; Ord. of 9-10-1980) 
Sec. 44-48. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  The regulations prescribed by this article shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this article, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. 
(b)  Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this article, and is diligently prosecuted. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the City Administrator, to indicate the operators or aircraft in the vicinity of the Airport, the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the City. 
(Code 1981, § 11.44; Ord. of 9-10-1980) 
Sec. 44-49. - Permits. 
(a)  Future uses. 
(1)  Except as specifically provided in subsections (1)a, b, and c of this section, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this article shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance with subsection (d) of this section. 
a.  In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, such tree or structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones. 
b.  In area lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zones. 
c.  In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for such transition zones. 
(2)  Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, or alteration of any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any the height limits established by this article except as set forth in section 44-46(5). 
(b)  Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of any airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to be made or become higher, or become a greater hazard to air navigation, than it was on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated all applications for such a permit shall be granted. 
(c)  Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the City Administrator determines that a nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned or more than 80 percent torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. 
(d)  Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use such person's own property, in violation of the regulations prescribed in this article may apply to the board of adjustment for a variance from such regulations in question. The application for variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest, but do substantial justice, and be in accordance with the spirit of this article. Additionally, no application for variance to the requirements of this article may be considered by the board of adjustment unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the Wills Point-Van Zandt County Joint Airport Zoning Board for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the Wills Point-Van Zandt County Joint Airport Zoning Board does not respond to the application within 15 days after receipt, the board of adjustment may act on its own to grant or deny said application. 
(e)  Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable by the City Administrator or the board of adjustment to effectuate the purpose of this article and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to allow the City Administrator to install, operate, and maintain, at the expense of the City, such markings and lights as may be necessary. 
(Code 1981, § 11.45; Ord. of 9-10-1980) 
Sec. 44-50. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the City Administrator to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits shall be made to the City Administrator upon a form published for that purpose. Applications required by this article to be submitted to the City Administrator shall be promptly considered and granted or denied. Applications for variances shall be made to the board of adjustment by first filing said application for variance with the City Administrator who shall forthwith transmit said application to the board of adjustment for determination. 
(Code 1981, § 11.46; Ord. of 9-10-1980) 
Sec. 44-51. - Board of adjustment. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board of adjustment to have and exercise the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals, as provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.036, from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the City Administrator in the enforcement of this article; 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this article, when this article requires the board of adjustment to do so; 
(3)  To hear and decide specific variances under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.034. 
(b)  The board of adjustment shall consist of five members appointed by the City Council and each shall serve for a term of two years and removable for cause by the appointment authority upon written charges after a public hearing. A vacancy on the board shall be filled for the unexpired term. 
(c)  The board of adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and procedure in harmony with the provisions of this article. Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such times as the board of adjustment may determine. The chairperson, or in the chairperson's absence the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the board of adjustment shall be public. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the City Administrator and shall be a public record. 
(d)  Actions by board of adjustment. 
(1)  The board of adjustment shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law stating the facts upon which it relied when making its legal conclusions in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order, requirement, decision, or determination which comes before it under the provisions of this article. 
(2)  The concurring vote of four members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the City Administrator/administrative agency or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under an airport zoning regulation in this article, or to effect any variation in this article. 
(Code 1981, § 11.47; Ord. of 9-10-1980) 
Sec. 44-52. - Appeals. 
(a)  A decision of the City Administrator in the administration of an airport zoning regulation may be appealed to the board of adjustment by: 
(1)  A person who is aggrieved by the decision; 
(2)  A taxpayer who is affected by the decision; or 
(3)  The City Council or a joint airport zoning board that believes the decision is an improper application of the airport zoning regulation. 
(b)  All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board of adjustment, by filing with the City Administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The City Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(c)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the City Administrator certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the opinion of City Administrator cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the board of adjustment on notice to the City Administrator and on due cause shown. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(e)  The board of adjustment may in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination, as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Code 1981, § 11.48; Ord. of 9-10-1980) 
Sec. 44-53. - Judicial review. 
    Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the board of adjustment, or the City Council or a joint airport zoning board that believes a decision of a board of adjustment is illegal, may appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.041 et seq. 
(Code 1981, § 11.49; Ord. of 9-10-1980) 
Sec. 44-54. - Enforcement and remedies. 
    The City Administrator and/or the City Council may institute in any court of competent jurisdiction an action to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate any violation of this article or of any order or ruling made in connection with its administration or enforcement including, but not limited to, an action for injunctive relief as provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.044. 
(Code 1981, § 11.50; Ord. of 9-10-1980) 
Sec. 44-55. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating this article, or any regulation, order, or ruling promulgated hereunder, shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12. 
(Code 1981, § 11.51; Ord. of 9-10-1980) 
Chapter 46 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate vehicles for hire, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.073. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1-46-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 

Sec. 46-19. - Registration with City Secretary. 
    All persons, firms, or associations of persons owning or operating automobiles, taxicabs or other gasoline or electrically propelled vehicles for hire in the City shall be required to register each automobile, taxicab or other gasoline or electrically propelled vehicle with the City Secretary. The City Secretary shall issue a receipt, beginning with number one, to such owner or operator showing that the license fee hereinafter provided has been paid and the license number of said car. 
(Code 1981, § 11.90; Ord. of 7-27-1915) 
Sec. 46-20. - License fee. 
    The owner or operator of each car provided for in section 46-19 shall pay annually to the City Secretary a license fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time, which sum shall be paid to the City Treasurer and be credited to the general fund of said City, and the City Secretary shall keep a record of all cars registered and licenses issued in a well-bound book for that purpose. All persons registering as required by this article shall keep prominently displayed on their car their license number accompanied by the words: "City License." 
(Code 1981, § 11.91; Ord. of 7-27-1915) 
Sec. 46-21. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating this article shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-12; provided that the driver of any vehicle included in this article which has been registered and the license fee paid shall be required to pay the license fee; and provided further that the license of any licensee guilty of reckless or unlawful driving shall be cancelled and revoked by the mayor and/or City Administrator. 
(Code 1981, § 11.92; Ord. of 7-27-1915) 
Secs. 46-22-46-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WRECKER SERVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Tow truck regulation by political subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 2308.201; Vehicle Storage Facility Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2303; automobile wrecking and salvage yards, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 396; accidents and accident reports, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 550; authority of governor to have wreckage removed in disasters, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.023; theft of wrecked motor vehicle, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 31.03; salvage vehicle dealers, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2302. 

Sec. 46-46. - Nonconsent tows. 
    A nonconsent tow shall be any tow of a vehicle where the owner or operator of a vehicle has not consented to such towing. A nonconsent tow includes, without limitation, situations such as an abandoned vehicle or an owner/operator being physically unable to designate the wrecker company the owner/operator desires to tow the vehicle. 
(Code 1981, § 14.35; Ord. No. 07-02) 
Sec. 46-47. - Method for rotation. 
    The chief of police shall set a method for rotation that allows an equal opportunity for each qualified wrecker company on the wrecker rotation list to be contacted. For example, the chief of police may choose to rotate between wrecker companies for every call, daily, once a week, or once a month, so long as the method chosen is consistently followed. 
(Code 1981, § 14.36; Ord. No. 07-02) 
Sec. 46-48. - Contents. 
    The wrecker rotation list shall contain the names, in alphabetical order, of all qualified wrecker companies requesting to be on such wrecker rotation list. 
(Code 1981, § 14.37; Ord. No. 07-02) 
Sec. 46-49. - Qualifications. 
    A wrecker company is qualified if: 
(1)  The wrecker company has filed an application as required by section 46-51; 
(2)  The wrecker company's storage facility is located within the county and is no farther than ten miles from the City limits; 
(3)  The wrecker company is licensed by the state department of transportation and is in compliance with its regulations, including the Vehicle Storage Facility Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2303. 
(Code 1981, § 14.38; Ord. No. 07-02) 
Sec. 46-50. - Procedure. 
    Upon a police officer determining a vehicle needs a nonconsent tow, the police officer shall communicate that need to the police communications center. The police communications center shall then call the wrecker company on the wrecker rotation list for that call, day, week, or month, as the case may be, depending on the rotation method set by the chief of police pursuant to section 46-47. 
(Code 1981, § 14.39; Ord. No. 07-02) 
Sec. 46-51. - Application; proof of compliance with state DOT; annual fee. 
(a)  A wrecker company desiring to be placed on the wrecker rotation list shall file with the chief of police a written application upon a form provided for that purpose, which must be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. The following information is required in the application: 
(1)  True name, trade name, address and telephone number of the wrecker company; 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the wrecker company, and, if a corporation or other entity is the owner, the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of owners holding more than ten percent of the shares of the entity; and 
(3)  A statement that the wrecker company is requesting to be added to the wrecker rotation list. 
(b)  A wrecker company desiring to be placed on the wrecker rotation list shall include with its application proof of compliance with the state department of transportation and its regulations. Each wrecker company placed on the wrecker rotation list shall also have a continuing obligation to provide the chief of police with proof of compliance with the state department of transportation and its regulations by December 31 of each year. 
(c)  A wrecker company desiring to be placed on the wrecker rotation list shall pay an annual administrative fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time to defray the cost of administering, updating, and maintaining the wrecker rotation list. This fee shall not be refunded or prorated and will be assessed to each wrecker company on the list. This fee shall be paid by the wrecker company upon its initial application and placement on the wrecker rotation list, and it shall be paid again by December 31 of each year, regardless of the date on which the wrecker company is initially placed on the wrecker rotation list. 
(Code 1981, § 14.40; Ord. No. 07-02) 
Sec. 46-52. - No wreckers at scene unless requested. 
    No person shall drive a wrecker to or near the scene of an accident within the City unless the person has been called to the scene by the owner of the vehicle or the owner's authorized representative or by the police department. If a wrecker arrives on the scene without being so requested, the police officer shall direct that wrecker to leave the scene immediately and shall not allow that wrecker's services to be used. 
(Code 1981, § 14.41; Ord. No. 07-02) 
Sec. 46-53. - Towing vehicles containing hazardous materials. 
(a)  The Wills Point Fire Department (the "fire department") shall be notified in the event a vehicle needs to be towed which contains, or is reasonably believed to contain, any of the following: 
(1)  Any substance classified as a hazardous material under state or federal law or under a rule adopted pursuant to a state or federal law; or 
(2)  A chemical, petroleum product, gas or other substance that, if discharged or released, will or is likely to create an imminent danger to individuals, property or the environment. 
(b)  The vehicle or trailer shall not be moved until it is inspected by the fire department, and the fire department shall be the sole authority in determining the appropriate precautions to be taken prior to authorizing the motor vehicle or trailer to be moved by a wrecker company. The fire department shall be the sole authority in deciding which wrecker company to use and shall have no obligation to choose a wrecker company from the wrecker rotation list. 
(Code 1981, § 14.42; Ord. No. 07-02) 
Sec. 46-54. - Suspension or removal. 
(a)  A wrecker company may be suspended or removed from the wrecker rotation list for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to maintain wrecker or equipment in safe working order; 
(2)  Failure to operate the tow business in a safe manner, such as failure to take direction from the investigating officer or failure to remove debris of the collision; 
(3)  Failure to comply with any section of this article; 
(4)  Failure to arrive at a scene within 30 minutes of being requested to do so; 
(5)  The making of a false statement as to any material matter in the wrecker company's application; or 
(6)  The filing of a false complaint against another wrecker company. 
(b)  Any person desiring to file a complaint against a wrecker company on the wrecker rotation list for one of the above reasons must do so in writing to the chief of police. Upon receiving such written complaint, the chief of police will investigate both the wrecker company against whom the complaint is filed as well as the person or company making the complaint. 
(c)  If the chief of police determines, after investigation into the complaint, that the wrecker company has committed any of the above violations, the following administrative penalties shall be imposed: 
(1)  For the first violation, a wrecker company shall receive a warning; 
(2)  For the second violation, a wrecker company shall be suspended from the wrecker rotation list for a month; 
(3)  After the third violation, a wrecker company shall be removed from the wrecker rotation list. 
(d)  If a wrecker company is out of compliance with the state department of transportation and its regulations at any point, the wrecker company shall automatically be removed from the wrecker rotation list and will have to reapply and pay another annual fee in order to be placed on the wrecker rotation list again. 
(Code 1981, § 14.43; Ord. No. 07-02) 
Chapter 48 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of land use, structures, businesses and related activities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211 et seq.; planning and development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 371 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 48-1. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Wills Point, Texas. 
(Code 1981, § 16.1) 
Sec. 48-2. - Purpose. 
    The zone regulations and districts as herein established have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting health, safety, morals, and the general welfare of the City. They have been designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic or other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, of the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view of conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City. 
(Code 1981, § 16.2) 
Sec. 48-3. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future: the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular. The word "building" shall include the word "structure," the word "lot" includes the word "plot," and the word "shall" is mandatory and not merely permissive or directory. 
    Accessory buildings and use means a subordinate building or a portion of the main building, the use of which is incidental to the main building or to the main use of the premises. An accessory use is one which is incidental to the main use of the premises. 
    Alley means a public or private throughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to property abutting thereon. 
    Apartment means a room or suite of rooms in a multiple dwelling, or a building in which more than one living unit is established above or on the same floor as nonresidential uses, which room or suite is intended or designed for use as a residence by one family and which includes culinary accommodations. 
    Apartment house means a building or portion thereof used or designed as a residence for three or more families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in said building, including apartments and apartment hotels. 
    Boardinghouse means a building other than a hotel where for compensation and by pre-arrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals are provided for three or more persons, but not exceeding 20 persons. 
    Building means any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels, or property. 
    Clinic means an office or group of offices for one or more physicians, surgeons, or dentists engaged in treating the sick or injured, but not including rooms for the abiding of patients. 
    District means a section of the City of Wills Point, Texas, for which regulation governing the use of buildings and premises, the height of buildings, the size of yards, and the intensity of use are uniform. 
    Dwelling means any building or portion thereof which is designed and used exclusively for residential purposes. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family, means a building having accommodations for and occupied exclusively by more than two families. 
    Dwelling, single-family, means a building having accommodations for and occupied exclusively by one family. 
    Dwelling, two-family, or duplex means a building having accommodations for and occupied exclusively by two families. 
    Family means one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse, lodginghouse, or hotel as herein defined. 
    Filling or service station means any building or premises used for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale at retail of any automobile fuels or oils. When the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, or retail store, the premises are classified as a public garage or retail store. 
    Frontage means all the property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead-ended, then all the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead-end of the street. 
    Garage, private, means an accessory building or portion of the main use building, designed for or used for the housing of the motor-driven vehicles which are the property of and for the private use of the occupants of the lot on which the private garage is located. Not more than one of the vehicles may be a commercial vehicle and may not be more than 11/2 tons capacity. 
    Garage, public, means a building or portion thereof, other than a private garage, designed or used for equipping, preparing, hiring, servicing, selling, or storing motor-driven vehicles. 
    Grade means: 
(1)  For buildings having walls adjoining one street only, the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the wall adjoining the street. 
(2)  For buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, the average of the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of all walls adjoining the streets. 
(3)  For buildings having no walls adjoining the street, the average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. Any wall approximately parallel to and not more than five feet from the street line shall be considered as adjoining the street. Where no sidewalk exists, the grade shall be established by the City Building Inspector. 
    Heavy truck means any and all truck tractors, van trailers, semitrailers, livestock trailers, house trailers and/or any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of property, whose body weight or whose rated or licensed combined body and load weight exceeds 20,000 pounds. 
    Height of building means the vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, or the mean height level between the eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
    Home occupation means any occupation or profession engaged in by the occupants of a dwelling not involving the conduct of a retail business, and not including any occupation conducted in any building on the premises except in the building which is used by the occupant as the occupant's private dwelling. Home occupations shall include, in general, personal services such as furnished by an architect, lawyer, physician, dentist, musician, artist, and seamstress, when performed by the person occupying the building as the occupant and not including a partnership or the employment of more than one assistant in the performance of such services. 
    Hotel means a building in which lodging or board and lodging are provided and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. As such, it is open to the public in contradistinction to a boardinghouse, a lodginghouse, or an apartment which are herein defined. 
    Lodginghouse means a building or place where lodging is provided (or which is equipped to provide lodging regularly) for pre-arranged definite periods for compensation, for three or more persons, in contradistinction to hotels open to transients. 
    Lot means a parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in this article, including one main building with its accessory buildings, the open spaces and parking spaces required by this chapter, and having its principal frontage upon a street or upon an officially approved place. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
    Lot, depth of, means the mean horizontal distance between the front and the rear lot lines. 
    Nonconforming use means any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived or amendment thereto which does not conform after the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived or amendment thereto with the use regulations of the district in which it is situated. 
    Parking space means an area enclosed or unenclosed containing not less than 160 square feet exclusive of the driveways connecting said space with a street or alley. Said parking space and connecting driveway shall be durably surfaced and so arranged to permit satisfactory ingress and egress of an automobile. 
    Story means that portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it; or if there be no floor above it then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Street means a public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Structural alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls of partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any complete rebuilding of the roof or the exterior walls. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground, including, but without limiting the general inclusiveness of the foregoing, advertising signs, billboards, poster boards, and pergolas. 
    Tourist court, auto court, motel, or motor lodge means a group of attached, semidetached or detached buildings containing individual sleeping or living units, designed for or used temporarily by automobile tourists or transients, with garage attached or parking space conveniently located to each unit and offering to the public daily as well as other longer terms rental rates, and maintaining a register of guests and/or their vehicles. 
    Trailer means any structure used for living, sleeping, business, or storage purposes, having no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses, or skirtings and which is, has been, or reasonably may be, equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting the structure from place to place whether by motive power or other means. The term "trailer" shall include camp car and house car, motor home, travel trailer, fifth wheel, and the like. For the purposes of this article, a structure falling within this definition shall be deemed to be a single-family dwelling. (See section 48-5, "R-1" One-Family Dwelling District.). 
    Trailer camp or trailer coach park means a lot or tract of land where facilities and accommodations are provided by the day, week, month or for a longer period of time, for or without compensation for two or more trailers when such trailers are being used for human habitation. 
    Yard means an open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a yard, the depth of a front yard, or the depth of a rear yard, the horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
    Yard, front, means a yard extending across the front of a lot between the side yard lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or any projections thereof other than the projection of the usual steps, unenclosed balconies or open porch. 
    Yard, rear, means a yard extending across the rear of a lot, measured between the side lots, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the real lot line and the rear of the main building or any projections other than steps, unenclosed balconies or unenclosed porches. On corner lots the rear yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. On both corner lots and interior lots the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of a lot from the front yard. 
    Yard, side, means a yard between the main building and the sideline of the lot, and extending from the front lot line to the rear yard line. 
(Code 1981, § 16.3; Ord. No. 03-01; Ord. No. 13-07, § 2, 10-8-2013 ) 
Sec. 48-4. - Districts. 
(a)  For the purpose of regulating and restricting the height and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot that may be occupied, the size of yards, and other open spaces, the density of population, and the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residents or other purposes, the City, is hereby divided into districts, of which there shall be six classes in number, and which shall be known as: 
"R-1" One-Family Dwelling District. 
"R-2" Duplex and Apartment District. 
"B-1" Neighborhood Business District. 
"B-2" Secondary and Highway Business District. 
"B-3" Central Business District. 
"I" Industrial District. 
(b)  The boundaries of the districts listed above are shown on the map that is on file in the office of the City Secretary and made a part of this article by reference, which map is designated as the "Zoning District Map." Said district map and all notations, references, and other information shown thereon are made a part of this article and shall have the same force and effect as if said map and said data thereon were fully set forth or described herein. Said map shall, on its face, be identified and verified in the manner following: It shall bear the title "Zoning District Map Wills Point, Texas"; it shall bear even date with the passing of this article, it shall bear the name of the mayor; and it shall be attested by the signature of the City Secretary. The original of said map shall be kept in a proper place in the municipal building. 
(c)  Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is lawfully vacated by the City Council, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley, or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacated area and thereafter all land included in said vacated area shall be subject to all applicable regulations of the extended districts. All territory hereafter annexed to the City shall be classified as "R-1" One-Family Dwelling District, until permanently zoned by the City Council. The City Planning Commission shall, as soon as practicable after annexation of any territory to the City, institute proceedings on its own motion to give the newly annexed territory permanent zoning, and the procedure to be followed shall be the same as provided by law for the adoption of original zoning regulations, except as hereinafter provided: 
(1)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered, and no building or land shall be used for any purpose that is not permitted in the district in which the building or land is situated. 
(2)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the district in which the building is situated. 
(3)  The minimum yards and other open spaces, including lot area per family, required by this article for each and every building existing at the time of the passage of this article, or for any building hereafter erected, shall not be encroached upon or considered as yard or open space requirements for any other building, nor shall any lot area be reduced to an area less than the district requirements of this article. 
(4)  Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot as herein defined, and in no case shall there be more than one main building on one lot except as otherwise provided in this article. 
(5)  The use of trailers, as such term is defined in section 48-3 for living, sleeping, business, or storage purposes, is prohibited within the City. 
(6)  A temporary permit for a variance from this section for a period not to exceed two weeks may be obtained from the City Administrator upon presentation of evidence of necessity satisfactory to the City Administrator. 
(7)  An applicant may appeal denial of a temporary permit to the City Council. 
(Code 1981, § 16.4; Ord. No. 03-01) 
Sec. 48-5. - "R-1" One-Family Dwelling District. 
    The following regulations shall apply to the "R-1" One-Family Dwelling District: 
(1)  Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
a.  Single-family dwellings. 
b.  Church (except temporary revival). 
c.  School, public or private, having a curriculum equal to a public elementary, high school, or institution of higher learning. 
d.  Public parks, playgrounds, golf courses (except miniature golf); public recreation and community buildings. 
e.  Municipal buildings, nonprofit libraries, or museums, police and fire stations. 
f.  Farms, nurseries, truck gardens and greenhouses, provided no sales office is maintained. 
g.  Customary home occupations. 
h.  Accessory buildings and accessory uses, customarily incident to the above uses (not involving the conduct of a business), when located on the same lot, including a private garage for one or more cars, bona fide servants quarters not for rent or used for commercial purposes. 
i.  Signs. 
1.  One unlighted sign, which shall not exceed one square foot in area, indicating the name of the occupant or occupation of a customary home occupation, provided the sign is attached flat wise to the building. 
2.  One sign, which shall not exceed 18 square feet, for church or school. 
3.  One temporary unlighted sign which shall not exceed four square feet in area, pertaining to the lease, hire or sale of the building or premises, provided the sign is immediately removed upon the lease, hire or sale of such building or premises. 
(2)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed 21/2 stories or 35 feet in height except as provided in section 48-11. 
(3)  Area regulations. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard along the front line of the lot. The minimum depth of such front yard shall be 30 feet. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of a building of not less than ten percent of the width of the lot, but such side yard need not exceed six feet and shall not be less than five feet. 
c.  Rear yard. The depth of the rear yard shall be at least 30 percent of the depth of the lot, but such depth need not be more than 40 feet. 
(4)  Intensity of use. Every lot or tract of land shall have an area of not less than 5,400 square feet and an average width of not less than 50 feet, except that if a lot or tract should have less area or width than is herein required in its boundary lines along their entire length touching lands under other ownership on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived not have been changed since said date, such parcel of land may be used for a single-family dwelling. 
(5)  Parking regulations. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person in charge of property used for residential purposes to permit the parking, standing or storing of heavy trucks as defined herein in residential areas for other than actual supervised loading or unloading of goods and/or passengers. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person in charge of property used for residential purposes to permit the parking, standing or storing of heavy trucks in residential yards and/or lawns, including driveways, for other than actual supervised loading or unloading of goods and/or passengers. 
(6)  Additional use, height, and area regulations. Additional use, height, and area regulations and exceptions are found in section 48-11. 
(Code 1981, § 16.5; Ord. No. 03-01; Ord. No. 13-07, § 2, 10-8-2013 ) 
Sec. 48-6. - "R-2" Duplex and Apartment District. 
    The following regulations shall apply to the "R-2" Duplex and Apartment District: 
(1)  Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
a.  Any use permitted in the "R-1" One-Family Dwelling District. 
b.  Two-family or duplex dwellings. 
c.  Apartment houses or multiple-family dwellings. 
d.  Boardinghouses, lodginghouses, and roominghouses. 
e.  Hospitals, excepting tubercular, liquor, narcotics, insane, feeble-minded, or animal hospitals. 
f.  Private clubs, fraternities, sororities, and lodges, excepting those the chief activity of which is a service customarily carried on as a business. 
g.  Institutions of a religious, educational or philanthropic nature. 
(2)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed 21/2 stories or 35 feet in height. 
(3)  Yard regulations. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard along the front line of the lot. The minimum depth of such front yard shall be 25 feet. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of a building of not less than ten percent of the width of the lot, but such side yard need not exceed five feet and shall not be less than four feet. 
c.  Rear yard. The depth of the rear yard shall be at least 25 percent of the depth of the lot, but such depth need not be more than 25 feet. 
(4)  Intensity of use. Except as hereinafter provided, all dwellings hereafter erected, enlarged, relocated, or reconstructed, shall be located on lots containing the following areas: 
a.  A lot on which there is erected a single-family dwelling shall contain an area of not less than 5,400 square feet. 
b.  A lot on which there is erected a two-family dwelling shall contain an area of not less than 5,400 square feet. 
c.  A lot on which there is erected an apartment house or multiple-family dwelling shall contain an area of not less than 1,800 square feet per dwelling unit. 
d.  Where a lot or tract has less area than herein required and its boundary lines along their entire length touched lands under other ownership on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and have not since been changed, such parcel of land may be used for a single-family dwelling. 
(5)  Parking regulations. 
a.  Whenever a structure is erected, converted, or structurally altered for a two- family dwelling or a multiple-family dwelling, one parking space shall be provided and maintained on the lot for each dwelling unit in the building. Such parking space shall be on the lot and so arranged as to permit satisfactory egress and ingress of an automobile, and such parking area shall be in addition to driveways. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person in charge of property used for residential purposes to permit the parking, standing or storing of heavy trucks as defined herein in residential areas for other than actual supervised loading or unloading of goods and/or passengers. 
c.  It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person in charge of property used for residential purposes to permit the parking, standing or storing of heavy trucks in residential yards and/or lawns, including driveways, for other than actual supervised loading or unloading of goods and/or passengers. 
(6)  Additional use, height and area regulations. Additional use, height, and area regulations and exceptions are found in section 48-11. 
(Code 1981, § 16.6; Ord. No. 03-01; Ord. No. 13-07, § 2, 10-8-2013 ) 
Sec. 48-7. - "B-1" Neighborhood Business District. 
    The following regulations shall apply to the "B-1" Neighborhood Business District: 
(1)  Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
a.  Any use permitted in the "R-2" Duplex and Apartment District. 
b.  Advertising signs, when the same are attached to a building and advertise only services, articles, or products which are offered within the building to which such sign is attached, and provided that such sign shall not extend above the outside walls of such building, nor more than one foot from the face of the walls of such building, nor shall it contain an area of more than 12 square feet. One freestanding sign not to exceed 24 feet in height will be allowed in the front yard provided such sign does not exceed 30 feet in area. 
c.  Automobile parking lots. 
d.  Bakeries employing not more than five persons that are completely within an enclosed building. No building or structure shall be erected, converted or constructed to allow for the interior passage of motor vehicles for the retail sale or delivery of foods and/or beverages. 
e.  Bank. 
f.  Beauty parlor. 
g.  Barbershop. 
h.  Billiard or pool hall. 
i.  Cleaning, pressing and dyeing plants employing not more than five persons each. 
j.  Clinic. 
k.  Garage, public. 
l.  Filling station, service station, provided all storage tanks for gasoline shall be below the surface of the ground. 
m.  Laundries, employing not more than five persons on the premises. 
n.  Laundries, self-service. 
o.  Ice retail distributing station, no manufacturer, and capacity not to exceed five tons storage. 
p.  Job printing, provided total mechanical power used in operation of such printing plant shall not exceed five horsepower. 
q.  Lodge halls. 
r.  Mortuaries. 
s.  Offices. 
t.  Radio repair and sale shops. 
u.  Radio studios. 
v.  Real estate offices. 
w.  Restaurants, cafes, cafeterias and/or taverns that are completely within an enclosed building. No building or structure shall be erected, converted or constructed to allow for the interior passage of motor vehicles for the retail sale or delivery of foods and/or beverages. 
x.  Stores and/or shops for the sale of products at retail only that conduct retail sales completely within an enclosed building. No building or structure shall be erected, converted or constructed to allow for the interior passage of motor vehicles for the retail sale or delivery of foods and/or beverages. 
y.  Studios (art, photo, music). 
(2)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed 21/2 stories or 35 feet in height. 
(3)  Yard regulations. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard along the front line of the lot. The minimum depth of such front yard shall be 20 feet. 
b.  Side yard. For uses permitted in the "R-2" district the side yard regulations for that district shall apply for the additional uses permitted in the "B-1" district. No side yards are required except that on a corner lot the side yard on a street shall be 20 feet. Where a lot is used for any of the commercial purposes permitted in this district and abutting on the side of an "R-1"or "R-2" district there shall be a side yard of not less than five feet. 
c.  Rear yard. For uses permitted in the "R-2" district the rear yard shall be the same as in the "R-2" district. For all other uses a rear yard is not required except when it abuts upon an "R-1" or "R-2" district, in which case there shall be a rear yard of not less than ten feet. 
(4)  Intensity of use. For uses permitted in the "R-2" district the minimum lot area and minimum lot width shall be the same as in the "R-2" district. There are no minimum lot area or width requirements for other uses. 
(5)  Parking regulations. 
a.  The parking regulations for dwellings are the same as those in "R-2" districts. 
b.  Where any structure is erected, reconstructed, or converted for any other business or commercial uses permitted in this section, parking spaces shall be provided in the ratio of not less than one parking space for each 200 square feet of floor space in the building which is used for commercial purposes. Such parking space may be located on the same lot as the building or on an area within 300 feet of the building. Two or more owners of buildings may join together providing this parking space. 
(6)  Additional use, height, and area regulations. Additional use, height, and area regulations and exceptions are found in section 48-11. 
(Code 1981, § 16.7; Ord. No. 10-04, §§ 2-4, 3-29-2010) 
Sec. 48-8. - "B-2" Secondary and Highway Business District. 
    The following regulations shall apply to the "B-2" Secondary and Highway Business District: 
(1)  Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
a.  Any use permitted in the "B-1" Neighborhood Business District. 
b.  Automobile salesroom and accompanying service facilities. 
c.  Automobile repair garage. 
d.  Bakeries that are completely within an enclosed building. No building or structure shall be erected, converted or constructed to allow for the interior passage of motor vehicles for the retail sale or delivery of foods and/or beverages. 
e.  Billboards and poster boards. 
f.  Dance hall and skating rink. 
g.  Frozen food locker plants. 
h.  Hotel. 
i.  Moving picture house or theater. 
j.  Laundry and cleaning. 
k.  Tourist court or motel. 
l.  Trailer camp or mobile home court. 
m.  Any other retail businesses not included in the Neighborhood Business District, provided that such uses are not noxious or offensive by reason of vibrations, smoke, odor, dust, gas, noise or similar nuisance and such uses are conducted completely within an enclosed building; and all merchandise be sold at retail on the premises. No building or structure shall be erected, converted or constructed to allow for the interior passage of motor vehicles for the retail sale or delivery of foods and/or beverages. 
(2)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed 21/2 stories or 35 feet in height. 
(3)  Yard regulations. 
a.  Front yard. For uses permitted in the "R-2" district, the front yard requirements for the "R-2" district shall apply. For other uses permitted in this district a front yard of 20 feet in depth is required. 
b.  Side yard. For uses permitted in the "R-2" district, the side yard requirements for the "R-2" district shall apply. For other uses no side yards are required. 
c.  Rear yard. For uses permitted in the "R-2" district, the "R-2" district regulations shall apply. There are no rear yard regulations for other uses. 
(4)  Intensity of use. For uses permitted in the "R-2" district the minimum lot area and minimum lot width shall be the same as the "R-2" district. There are no minimum lot areas or lot width requirements for other uses. 
(5)  Parking regulations. 
a.  The parking regulations for dwellings are the same as those in the "R-2" district. 
b.  Where any structure is erected, reconstructed, or converted for any of the business or commercial uses permitted in this section, parking spaces shall be provided in the ratio of not less than one parking space for each 200 square feet of floor space in the building which is used for commercial purposes. Such parking space may be located on the same lot as the building or on an area within 300 feet of the building. Two or more owners of the building may join together to provide this parking space. 
c.  Tourist courts. At least one parking space shall be provided and maintained on the lot for each tourist court unit. 
(6)  Additional use, height, and area regulations. Additional use, height, and area regulations and exceptions are found in section 48-11. 
(Code 1981, § 16.8; Ord. No. 10-04, §§ 5, 6, 3-29-2010) 
Sec. 48-9. - "B-3" Central Business District. 
    The following regulations shall apply to the "B-3" Central Business District: 
(1)  Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
a.  Any use permitted in "B-2" district. 
b.  Storage in bulk, or warehouse for such material as household goods, clothing, drugs, glass, dry goods, furniture, hardware, groceries, millinery, and shop supplies. 
c.  Wholesale sales rooms that are completely within an enclosed building. No building or structure shall be erected, converted or constructed to allow for the interior passage of motor vehicles for the retail sale or delivery of foods and/or beverages. 
(2)  Height regulations. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed six stories or 75 feet. 
(3)  Yard regulations. 
a.  Front yard. For uses permitted in the "R-2" district, the front yard requirements for the "R-2" district shall apply. For other uses no front yard is required. 
b.  Side yard. For uses permitted in the "R-2" district the side yard, yard requirements for the "R-2" district shall apply. For other uses there are no side yard requirements. 
c.  Rear yard. For uses permitted in the "R-2" district, the rear yard regulations for the "R-2" district shall apply. For other uses there are no rear yard regulations. 
(4)  Intensity of use. For uses permitted in the "R-2" district, the minimum lot area and minimum lot width shall be the same as in the "R-2" district. There are no minimum lot area or lot width requirements for other uses. 
(5)  Parking regulations. The parking regulations for the dwellings and business and commercial uses are the same as those in the "B-2" district. 
(6)  Additional use, height, and area regulations. Additional use, height, and area regulations and exceptions are found in section 48-11. 
(Code 1981, § 16.9; Ord. No. 10-04, § 7, 3-29-2010) 
Sec. 48-10. - "I" Industrial District. 
    The following regulations shall apply to the "I" Industrial District: 
(1)  Use regulations. Any building or premises may be used for any purpose not in conflict with any article of the City, provided that no building or structure shall be erected, converted or constructed to allow for the interior passage of motor vehicles for the retail sale or delivery of foods and/or beverages, and provided that no building or occupancy permitted shall be issued for any of the following uses until and unless the location of such use shall be approved by the City Council following a recommendation by the City Planning Commission: 
a.  Cement or lime manufacture. 
b.  Distillation of bones. 
c.  Explosive manufacture or storage. 
d.  Fat rendering. 
e.  Garbage offal or dead animal incineration, reduction or dumping. 
f.  Junkyards or automobile wrecking yards. 
g.  Petroleum refinery. 
h.  Slaughter and dressing of animals (not including poultry and rabbits). 
i.  Stockyards. 
j.  Wholesale storage of gasoline or other petroleum products in carload lots or more above ground. 
(2)  Height regulations. No building shall exceed a height of six stories or 75 feet. 
(3)  Yard regulations. 
a.  Front yard. For uses permitted in the "R-2" district the front yard requirements for the "R-2" district shall apply. For other uses there is no front yard requirement. 
b.  Side yard. For uses permitted in the "R-2" district the side yard requirements for the "R-2" district shall apply. For other uses no side yards are required. 
c.  Rear yard. For uses permitted in the "R-2" district the rear yard requirement for the "R-2" district shall apply. For other uses there is no rear yard requirement. 
(4)  Intensity of use. For uses permitted in the "R-2" district the minimum lot area and minimum lot width shall be the same as in the "R-2" district. There are no minimum lot area or lot width requirements for other uses. 
(5)  Parking regulations. The parking regulations for the dwellings are the same as those in the "R-2" district. 
(6)  Additional use, height, and area regulations. Additional use, height, and area regulations and exceptions are found in section 48-11. 
(Code 1981, § 16.10; Ord. No. 10-04, § 8, 3-29-2010) 
Sec. 48-11. - Additional use, height, and area regulations and exceptions. 
(a)  Use regulations. 
(1)  Accessory buildings. No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the main use building has been actually commenced. No accessory building shall be used unless the main use building on the lot is also being used. No accessory building or structure shall be erected, converted or constructed to allow for the interior passage of motor vehicles for the retail sale or delivery of foods and/or beverages. 
(2)  Railroad right-of-way. On all existing rights-of-way of railroad companies, regardless of the zoning district in which such rights-of- way are located, railroad trackage and accessories to railroad movement may be constructed or maintained. 
(b)  Height regulations. 
(1)  Public, semi-public or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools, when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not exceeding 60 feet, and churches and temples may be erected to a height not exceeding 75 feet if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for every two feet additional height above the height limit otherwise provided in the district in which the building is located. 
(2)  Chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulk heads, fire towers, grain elevators, flour mills, monuments, stacks, or scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, ornamental towers, and spired church steeples, radio or television towers, or necessary mechanical appurtenances, may be erected to a height in accordance with existing or hereafter adopted ordinances of the City, provided that in the absence of any such ordinances there shall be no height limitations of these structures. 
(c)  Area and density regulations. 
(1)  In a district in which commercial or industrial buildings are built with one or more stories for residential purposes above the commercial or industrial uses, no side yards will be required for the residential portions of the building, provided that the part of the building intended for residential use is not more than two rooms deep from front to rear. 
(2)  No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purposes of complying with the provisions of these regulations shall again be used as a yard or an open space for another building. Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructured by buildings except for accessory buildings in the rear yard and except the ordinary projections of skylights, sills, belt courses, cornices, and other ornamental features which may project into such yards a distance of not more than two feet. 
(3)  Open, unenclosed porches, platforms, or landing places not covered by a roof or canopy may extend or project into the front yard for a distance not exceeding six feet. 
(4)  Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms, and ornamental features which do not extend more than three feet above the floor level of the ground (first) story may project into a required side yard, provided these projections be distant at least two feet from the adjacent side lot line. 
(5)  Front yard. 
a.  Where 40 percent or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings that have observed (with a variation of five feet or less) a front yard greater in depth than herein required, new buildings shall not be erected closer to the street than the front yard so established by the existing buildings. 
b.  Where 40 percent or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersection streets is developed with buildings that have not observed a front yard as described above, then: 
1.  Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 feet of existing buildings on both sides, the minimum front yard shall be a line drawn between the two closest front corners of the adjacent buildings on the two sides; or 
2.  Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 feet of an existing building on one side only, such building may be erected as close to the street as the existing adjacent building. 
In determining such front yard depth, buildings located entirely on the rear one-half of a lot shall not be counted. 
c.  Vision clearance. On any corner lot on which a front or side yard is required, no wall, fence, sign, or other structure, or any plant growth shall be permitted or maintained higher than two feet above the curb level within 15 feet of the intersection of the property lines. 
(6)  Side yards. 
a.  The minimum width of a side yard of a corner lot in the "R-1" and "R-2" districts shall be not less than ten feet provided that if the street side line of a corner lot is in the same block frontage with lots, whose street line is a front of such lots, the side yard shall extend to the average alignment of the buildings along the same line of the street, unless such buildings are more than 25 feet back from the street line, in which case the side yard need not be more than 25 feet. 
b.  A side yard of not less than 25 feet on the side of a lot adjoining on an "R-1" or "R-2" district shall be provided for all schools, libraries, churches, community houses, clubs, and other public or semi-public buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered. 
c.  Where a lot in the "B-2" "B-3", or "I" district is not used for residential purposes and abuts upon "R-1" or "R-2" district, a side yard shall be provided of not less than five feet. 
d.  Garages detached or attached to the main use building entering on the side street of a corner lot shall maintain a side yard of 20 feet in front of the garage. 
(7)  Rear yard. 
a.  In the "R-1" or "R-2" districts accessory buildings shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the required minimum rear yard area. Accessory buildings shall be a minimum of 12 feet from the main use building. In "R-1" and "R-2" districts no accessory building shall be more than one story in height. 
b.  In computing the depth of a rear yard where such yard opens into an alley, one-half of the width of such alley may be assumed to be a portion of the required yard. 
(Code 1981, § 16.11; Ord. No. 10-04, § 9, 3-29-2010) 
Sec. 48-12. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Nonconforming use of land. The nonconforming use of land where no building is involved existing at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived may be continued for a period of not more than two years therefrom, provided that no such nonconforming use of land shall in any way be expanded or extended either on the same or adjoining property, and that if such nonconforming use of land or any portion thereof is discontinued or changed, any future use of such land shall be in conformity with regulations of the district in which it lies. 
(b)  Nonconforming use of buildings. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, the nonconforming use of a building existing at the time the ordinance from which this article is derived becomes effective may be continued and the use of a nonconforming building may be changed to another use of the same or more restricted classification; but where such uses change to a more restricted classification, it shall not thereafter be changed back to a use of less restricted classification. A nonconforming building which is or may hereafter become vacant and which shall remain unoccupied or its nonconforming use discarded for a continuous period of one year shall not thereafter be occupied except by a use which conforms to regulations of the district in which it is located. A nonconforming building may be maintained or kept in good repair except as otherwise provided in this section. No existing nonconforming building may be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or altered unless its use is changed to a use permitted in the district in which such building is located except in the event such enlargement, extension, reconstruction, or alteration is required by a court decision, law, or ordinance. 
(2)  No nonconforming building shall be moved in whole or in part to any other location on the lot unless every portion of such building is made to conform to all regulations of the district in which it is located. A nonconforming building which is damaged by fire, explosion, flood, wind, earthquake or other calamity or act of God or public enemy to the extent of 50 percent or more of its reasonable value may not be restored except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. The following uses now in existence and not in a strict conformity with the provisions of the district in which it is located are hereby prohibited and such uses in existence in the City, shall be altered, replaced, or removed to conform to the provisions of the ordinance from which this article is derived on or before the date shown in the following schedule: 
(1)  Billboards and poster boards: One year from date of enactment. 
(2)  Junkyards and automobile wrecking yards: One year from date. 
(3)  Mobile homes: One year from date. 
(Code 1981, § 16.12) 
Sec. 48-13. - Permits. 
    No permit for the erection, alteration, or enlargement of any building shall be issued by the building inspector unless there first be filed in the building inspector's office by the applicant therefor a plat, drawn to scale and in such form as may be prescribed by the said building inspector, correctly showing the location and actual dimensions of the lot to be occupied, the dimensions and location on the lot of the building to be erected, altered, or enlarged, together with a true statement in writing, signed by the applicant, showing the use for which such building is arranged, intended or designed, and furnishing such other information as the building inspector may require in the enforcement of the provisions of this article, and any failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall be good cause for the revocation of any such building permit by the building inspector. A record of such application and plat shall be kept in the office of the building inspector. 
(Code 1981, § 16.13) 
Sec. 48-14. - Community unit plan. 
(a)  The owner of any tract of land in the City comprising an area of not less than ten acres may submit to the City Building Inspector a plan for the use and development of all of the tract of land for residential purposes. The development plan shall be referred to the City Planning Commission for study, public hearing, and report. The commission's recommendations and report together with the plan shall be submitted to the City Council within 30 days for consideration and action. 
(b)  The recommendations and report by the City Planning Commission shall contain specific evidence and facts showing whether or not the proposed project meets the following conditions: 
(1)  The property adjacent to the area included in the plan will not be adversely affected. 
(2)  The plan is consistent with the intent and purposes of this article to promote public health, safety, morals, and general welfare. 
(3)  The buildings will be used only for the purposes provided for in the "R-1" and "R-2" districts. 
(4)  The average lot area per family contained in the site, exclusive of the area occupied by streets, will be not less than the lot area per family required in the district in which the development is located. 
(c)  If the City Council approves the plan, building permits and certificates of occupancy may be issued even though the use of the land and the location of the building to be erected in the area and the yards open spaces contemplated by the plan do not conform in all respects to the district regulations of the district of which it is located. 
(Code 1981, § 16.14) 
Sec. 48-15. - Neighborhood shopping center. 
(a)  The owner of any tract of land comprising an area of not less than 21/2 acres and not lying within a business district may submit a development plan for a neighborhood shopping center. Such application shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of section 48-18. 
(b)  The City Planning Commission may recommend to the City Council that such application be approved if the application conforms to the following: 
(1)  The uses permitted in the center be limited to those limited to those of the "B-1" Neighborhood Business District as listed in section 48-7. 
(2)  The entire development be designed as a single architectural unit with appropriate landscape and architectural treatment of the entire area. 
(3)  At least four times the gross floor area of the stores included in the development is provided in off-street parking areas as integral parts of the design of the unit plan. 
(4)  The appropriate use of property adjacent to the area included in the plan will be fully safeguarded, and to this end the City Council may make such requirements as it deems necessary. 
(5)  Satisfactory evidence shall be submitted that the automobile parking areas and the landscaped areas be properly constructed and maintained. 
(6)  The plan is consistent with the intent and purposes of this article to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(Code 1981, § 16.15) 
Sec. 48-16. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  No vacant land shall be occupied or used except agricultural uses until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the building inspector. 
(b)  No premises shall be used and no buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be used, occupied or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy and compliance shall have been issued by the building inspector according to the laws and the provisions of these regulations. 
(c)  Certificates of occupancy and compliance shall be applied for coincidental with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten days after the erection or structural alteration of such buildings shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector. 
(d)  No permit for occupation for any building shall be issued before application has been made for certificate of occupancy and compliance. 
(e)  A certificate of occupancy shall be required of all nonconforming uses. Application for a certificate of occupancy for nonconforming uses shall be filed within 12 months from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived with the building inspector. 
(Code 1981, § 16.16) 
Sec. 48-17. - Boundaries of districts. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the map accompanying and made a part of this article, the following rules apply: 
(1)  The district boundaries are either streets or alleys unless otherwise shown, and where the districts designated on the map on file in the City Secretary's office and made a part of this article are bounded approximately by street or alley lines, the street or alley shall be construed to be the boundary of the district. 
(2)  Where the district boundaries are not otherwise indicated and where the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and lots, the district boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines, and where the districts designated on the map on file in the City Secretary's office and made a part of this article are bounded approximately by lot lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the districts unless the boundaries are otherwise indicated on the map. 
(3)  In subdivided property, the district boundary lines on the map accompanying and made a part of this article shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map. 
(Code 1981, § 16.17) 
Sec. 48-18. - Board of Adjustment, establishment and power; appeals. 
(a)  A Board of Adjustment is hereby established. 
(b)  The Board of Adjustment shall consist of the members of the City Council, who have authority to act as a Board of Adjustment pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.008. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. 
(c)  The board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this article. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board may determine. Such chairperson or, in the chairperson's absence, the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examination and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. The concurring vote of four members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of any administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under any such ordinance or to effect any variation in such ordinance. 
(d)  Appeals. 
(1)  Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the City affected by any decision of the building inspector. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, and by paying a filing fee of $3.00 to the county tax collector, at the time the notice if filed, which shall be credited to the general fund of the City. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the officer's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on the cause shown. 
(2)  The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, given public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(e)  The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this article. 
(2)  When a property owner can show that a strict application of the terms of this article relating to the use, construction or alteration of buildings or structures or the use of land will impose practical difficulties or particular hardship, the board may consider and allow variations of the strict application of the terms of this article if the variations are in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this article and the board is satisfied, under the evidence heard by it, that a granting of the variation would not merely serve as a convenience to the applicant but will alleviate some demonstrable hardship or difficulty so great as to warrant a variation from the comprehensive plan. 
(3)  The board may authorize a variance where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property of record at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived or by reason of exceptional topographical conditions or other extraordinary exceptional situation or condition of a specific piece of property, the strict application of a provision of this article would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties and particular hardship upon the owner of the property and amount to a practical confiscation of the property as distinguished from a mere inconvenience to the owner, provided the variation can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the general purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan as established by the regulations and provisions contained in this article. 
(4)  Special exceptions. When in its judgment the public convenience and welfare will not be substantially or permanently injured, the Board of Adjustment may in a specific case, after public notice and hearing and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, authorize special exceptions to the regulations herein established as follows: 
a.  Permit a transitional use between a business or industrial district in a dwelling district where the side of a lot in a one-family district or a two-family district abuts upon a lot zoned for business or industrial purposes as follows: On a lot in a single-family dwelling district which sides upon a lot zoned for business or industrial purposes, the board may permit a two-family dwelling. 
b.  Permit the extension of a building or use into a more restricted district, immediately adjacent thereto, but not more than 50 feet beyond the boundary line of the district in which such building or use is authorized. 
c.  Grant undeveloped sections of the City conditional permits for not more than two years. The granting or existence of such a conditional permit shall not be reason for extension of such permit. 
d.  Permit such modification of yard open space, lot area or lot width regulations as may be necessary to secure an appropriate improvement of a parcel of land, if such parcel is separately owned at the time of the original passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived or subsequent annexation of the City and is of such restricted area that it cannot be appropriately improved without such modification. 
e.  Determine in cases of uncertainty the classification of any use not specifically named in this article. 
f.  Grant a permit for the extension of a use, height or area regulation into an adjoining district, where the boundary line of the district divided a lot in a single ownership at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
g.  Permit as an accessory use as a parking area that shall not be more than 50 feet in width to be used for parking passenger automobiles on a lot in a single-family, duplex, or apartment house district adjoining or across the street from the primary residence in an "R-1" or "R-2" district, subject, however, to the following provisions: 
1.  The area shall be properly enclosed with a hedge, screen, fence, wall or other suitable enclosure having a height of not less than three feet nor more than six feet. Such fence or enclosure shall conform to the front yard regulations of the district in which it is located. 
2.  The area shall be paved. 
3.  No parking of vehicles shall be permitted within six feet of any adjoining lots on which is located a single family residence, duplex, or multiple dwelling. 
4.  One sign not exceeding two and one-half square feet in area may be erected identifying the one lot. 
5.  No changes may be made for parking and no other business use may be made of the lot. 
6.  Any light used to illuminate said parking area shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from the adjoining premises used for residential purposes. 
h.  Permit the reconstruction of a building occupied by a nonconforming use, or permit the extension of a nonconforming use of building upon the lot occupied by such use or building at the time of the passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(5)  Any appeal or permit granted by the Board of Adjustment shall not be valid if construction authorized by said permit is not begun within a period of 60 days. 
(6)  In exercising the above methods and powers such board may, in conformity with the provisions of this act, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
(7)  In considering all appeals and all proposed variations to this article the board shall, before make any finding in a specific case, first determine that the proposed variation will not constitute any change in the district map and will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or materially increase the congestion in public streets or increase the public danger of fire and safety, or materially diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the public health, safety, morals, and welfare of the City. 
(8)  Every variation granted or denied by the board shall be accompanied by a written order that is based on sworn testimony and evidence specifying the reason for granting or denying the variation. 
(Code 1981, § 16.18; Ord. No. 12-04, § 2, 10-9-2012 ) 
State Law reference- Board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.008 et seq. 
Sec. 48-19. - Changes and amendments. 
(a)  The City Council may from time to time amend, supplement or change by ordinance the boundaries of the districts or the regulations herein established. 
(b)  Before taking any action on any proposed amendment, supplement or change, the City Council shall submit the same to the City Planning Commission for its recommendation and report. 
(c)  The City Planning Commission hearing requirements shall be as required in section 2-253 and in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 211.006 and 211.007 
(Code 1981, § 16.19) 
State Law reference- Procedures governing adoption of zoning regulations and district boundaries, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.006. 
Sec. 48-20. - Enforcement and penalty for violation. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the building inspector to enforce the provisions of this article, and to refuse to issue any permit for any building, or for the use of any premises, which would violate any of the provisions of said article. 
(b)  In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, or converted or any building or land is used in violation of the article, the building inspector is authorized and directed to institute any appropriate action to put an end to any such violation. 
(c)  Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall build or alter any building in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine of not more than $2,000.00 and each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The owner of any building or premises, or part thereof, where anything in violation of this article shall be placed, or shall exist, and any architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as hereinbefore provided. 
(Code 1981, § 16.20; Ord. No. 03-01) 
Sec. 48-21. - Interpretation, purpose and conflict. 
    In interpreting and applying the provisions of this article they shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, morals, propriety and general welfare. It is not intended by this article to interfere with or abrogate or annul any ordinance, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this article which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of building or premises and likewise not in conflict with this article; nor is it intended by this article to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, except that, if this article imposes a greater restriction, this article shall control. 
(Code 1981, § 16.21) 
Sec. 48-22. - Validity. 
(a)  If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, or phrase of provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this article as a whole or any part or provision thereof other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(b)  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Code 1981, § 16.22) 
Sec. 48-23. - Special use permits. 
(a)  Purpose. The City Council may by ordinance, adopted by a majority of affirmative votes after public hearing and proper notice to all parties affected, and after receiving the recommendation of the City Planning Commission, grant a special use permit zoning classification in compliance with this section for the special uses as listed in subsection (c) below. The City Council may impose appropriate conditions and safeguards, including a specified period of time for the permit, to protect the comprehensive plan and to conserve and protect property and property values in the neighborhood. The zoning change application shall be accompanied by a written plan showing the general arrangement of the project, together with essential requirements such as off-street parking facilities; size, height, construction materials, and locations of buildings and the uses to be permitted; location and construction of signs; means of ingress and egress to public streets, the type of visual screening such as walls, plantings and fences; and the relationship of the intended use to all existing properties and land uses in all directions to a minimum distance of 200 feet. The City Planning Commission or City Council may require information, operating data and expert evaluation concerning the location and function and characteristics of any building or use proposed. 
(b)  Regulations. 
(1)  In recommending that a special use permit for the premises under consideration be granted, the Planning Commission shall determine that such uses are harmonious and adaptable to building structures and uses of abutting property and other property in the vicinity of the premises under consideration, and shall make recommendations as to requirements for the paving of streets, alleys and sidewalks, means of ingress and egress to public streets, provisions for drainage, adequate off-street parking, protective screening and open space landscaping, heights of structures, and compatibility of buildings, as necessary. 
(2)  Every special use permit granted under these provisions shall be considered as an amendment to the zoning ordinance as applicable to such property under consideration, but shall not be considered as a permanent change in zoning. If the building, premises, or land uses under the special use permit is voluntarily vacated or if the ownership is voluntarily transferred, or if such building, premise, or land is more than 50 percent destroyed by fire or other cause, the use of the property shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the original zoning district of such property unless a new and separate special use permit is granted for continuation of the use. 
(3)  Integral to granting a special use permit, the City Council may impose mandatory conditions that shall be complied with by the owner or grantee before a certificate of occupancy may be issued by the building inspector for use of any building on the property. 
(4)  At the time of application, the building plans and a detailed drawing showing the property lines, building or structure location, fences, foundation elevations, drainage requirements and proposed utility connections and set-back lines will be required, unless waived by the City. 
(5)  Unless the City Council has authorized an extension of time upon recommendation by the planning commission, a building permit shall be applied for and secured within six months from the time of granting the special use permit. 
(6)  No building, premises, or land in which a special use permit has been granted may be enlarged, modified, structurally altered, or otherwise significantly changed unless a separate special use permit is granted for such enlargement, modification, structural alteration, or change. 
(c)  General special uses. The following listed special uses and those indicated in a specific zoning district as a permitted use with a special use permit, and none other, may be authorized subject to the terms of this section and compliance with all special use terms, regulations and requirements established by the City Council. 
(1)  Commercial, recreational or amusement development for temporary or seasonal periods. 
(2)  Recreational vehicle park for temporary periods or seasonal periods (no retail sales allowed, except for state-recognized and dedicated charitable organizations on a case by case basis and not to exceed three consecutive days). A recreational vehicle means any travel trailer, pickup camper, motor home, camping trailer, tent trailer, or similar vehicle that is designed for human habitation. 
(3)  Privately-operated community building or recreation field. 
(4)  Contractor's temporary on-site construction office (only with a permit from the City Building Official). 
(5)  Governmental building or use (state or federally-owned and operated). 
(6)  Municipal use owned or operated by the City, including libraries. 
(7)  Park and/or playground (public or private). 
(8)  Charitable organization, other than churches. 
(9)  Rodeo arena or other outdoor sporting arena. 
(10)  Daycare center, day nursery or day camp for children. 
(d)  Procedure. Before authorization of any of the above special uses, public notice shall be given and public hearings shall be held as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 211.006 and 211.007 for the planning commission and City Council. The City Council shall vote to either grant or deny the special use permit only after a public hearing is held by City Council and after City Council's receipt of the recommendation made by the planning commission that discusses the effect of the proposed use on the adjacent and neighboring properties and neighborhoods. As a condition of granting a special use permit for uses set forth in subsection (c)(1) or (c)(2) of this section, time limitations shall be considered on a permit by permit basis. 
(1)  Permit required. No special use shall be established, operated or maintained, except as authorized by a special use permit issued in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Special use permit issued by City Council. A special use permit may be issued only for the special uses specified in this section, and only for the district where it is authorized. 
(3)  The City Council shall determine whether the proposed special use complies with each of the general criteria set forth in subsection (e) of this section and with each of the criteria for the district applicable to the proposed use and shall make separate findings or adopt the findings made by the Planning Commission. 
(4)  The City Council may condition its approval of an application on the applicant's adoption of specified changes, additions, limitations, safeguards or effective time periods designed to assure compliance with the criteria. 
(5)  Application. An application for a special use permit shall be made in writing in a form prescribed by the City Building Official and shall be accompanied by such information as may be requested (including the building plans, if required) in order to properly review the proposed use. Such information may include, but is not limited to, site and building plans, drawings and elevations, and operational data. 
(e)  General criteria applicable to all special uses. A proposed special use permit must comply with all the following criteria: 
(1)  The appearance, size, density and operating characteristics of the proposed special use must be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and uses; 
(2)  The proposed use will not have an adverse effect on the value of surrounding properties nor impede their proper development; 
(3)  The proposed use will not create a nuisance nor otherwise interfere with a neighbor's enjoyment of his property or operation of his business; 
(4)  The traffic that the proposed use can reasonably be expected to generate on existing streets will not create nor add significantly to congestion, a safety hazard, or a parking problem in the area, nor will it disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood; and 
(5)  The proposed use must comply with all other applicable City ordinances and regulations. 
( Ord. No. 12-04, § 2, 10-9-2012 ) 
Sec. 48-24. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section or fail to comply with any of the requirements contained in this section, or who shall build or alter any building in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted and approved in this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine of not more than $2,000.00 for each offense and each day any violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The owner of any building or premises, or part thereof, where anything in violation of this section shall be placed, or shall exist, and any architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection with this section and who may have assisted in the commission of any violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction shall be fined as provided in this section. 
( Ord. No. 12-04, § 2, 10-9-2012 ) 
Secs. 48-25-48-47. - Reserved 
ARTICLE II. - HUD-CODE MANUFACTURED HOMES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 1201. 

Sec. 48-48. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building official means a designated inspection authority of the City, or its authorized representative. 
    Certificate of occupancy means a certificate issued by the City Council for the use of a building, structure, and/or land, when it is determined by Council that the building, structure, and/or land complies with the provisions of all applicable City codes, ordinances, and regulations. 
    Common access route/internal street means a private drive allowing principal means of access to individual HUD-Code manufactured home lots or auxiliary buildings. 
    Driveway means a minor entranceway off the common access route within the manufactured home park, into an off-street parking area serving one or more HUD-Code manufactured homes. 
    HUD-Code manufactured home means a structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. A manufactured home with dimensions that are less than the length and/or width specified in this paragraph shall not be allowed in a HUD-Code manufactured home park, or any other area designated for HUD-Code manufactured home placement within the City. 
    HUD-Code manufactured home park means a parcel of land which has been placed and improved for the placement of HUD-Code manufactured homes, accessory uses, and service facilities, and which complies with all requirements of this article, applicable deed restrictions, and applicable laws and regulations. 
    License means a written license issued by the City Council, permitting a person to operate and maintain a HUD-Code manufactured home park under the provisions of this article. 
    Mobile home means a structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. Mobile homes shall not be allowed in a HUD-Code manufactured home park. 
    Parking space, off-street means a minimum space nine feet in width by 18 feet in length, located within the boundary of a HUD-Code manufactured home space, or in a common parking and storage area having unobstructed access to an internal street. 
    Permit means a written permit/certification issued by the City Council permitting the construction, alteration, or extension of a HUD-Code manufactured home park, under the provisions of this article and regulations issued hereunder. 
    Plot plan/site plan means a graphic representation, drawn to scale, in a horizontal plane, delineating the outlines of the property included in the plan and all proposed use locations, accurately dimensioned, the dimensions also indicating the relation of each use to that adjoining and to the boundary of the property. 
    Sewer connection means a connection consisting of pipes, fittings, and appurtenances from the drain outlet of a HUD-Code manufactured home to the inlet of the corresponding sewer service riser pipe of the sewage system serving the HUD-Code manufactured home park. 
    Sewer service riser pipe means that portion of sewer service which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a HUD-Code manufactured space. 
    Space means a plot of ground within a HUD-Code manufactured home park designated for accommodation of one HUD-Code manufactured home, together with such open space as required by this article. The term "space" includes "lot" and "site." 
(Code 1981, § 16.25; Ord. No. 97-02) 
Sec. 48-49. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter, extend or expand any HUD-Code manufactured home park within the limits of the City unless such person holds a valid permit issued by the City Council in the name of such person for the specific construction, alteration, extension, or expansion proposed. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  All applications for permits shall be made upon standard forms provided by the City Council and shall contain the following: 
a.  Name and address of the applicant. 
b.  Location and legal description of the HUD-Code manufactured home park. 
(2)  To this application shall be attached five copies of a site plan, at a minimum scale of one inch = 200 feet for sites of 30 acres or more, and at a minimum scale of one inch = 100 feet for sites under 30 acres. The site plan shall include all data required under section 48-55. 
(c)  Permit fee. All applications to the City shall be accompanied by a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time. 
(d)  Issuance of permit. When upon review of the application, the City Council is satisfied that the proposed plan meets the requirements of this article and all applicable laws and regulations, a permit shall be issued. 
(e)  Denial of permit/hearing. Any person whose application for a permit under this article has been denied, may request in writing a rehearing on the application and permit denial and offer additional evidence in support of the application. 
(Code 1981, § 16.26; Ord. No. 97-02) 
Sec. 48-50. - Licenses. 
(a)  License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate, or maintain or permit to be established, operated or maintained upon any property owned or controlled by said person any HUD-Code manufactured home park within the limits of the City unless the person holds a valid license issued annually by the City Council. All applications for licenses shall be made in writing to the City Council on forms furnished by the City. The City Council shall issue a license to the applicant if, upon review, the City Council determines that the applicant is in compliance with all provisions of this article, and any other applicable laws or regulation. The City Council shall not issue a license unless the applicant is a valid holder of a certificate of occupancy which shall be issued by the City Council upon compliance with applicable ordinances and laws. 
(b)  Application for original license. Application for an original license shall be in writing signed by the applicant, accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the application and by the deposit of the license fee hereinafter provided, and shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  A copy of a valid certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  The location and legal description of the HUD-Code manufactured home park. 
(4)  A site plan of the HUD-Code manufactured home park prepared in accordance with section 48-55. 
(c)  Hearing granted applicants. Any person whose application for a license under this article has been denied may request a rehearing in writing within ten days of the date of the City Council's decision, which shall be granted by the City Council upon proper request by the applicant. 
(d)  Application for license renewal. Application for renewal of a license shall be made in writing by the licensee on forms furnished by the City Council on or before November 1 of each year. Such application shall contain any change in the information occurring after the original license was issued or after the latest renewal was granted and must be accompanied by the HUD-Code manufactured home park register as hereafter provided. 
(e)  License fee. All original license applications or renewals hereof shall be accompanied by a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time. 
(f)  Transfer of license. Every person holding a license shall give notice in writing to the City Council within 15 days after having sold, transferred, conveyed by gift, or otherwise disposed of interest in or control of any HUD-Code manufactured home park. Applications for the transfer of a license shall be made not later than 15 days after the date of the sale, transfer, or gift, or other disposition of interest in or control of the HUD-Code manufactured home park, and the City Council shall act thereon at the next regularly scheduled meeting, or as soon as practicable thereafter. 
(g)  Transfer of license fee. All applications for a license transfer shall be accompanied by a fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time. 
(Code 1981, § 16.27; Ord. No. 97-02) 
Sec. 48-51. - Violations; notice; revocation of license or permit. 
    Whenever the City Council finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provisions of this article, the City Council or its designee shall give notice, in writing, in accordance with section 48-53(a), to the permittee or licensee, or agent, that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time, that is, not less than 30 days nor more than one year as specified in such notice, the license or permit shall be revoked. At the end of said period of time and if such conditions or practices have not been corrected, the City Council may revoke the license or permit and give notice in writing of such revocation to the permittee or licensee, or agent, at the address provided in the application. Upon receipt of notice of revocation, the licensee or permittee shall cease operation of such park within ten days after the notice is issued. 
(Code 1981, § 16.28; Ord. No. 97-02) 
Sec. 48-52. - Inspections. 
    Any duly authorized inspector of the City shall be permitted to make reasonable inspections of any HUD-Code manufactured home park to determine compliance with this article and all applicable laws and regulations. 
(Code 1981, § 16.29; Ord. No. 97-02) 
Sec. 48-53. - Notices, hearings, and orders. 
(a)  Notice of violations; requirements of notice. Whenever it is brought to the attention of the City Council that there has been a violation of any provision of this article, the City Council, or its designee, shall give notice of such alleged violation to the permittee or licensee or agent, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance; 
(3)  Allow a reasonable time of not less than 30 days nor more than one year, based upon the nature and severity of the violation and having due regard for the safety and protection of the community, for the performance of the acts to remedy the violation; 
(4)  Be served upon the permittee or licensee, or agent; provided, that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such permittee or licensee, or agent, when a copy thereof has been sent by mail to the last known address of such permittee or licensee, or agent, or when such permittee or licensee, or agent has been served with such notice by any method authorized or required by the laws of this state; and 
(5)  Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  If the violation is not remedied in accordance with the notice, a breach of the article continues, then the City Council may revoke any permits or licenses issued in addition to any punishment provided in section 48-57. 
(Code 1981, § 16.30; Ord. No. 97-02) 
Sec. 48-54. - Mobile homes prohibited in the City. 
(a)  The installation of mobile homes for use or occupancy as a residential dwelling in the City is prohibited. This provision is prospective and shall not apply to any mobile homes used and occupied as residential dwellings in the City on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Mobile homes used and occupied as residential dwellings on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be deemed a lawful nonconforming use, and such use may continue until discontinued, abandoned, or terminated as provided herein. If the nonconforming mobile home use is abandoned or discontinued for a period of 30 or more days, any future use of the structure and land or portion thereof shall conform with the provisions of this article. If a nonconforming mobile home is not occupied for a period of 30 or more days, said use is deemed to be abandoned by operation of law. If a nonconforming mobile home is destroyed or damaged to an extent greater than 50 percent of its fair market value by fire, explosion, act of God, or other cause, then any future of the structure and land on which the mobile home was situated shall conform to the provisions of this article. A nonconforming mobile home use shall not be enlarged, extended or expanded into any other portion of the land on which the nonconforming mobile home is situated. Nothing in this subsection is intended to prohibit normal repairs and maintenance of a nonconforming mobile home. If a nonconforming mobile home is removed from the parcel of land on which it is situated, any future use of the structure and land on which the mobile was situated shall conform to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall operate to prohibit operators of mobile home parks which are in existence as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived from allowing the use of HUD-Code manufactured homes in such existing mobile home parks without requiring compliance by such mobile home park operators with the requirements set forth in section 48-55. 
(Code 1981, § 16.31; Ord. No. 97-02) 
Sec. 48-55. - HUD-Code manufactured home park. 
(a)  Site plan. The site plan shall be filed as required by section 48-50(b) and shall show the following: 
(1)  The name, address, fee owner and record owner of the proposed or existing HUD-Code manufactured home park. 
(2)  Name of subdivision where the park is located. 
(3)  Names of adjacent public streets and roads. 
(4)  Contour lines at two-foot intervals. 
(5)  Locations and dimensions of all HUD-Code manufactured home spaces, utility easements, drives, recreation areas, streets and sidewalks. Each HUD-Code manufactured home space shall be numbered. 
(6)  Scale of plan (no smaller than one inch = 200 feet) and complete dimensions. 
(7)  Density in units per gross acre. 
(8)  Area and dimensions of site. 
(9)  Areas defined for waste containers and method of disposal of garbage and refuse. 
(10)  Location of shower and toilet facilities. 
(11)  Water and sewer plans. Water and sewer plans must be submitted showing the following: 
a.  Sewer line locations, grades and sizes. 
b.  Water line locations and sizes and source of water supply. 
(12)  Paving and drainage plans. Paving and drainage plans must show the directions and calculated quantities of runoff and the proposed specifications for streets. 
The City Council, or its designee, shall notify the applicant in writing whether the plan was approved or disapproved, stating the reasons for disapproval and the modifications or conditions that must be made or met before approval can be obtained upon subsequent submission. 
(b)  HUD-Code manufactured home park standards. Any HUD-Code manufactured home park (formerly called a mobile home park) constructed after the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and any alteration, extension, addition, or expansion to an existing HUD-Code manufactured home park in the City shall be made in compliance with the following site requirements: 
(1)  Density. A HUD-Code manufactured home park shall have no more than ten spaces per acre. Each HUD-Code manufactured home park shall be planned for and shall provide a minimum of five acres in area. 
(2)  Basic HUD-Code manufactured home minimum site requirements. 
a.  Height regulations. 
1.  The height limit for any structure intended for occupancy in the HUD-Code manufactured home park shall be 35 feet. 
2.  The average height of the HUD-Code manufactured home frame above ground elevation, measured 90 degrees to the frame, shall not exceed four feet from the top of the pad. 
b.  Spacing regulations. HUD-Code manufactured homes shall be located no closer than 20 feet from any exterior wall to the closest exterior wall of the nearest HUD-Code manufactured home. 
c.  HUD-Code manufactured home space. Each and every HUD-Code manufactured home shall be located on a separate space which shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  Be served with sanitary sewer, water, electrical power, telephone service, and natural gas. 
2.  Provide a minimum average width of 40 feet and a minimum average depth of 80 feet. 
3.  Abut and/or have access to a private street for a minimum distance of 12 feet. 
4.  Provide a minimum area of 3,200 square feet, said area to be determined by the boundary lines of the space. 
5.  Provide a HUD-Code manufactured home pad which shall provide an adequate foundation for the placement and tie-down of one single-family HUD-Code manufactured home thereby securing the super-structure against uplift, sliding, rotation, and overturning. Said pad shall: 
(i)  Be constructed of concrete which shall adequately support the weight of the HUD-Code manufactured home placed thereon and be durable and well drained under normal use and weather conditions. 
(ii)  Provide anchors and tie-downs such as cast-in-place concrete "dead men," eyelets embedded in the concrete foundations or runway screw augers, arrowhead anchors, or other devices which secure the stability of the HUD-Code manufactured home, and shall be placed, at a minimum, at each corner of the HUD-Code manufactured home. 
(iii)  Cover an area of at least 240 square feet or at least one-third the area of the largest HUD-Code manufactured home which is to be placed on the HUD-Code manufactured home space, whichever is greater. No surface provided for a purpose other than the foundation of a HUD-Code manufactured home shall be considered a part of such HUD-Code manufactured home pad. 
6.  Provide a minimum of two off-street parking spaces which shall be constructed of concrete. 
7.  Double street frontage of HUD-Code manufactured home spaces shall be avoided. 
8.  No vehicular access to a HUD-Code manufactured home space is permitted from a public street. 
9.  Drainage. The ground surface in all parts of every HUD-Code manufactured home park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe and efficient manner so as not to permit water to stand or become stagnant. 
(c)  Design and location of storage facilities. Storage facilities with a minimum capacity of 200 cubic feet per HUD-Code manufactured home space may be provided on the space, or in compounds located within 200 feet of the space. Where provided, storage facilities shall be faced with a durable, fire-resistant material. Storage outside the perimeter walls of the HUD-Code manufactured home shall be permitted only in such facilities. No storage shall be permitted under a HUD-Code manufactured home. Storage facilities shall not be located within ten feet of the boundary line of any HUD-Code manufactured home space boundary line. 
(d)  Location of HUD-Code manufactured homes and accessory structures. No HUD-Code manufactured home or accessory structure such as a refuse container, carport cabana, awning, fence, or storage locker shall be permitted within ten feet of a private street or the boundary line of a HUD-Code manufactured home space; provided further that two HUD-Code manufactured homes shall not be placed less than 20 feet apart. 
(e)  Setbacks and screening. 
(1)  No HUD-Code manufactured home or structure in a HUD-Code manufactured home park shall be located within the yard setback area. The minimum setback area for each space is: 
a.  Front yard: 25 feet; 
b.  Rear yard: 15 feet; 
c.  Side yard: five feet. 
(2)  The following screening requirements shall be applicable: A landscaped strip, not less than ten feet in width or a screening device as defined herein shall be located along all HUD-Code manufactured home park boundary lines abutting upon a public street or adjoining residential property. Such landscaped strip shall be continuously maintained and shall be devoted exclusively to the planting, cultivation, growing, and maintenance of site-obscuring trees, shrubs, and plant life, as described below. Trees, shrubs, cane and/or other vegetation shall be planted, cultivated, and maintained as a sight- and noise-obscuring buffer that will effectively achieve sight and noise obstruction within approximately five years. At least one row of trees with a minimum initial trunk diameter of one inch and minimum initial height of five feet shall be planted on 25-foot centers. Also, two rows of cane, non-deciduous shrubs and/or other suitable screening plants shall be planted on ten-foot centers. The buffer strips are intended to provide a 75 percent or more opaque screen when viewed horizontally between two and ten feet above the natural ground at the end of the growing period of five years from the date of planting. Additional planting, cultivation, and maintenance may be required by the City officials during the use period of the buffer strip to achieve and maintain this effect. 
(f)  Access; traffic circulation; parking. 
(1)  Internal streets shall be privately owned, built, and maintained. Streets shall be designed for safe and convenient access to all spaces and facilities for common use of park residents. 
(2)  All internal streets shall be constructed to specifications set by the City Council and shall be maintained by the owner. 
(3)  All private streets shall be constructed with concrete and shall be durable and well drained under normal use and weather conditions. 
(4)  Internal street dimensions; parking. 
a.  Internal streets shall be a minimum pavement width of 20 feet. Parking shall not be allowed on the minimum street width. An additional lane of nine feet minimum width may be added to one or both sides for off-street parking. 
b.  Internal streets shall permit unobstructed access to within at least 200 feet of any portion of each HUD-Code manufactured home. 
c.  Within each HUD-Code manufactured home park, streets shall be named, and HUD-Code manufactured homes numbered. Park signs and numbers shall be of standard size and placement to facilitate location by emergency vehicles. 
d.  Private streets which may connect two public street rights-of-way shall, by the use of curves, off-sets, location, and/or the use of two or more streets be located so as to discourage through traffic. 
e.  Private street intersections shall generally be at right angle; offsets at intersections of less than 125 feet (centerline to centerline) shall be avoided. The intersection of more than two streets at one point shall be avoided. 
f.  Dead-end private streets shall be limited to maximum length of 1,000 feet and shall be provided with a vehicular turning space, with a turning circle of 80 feet in diameter. 
g.  Layout of streets and blocks. Streets shall be laid out to provide a minimum distance of 240 feet, center to center, of parallel streets, between intersections. 
h.  Lighting. The private streets, parking lots, walks, and service areas shall be lighted at all times so the HUD-Code manufactured home park shall be safe for occupants and exits shall be lighted. 
(g)  Fire safety standards. 
(1)  The storage, handling, and use of liquefied petroleum gases and flammable liquids shall be done in compliance with applicable City ordinances and state statutes. 
(2)  Access to HUD-Code manufactured home for fire protection. Approaches to all HUD-Code manufactured homes shall be kept free of obstructions to allow access by emergency vehicles. 
(3)  Fire protection. Water lines and fire hydrants shall be provided and suitably located for adequate fire protection as determined by the City Council, but in no case shall the park provide less than a system of standard hydrants located not more than 500 feet from each HUD-Code manufactured home space and served by water lines not less than six inches in diameter installed in a looped system. 
(4)  The HUD-Code manufactured home park licensee or agent shall provide an adequate system of collection and safe disposal of rubbish, trash, and garbage. 
(h)  Water supply. 
(1)  The licensee shall make provisions for all approved water supply for domestic use and fire protection purposes to meet the requirements of the HUD-Code manufactured home park. 
(2)  All plumbing shall be in accordance with applicable ordinances of the City, and all applicable laws and regulations. 
(i)  Sewage disposal. From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the following shall apply. 
(1)  Waste from all toilets, lavatories, sinks and showers in a HUD-Code manufactured home park shall be discharged into a public sewer or a private disposal system approved by the City Council. 
(2)  All plumbing shall comply with applicable plumbing codes. 
(3)  Each HUD-Code manufactured home pad shall have a sewer riser pipe of at least four inches which shall be capped when not in use. 
(j)  Electrical and telephone distribution systems. From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the electrical distribution system shall comply with applicable electrical codes and other applicable laws of the state. 
(k)  Walls and partitions. All rooms containing bathrooms or laundry facilities shall have fire-resistant walls extending to the ceiling between male and female sanitary facilities. Walls and partitions around showers, tubs, lavatories, and other plumbing fixtures shall be constructed of dense, nonabsorbent, waterproof materials or covered with moisture-resistant materials. 
(l)  Refuse and garbage. Solid waste shall be stored in fly-proof, waterproof containers, which shall be emptied regularly and maintained in a usable, sanitary condition, and the collection and disposal of said refuse and garbage shall be so conducted as to create no health hazard. A refuse pickup easement shall be granted by the owner of the HUD-Code manufactured home park to the City, if these facilities are located so as to require the entrance of a City vehicle into the HUD-Code manufactured home park. 
(m)  Maintenance of park. The owner of the park shall be responsible to ensure that it is maintained in a manner which will not attract or aid the propagation of insects or rodents or create a hazard. Growth of plant materials such as weeds and grass shall be continuously controlled. All streets, parking and storage areas shall be maintained to provide a fully paved surface. 
(n)  Conform to codes. All HUD-Code manufactured home park facilities and HUD-Code manufactured homes contained therein shall conform without limitation to the codes and ordinances of the City, including the building, plumbing, electrical, and fire codes, and all applicable laws of the state. 
(o)  Office. Every HUD-Code manufactured home park shall have an office in which a copy of the park permit or license shall be posted and the park register shall be in such office. It shall be the duty of the licensee to keep a register of park occupancy which shall contain the following information. 
(1)  Name and address of owner and occupant. 
(2)  The make, model, serial number, year and dimensions of all HUD-Code manufactured homes. 
(3)  The date of arrival and departure of each HUD-Code manufactured home. 
The park licensee shall submit the park register to the City Council each year upon requesting license renewal and shall make said register available to any authorized City official upon reasonable request. Upon gaining knowledge of a departure of any HUD-Code manufactured home, the park licensee shall notify the City Tax Assessor. Failure to do the acts required by this subsection shall place the licensee in violation of this article. 
(p)  Compliance. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to ensure that all requirements of this article are met and maintained. Any HUD-Code manufactured home park issued an initial license after adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived that is found to be in violation of any provisions of this article shall be notified in writing by the City Council in accordance with section 48-53, and upon failure to comply, said license shall be revoked. 
(q)  Nonconforming HUD-Code manufactured home park. 
(1)  Any mobile home park in use and/or existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and not complying with all applicable provisions of this article shall be considered a nonconforming mobile home park. Such nonconforming mobile home park shall conform the requirements as existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Nonconforming parks shall however comply with the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Any land area added to a nonconforming mobile home park shall conform to all requirements of this article. 
(r)  Miscellaneous requirements. 
(1)  Responsibilities of the park licensee. 
a.  All responsibilities set out elsewhere in this article shall apply. 
b.  The licensee or agent shall operate the park in compliance with this article and other applicable ordinances and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park and all facilities in good repair, and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
c.  The licensee or agent shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this article and inform them of their duties and responsibilities under this article. 
(2)  Responsibilities of park occupants. 
a.  All responsibilities of occupants set out elsewhere in this article shall apply. 
b.  The park occupant shall comply with all requirements of this article. 
c.  The park occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of the occupant's HUD-Code manufactured home in its HUD-Code manufactured home pad and proper installation of all utility connections in accordance with the instructions of the park licensee. 
d.  The use of space immediately beneath a HUD-Code manufactured home for storage shall not be permitted. 
(3)  Mobile homes shall not be permitted in a HUD-Code manufactured home park. 
(4)  Only HUD-Code manufactured homes shall be permitted in a HUD-Code manufactured home park. 
(Code 1981, § 16.32; Ord. No. 97-02) 
Sec. 48-56. - Designated area for single-lot placement of HUD-Code manufactured homes. 
(a)  HUD-Code manufactured homes may be placed on single lots situated within the following described area: 
(1)  North side of E. N. Commerce from First St. to Lybrand St. 
(2)  West side of South 4th St. from Orville to West Park. 
(3)  East side of South 5th St. from Orville to West Park. 
(b)  Only one HUD-Code manufactured home may be placed and installed on each legal lot situated within the above described area. 
(Code 1981, § 16.33; Ord. No. 97-02) 
Sec. 48-57. - Penalty provisions. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating this article or any portion thereof shall upon conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $1.00 nor more than $500.00 and each day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense and punishable accordingly. 
(Code 1981, § 16.34; Ord. No. 97-02) 
Appendix A - FRANCHISES 
    The following franchises were granted by the City and are currently in effect: 
(1)  Waste Management Services Inc. (Garbage Service) 
Originally September 14, 1998 
Renewed through September 30, 2013. 
(2)  Center Point Energy (Natural Gas Service) 
November 5, 1975 - current 
(3)  AT &T (Local Phone Service) 
(4)  OnCor Electric Delivery Company, LLC (Electric Service) 
Originally December 04, 1962 
Renewed through June 30, 2032. 
(5)  Houston Media Cable (Local Cable) 
02/12/08 - current 
( Ord. No. 12-05, 10-9-12 ) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1981 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1981 Code, as supplemented, which are included herein. Sections of the 1981 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances included herein, see the table immediately following this table. 
1981 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1.1 1-1 1.2, 1.3 1-3, 1-4 1.5 1-11 1.6 1-2 1.7-1.10 1-12-1-15 2.1-2.10 2-19-2-28 2.20-2.23 22-1-22-4 2.26-2.28 22-5-22-7 2.30-2.32 2-81-2-83 2.40-2.51 2-349-2-360 3.1-3.5 4-19-4-23 4.1-4.7 8-19-8-25 4.8 8-28 4.10-4.13 8-60-8-63 4.21-4.23 8-85-8-87 4.30, 4.31 8-118, 8-119 4.31 8-120 4.40-4.45 8-139-8-144 5.1 6-19 5.3-5.10 6-20-6-27 5.12 6-28 6.1 10-166 6.2, 6.3 2-285, 2-286 6.4-6.15 10-167-10-178 6.20-6.33 10-210-10-223 6.40-6.47 34-19-34-26 6.50-6.56 10-135-10-141 7.1-7.11 18-21-18-31 7.20-7.26 10-97-10-103 7.51-7.55 18-83-18-87 7.57 18-88 7.70 18-1 8.10-8.12 32-19-32-21 9.1-9.5 16-19-16-23 9.5 16-25 9.6 16-24 9.10-9.21 18-51-18-62 9.22-9.24 42-88-42-90 9.30-9.54 42-109-42-133 9.60-9.65 42-49-42-54 9.67, 9.68 42-55, 42-56 9.83 42-57 9.100-9.109 14-19-14-28 10.1-10.5 20-1-20-5 10.6 20-2 10.7-10.9 20-6-20-8 10.12-10.14 28-19-28-21 10.16 6-60 28-22 10.17-10.33 6-61-6-77 11.1, 11.2 24-1 11.10 16-54 11.11(A)-11.11(F) 16-84-16-89 11.11(H) 16-96 11.12-11.17 16-121-16-126 11.18 16-55 11.18, 11.19 16-127, 16-128 11.21-11.29 16-155-16-163 11.31 16-164 11.31-11.33 24-3 11.31A-11.31C 24-2 11.40-11.51 44-44-44-55 11.60, 11.61 44-19, 44-20 11.80, 11.81 24-4 11.90-11.92 46-19-46-21 11.100, 11.101 2-329, 2-330 11.110-11.112 2-251-2-253 12.1-12.3 2-110-2-112 12.10-12.15 2-138-2-143 12.20, 12.21 2-60, 2-61 12.35-12.42 2-192-2-199 13.2, 13.3 38-19, 38-20 13.10-13.14 38-94-38-98 13.30 38-44 14.1 40-1 40-63 14.1A 40-2 14.2, 14.3 40-3, 40-4 14.10, 14.11 40-5, 40-6 14.20-14.24 40-31-40-35 14.26, 14.27 40-36, 40-37 14.31, 14.32 40-65, 40-66 14.35-14.43 46-46-46-54 15.12 42-165 15.12A 42-166 15.13 42-167 15.13A 42-168 15.40-15.44 42-227-42-231 15.50-15.60 42-19-42-29 15.63 42-30 15.71-15.88 42-190-42-207 15.90, 15.91 42-208, 42-209 16.1-16.22 48-1-48-22 16.25-16.34 48-48-48-57 16.40-16.53 12-19-12-32 16.60-16.66 10-255-10-261 17.1-17.13 36-1-36-13 18.41-18.58 26-19-26-36 18.70 16-209 19.2, 19.3 38-125, 38-126  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code  7-27-1915(Ord.) 46-19-46-21 11- 7-1922(Ord.) 40-4 12- 7-1948(Ord.) 42-49-42-57  6- 7-1949(Ord.) 10-97-10-102 10- 7-1952(Ord.) 40-31 12- 3-1963(Ord.) 18-1  6- 7-1966(Ord.) 24-4  9- 5-1967(Ord.) 40-32  4- 6-1971(Ord.) 4-19-4-23  7-18-1972(Ord.) 12-11-1989(Rev.) 42-109-42-116 42-118-42-122 42-126-42-133  5- 8-1973(Ord.) 34-19-34-23 34-25, 34-26 42-227-42-231  1-10-1977(Ord.) 2-110-2-112  2-14-1977(Ord.) 38-94-38-98  7-11-1977(Ord.) 18-21-18-31 10- 9-1977(Ord.) 14-19-14-28  1- 9-1978(Ord.) 10-210, 10-211 10-214-10-223  8-14-1978(Ord.) 18-51-18-62  3-10-1979(Ord.) 38-19  3-12-1979(Ord.) 17.1-17.13 36-1-36-13  4- 9-1979(Ord.) 2-251-2-253 2-329  1- 9-1980(Ord.) 10-212, 10-213  3-14-1980(Ord.) 44-19, 44-20  9-10-1980(Ord.) 44-44-44-55  7-13-1981(Ord.) 2-81-2-83  2-14-1983(Ord.) 22-1-22-3  5- 8-1983(Ord.) 34-24  3-12-1984(Ord.) 42-165-42-167  6-11-1984(Ord.) 40-1 40-3  5-12-1986(Ord.) 2-330  7-13-1987(Ord.) 38-20  2- 8-1988(Ord.) 40-36, 40-37 12-11-1989(Ord.) 38-44 42-88-42-90 12-10-1990(Ord.) 2-349-2-360  3- 9-1992(Ord.) 6-60-6-72 6-75 6-77  6- 8-1992(Ord.) 16-155-16-164  5-10-1993(Ord.) 40-34  8- 9-1993(Ord.) 12-20-12-32 10-11-1993(Ord.) 42-190-42-209 11-14-1995(Ord.) 2-192-2-199 97-1  1-13-1997 19.2, 19.3 38-125, 38-126 97-02 48-48-48-57 98-04 40-32 98-05 24-2 98-07 2-285, 2-286 10-166-10-178 99-06 6-19-6-28 2000-01 40-35 01-01 16-54 16-84-16-89 16-96 16-121-16-128 B 16-55 2001-02 22-5 01-03 24-3 02-02 42-168 02-03 8-19, 8-20 8-22-8-25 8-28 8-60-8-63 8-85-8-87 8-118 8-120 8-139-8-144 02-04 16-209 02-06 22-6 02-08 40-2 02-10 18-83-18-88 03-01 48-3-48-6 48-20 03-02 26-19-26-36 03-03 40-5, 40-6 03-05 20-1-20-8 03-09 40-65, 40-66 04-02 2-60, 2-61 05-03 28-19-28-22 05-04 10-135-10-141 05-05 16-19-16-23 16-25 05-07 8-21 05-09 22-7 06-01 42-19-42-29 06-02 22-4 07-02 46-46-46-54 07-03  3-12-2007 1-10 38-66-38-75 07-04  5-15-2007 1-4 16-182-16-185 07-05  5-15-2007 1, 2 40-91, 40-92 2 40-97 3-6 40-93-40-96 07-07  5-15-2007 1 10-166 2 10-169 3 10-174 07-08  6-11-2007 1, 2 40-91, 40-92 2 40-97 3-6 40-93-40-96 07-09  6-11-2007 11.31-11.33 24-3 07-10  7-10-2007 40-64-40-66 07-11  7-10-2007 4.8-4.10 8-26-8-28 07-13  7-10-2007 9.1-9.7 16-19-16-25 07-14  9-11-2007 1 42-28 2 42-26 3 10-137 07-16 12-13-2007 38-45 08-02  1- 7-2008 42-23 08-04  4- 8-2008 8.10-8.14 32-19-32-23 8.15 32-26 08-05  6-10-2008 8.15(A), 8.15(B) 32-24, 32-25 8.16 32-26 08-06  7- 8-2008 2(6.64) 10-19 3(6.65) 10-20 4(6.66) 10-21 5(6.67) 10-22 6(6.68) 10-23 7(6.69) 10-24 8(6.70) 10-25 9(6.71) 10-26 10(6.72) 10-27 11(6.73) 10-28 12(6.74) 10-29 13(6.75) 10-30 14(6.76) 10-31 15(6.77) 10-32 16-18 10-33-10-35 20 10-36 08-07  8-12-2008 2(6.78) 10-61 3(6.79) 10-62 4(6.80) 10-63 5(6.81) 10-64 6(6.82) 10-65 7(6.83) 10-66 8, 9 10-67, 10-68 11 10-69 08-08  7- 8-2008 2(6.84)-2(6.95) 30-1-30-12 08-09  9- 9-2008 1 42-28 16.40 12-19 08-13 12- 9-2008 1-3 22-8 09-01  1-  -2009 2-144 09-02  5-12-2009 4.1, 4.2 4-40, 4-41 4.3-4.11 4-61-4-69 4.12-4.21 4-99-4-108 09-03  8-11-2009 1       Added 10-62(a)(11) 10-62(b)(1) 09-04  9- 8-2009 1-7 Adopting ord., p. xi 09-05  9- 8-2009 2       Added 40-122-40-125 09-06 10-13-2009 1       Added 42-252-42-255 10-01  1-12-2010 1 22-3(c) 10-02  1-12-2010 2       Added 16-230-16-235 10-03  2- 9-2010 2 10-259 10-04  3-29-2010 2 48-7(1)d. 3 48-7(1)w. 4 48-7(1)x. 5 48-8(1)d. 6 48-8(1)m. 7 48-9(1)c. 8 48-10(1) 9 48-11(1) 10-05  7-13-2010 Art. I-Art. 5       Added 19-1-19-59 10-08 11- 9-2010 1 8-27 8-62 8-85 8-118 11-01 12-11-2010 1 40-31(b)(1) 11-02  4-12-2011 2       Added 40-67 11-03  6-14-2011 2       Added 2-336 11-05 10-11-2011 2 16-121 11-07 10-11-2011 2       Rpld 22-7 11-08 12-13-2011 2 16-19(3) 16-21(b) 16-22, 16-23 16-25 11-09 12-13-2011 2 38-45 12-01  2-12-2012 2       Rpld 32-24 3 32-25 12-02  3-13-2012 2       Added 34-28 12-03  7-10-2012 1       Added 42-108 42-109 42-111(c) 42-119 12-04 10- 9-2012 2 48-18(b)       Added 48-23, 48-24 12-05 10- 9-2012 Appendix A 12-06 11-13-2012 2 26-31 3       Added 26-35(a) 13-02  4- 9-2013 2 40-91 40-93 40-95 13-03  9-10-2013 2       Added 40-6       Rnbd 40-6       as 40-7 13-04  9-10-2013 2 8-22 13-07 10- 8-2013 2 48-3       Added 48-5(5)       Rnbd 48-5(5)       as 48-5(6) 48-6(5) 14-07  8-12-2014 1 24-3 14-08  8-12-2014 1 2-139 17-02  2-14-2017 1       Rpld 8-139-8-144       Added 8-39-8-144 17-03  2-14-2017 1 42-121       Added 42-121.001-42-121.005 17-06  5- 9-2017 2       Rpld 6-21       Added 6-21 3 6-25 4 6-27 5       Added 6-29 17-07  5- 9-2017 1       Added 44-4, 44-5 44-44 17-11  9-12-2017 2 30-8(e) 3       Added 34-40-34-63  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Vernon's Texas Code Annotated. 
V.T.C.A. Administrative Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 312.142 42-121.001 312.143 42-121.002 319.11 42-121.002  
V.T.C.A. Agriculture Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 141 et seq. Ch. 8 Ch. 8, Art. III ch. 142 8-20 8-62 143.101 et seq. 8-20 8-62 ch. 201 Ch. 10, Art. VII  
V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. Ch. 4 1.04 4-41 1.05 4-107 ch. 11, 61 4-65, 4-66 11.38 Ch. 4 4-69 11.38(d) 4-62 11.41 4-69 ch. 25, ch. 26 4-100 26.05 4-103, 4-104 ch. 28 4-100 ch. 32 4-100 61.36 Ch. 4 4-69 ch. 69 4-100 71.10 4-103 ch. 74 4-100 101.72 4-103 105.04, 105.05 4-102 105.10 4-102 ch. 106 22-2 106.03 4-106 109.31 et seq. Ch. 4 109.32 4-101 109.33 4-99 109.33(c) 4-100 109.53 4-99 109.57 4-105 109.57(d) 4-105 109.331 4-100  
V.T.C.A. Civil Practice and Remedies Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 101 Ch. 2, Art. VI, Div. 2  
V.T.C.A. Code of Criminal Procedure 
Section  Section 
this Code art. 2.12 2-144 art. 18.05 Ch. 18, Art. II arts. 45.052, 45.053 22-7 art. 45.056 22-7 art. 45.059 24-3 art. 102.017 22-6 art. 102.017(d) 22-6 art. 102.0172 22-5 art. 102.0174 22-7 art. 103.0031 22-8  
V.T.C.A. Education Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 61.003 38-66  
V.T.C.A. Family Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 31 24-3  
V.T.C.A. Finance Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI  
V.T.C.A. Government Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 29 Ch. 22 ch. 414 18-1 ch. 418 Ch. 10, Art. VII Ch. 14 418.023 Ch. 46, Art. III 418.103 Ch. 14 ch. 551 42-209 551.045 2-27 ch. 552 42-202 ch. 614, subch. H 2-144 614.122 2-144 ch. 851 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 2 2-192 852.004 2-199 853.101 2-196 853.105 2-196 854.601-854.605 2-199 855.313, 855.314 2-199 855.408 2-199 855.502 2-199 ch. 1503 Ch. 44  
V.T.C.A. Health and Safety Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 122.005 Ch. 16, Art. II ch. 341 et seq. Ch. 16 ch. 341 Ch. 16, Art. II Ch. 32 ch. 342 Ch. 16, Art. II Ch. 32 chs. 361, 363 Ch. 32 ch. 365 Ch. 16, Art. II Ch. 32 ch. 751 et seq. Ch. 18 756.021 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II ch. 821 et seq. Ch. 8 821.002 8-21 ch. 822 Ch. 8 822.002 8-21 822.007 8-20 822.012 8-20 ch. 826 8-23 826.015 8-23 826.051 et seq. 8-21  
V.T.C.A. Human Resources Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 42.002 4-100  
V.T.C.A. Local Government Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 5.001 Ch. 2 6.001 et seq. Ch. 2 22.038 2-25 22.039 2-28 22.071 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 22.072 2-83 22.073 2-111 ch. 43 36-1 51.001 Adopting ord. 51.011-51.018 Ch. 2 51.012 Ch. 2 51.032 Adopting ord. ch. 53 1-1 ch. 54 et seq. Ch. 10 ch. 54 Ch. 16, Art. II 54.001 1-12 4-107 54.012 4-107 54.016 4-107 ch. 101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI Ch. 38 ch. 141 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III ch. 201 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VII 2-356 ch. 211 et seq. Ch. 10 Ch. 48 211.006 2-253 48-19 48-23 211.007 Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 2 2-253 48-19 48-23 211.008 et seq. 48-18 ch. 212 Ch. 36 36-1 ch. 214 Ch. 10 214.212 10-21 214.214 10-29 214.216 10-19 ch. 215 Ch. 16, Art. II 215.025, 215.026 Ch. 8 215.026 Ch. 8, Art. III 215.027 Ch. 8 215.031 Ch. 20 215.032 Ch. 6 215.073 Ch. 46 ch. 216 Ch. 30 217.002 Ch. 10 217.003 24-1 229.001(b), 229.002 24-1 ch. 241 Ch. 44 241.011, 241.012 44-19 241.014 44-19 241.032 44-44 241.034 44-51 241.036 44-51 241.041 et seq. 44-53 241.044 44-54 ch. 243 Ch. 6, Art. III 253.005 Ch. 16, Art. VI ch. 281 et seq. Ch. 34 ch. 282 Ch. 26 ch. 283 34-41 34-44 283.057 34-44 ch. 284 34-43 34-44 ch. 306 et seq. Ch. 34 ch. 341 Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 4 341.905 24-3 ch. 342 Ch. 18 Ch. 18, Art. II 342.003 Ch. 18, Art. III 343.003 24-1 351.903 24-3 ch. 362 Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 4 370.002 24-3 ch. 371 et seq. Ch. 48 ch. 401 et seq. Ch. 42 411.002, 411.003 Ch. 10, Art. VII  
V.T.C.A. Natural Resources Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. Ch. 16 ch. 52 Ch. 16, Art. VI ch. 81 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. VI 91.1012 Ch. 16, Art. VI 92.007 Ch. 16, Art. VI  
V.T.C.A. Occupations Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 1201 Ch. 48, Art. II ch. 1701 Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 4 1701.357(b), 1701.357(c) 2-144 ch. 1801 et seq. Ch. 20 ch. 2001 et seq. Ch. 6 ch. 2154 Ch. 18, Art. III ch. 2302, ch. 2303 Ch. 46, Art. III ch. 2303 46-49  
V.T.C.A. Parks and Wildlife Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. Ch. 16 Ch. 26 ch. 31 16-54 16-86 16-155 ch. 89 16-93  
V.T.C.A. Penal Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. Ch. 24 ch. 12 1-12 21.01 6-67 ch. 22 6-62 ch. 25 6-62 28.02 18-1 31.03 Ch. 46, Art. III ch. 43 6-62  
V.T.C.A. Property Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 12.002 36-8 ch. 301 Ch. 12, Art. II 301.001 et seq. 12-26 12-30  
V.T.C.A. Tax Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. Ch. 38 1.01 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. III 11-251 38-44 11.253 38-45 ch. 156 Ch. 38, Art. IV 156.103(a) 38-67 182.025 Ch. 42 ch. 312 Ch. 38, Art. VI 312.201, 312.202 38-125 ch. 321 Ch. 38, Art. II 38-19 321.105 38-19 321.210 38-20 ch. 351 Ch. 38, Art. IV 38-74 351.001 38-73 351.108 38-75 351.0041 38-68  
V.T.C.A. Transportation Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. Ch. 40 ch. 21 et seq. Ch. 44 ch. 396 Ch. 16, Art. IV Ch. 46, Art. III ch. 501 16-86 502.001 16-54 16-155 504.201 40-67 541.302 16-84 541.302(13) 40-122 542.202(2) Ch. 40, Art. III 545.356 Ch. 40, Art. II 40-1 ch. 550 Ch. 46, Art. III 644.153(q) 16-87 16-94 644.153(r) 16-84 681.001 40-67 681.002 40-67 681.002-681.004 40-67 681.006-681.007 40-67 691.009 40-67 681.009(b) 40-67 681.011 40-67 681.011(h)-(k) 40-67 ch. 683 Ch. 16, Art. III, Div. 2 683.012 16-94, 16-95 683.016 16-93 683.031 16-86, 16-87 683.032 16-87 683.071 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. III, Div. 3 2308.201 Ch. 46, Art. III  
V.T.C.A. Utilities Code 
Section  Section 
this Code ch. 1 et seq. Ch. 42 11.003 34-41 31.002 34-52 ch. 33 Ch. 42 51.002 34-52 51.002(11) 34-41 66.007 34-59 162.003 34-52  
V.T.C.A. Water Code 
Section  Section 
this Code 5.130-5.132 42-112 16.311 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. VII 16.311-16.319 10-211 16.315 19-1 16.318 Ch. 10, Art. VII  
Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. 
Article  Section 
this Code ch. 45 Ch. 22  
